{1}
THE ACTIVITIES OF THE SPIRIT
@John 4:11 - 14; @John 7:37 - 39
I thought it might help us to have our attention called to the Spirit's activities in the saints as adjusting our souls, so that we might know relief and satisfaction culminating in eternal life. That is what comes out in chapter 4. And then, further, to see how the Spirit acts from the heavenly side in order to bring in the influence of heaven here. That is chapter 7. These two sides present the Spirit's work at the present moment. We have to notice that what we get in chapter 4 is the result of an administration committed to the Son. "The Father loveth the Son and hath given all things into his hand". Then chapter 7 is the result of Christ being glorified. He goes up to heaven and sends the Spirit here so that there might be the influence of heaven here. Thus the superiority of the heavenly is seen; it is to influence all. This is indicated in chapter 3 in the remarks of John the baptist.
Chapter 7 brings in the levitical idea as developed in the book of Joshua, whereas chapter 4 is more connected with Numbers. Joshua gives you the privileged family, the heavenly family in type, and you see them distributed throughout all the tribes of Israel. They have cities allotted to them in all the tribes; they are distributed throughout the whole inheritance, and in that way a heavenly influence is secured and diffused through all. I think that is the idea connected with @John 7. What the Lord proposes in chapter 4 meets all our need, and is the result of an administration between divine Persons; the Father commits all things into the hand of the Son, and the Son proposes to give living water to any one who asks of Him, so that he may never thirst for ever. It is a final solution of the whole question of man's need in mind and affection. Hence chapter 4 runs pretty
{2}
much with the epistle to the Romans, whereas chapter 7 runs more with Ephesians.
In @John 20:22, where we have "Receive the Holy Spirit", it is no question of our need; it is the Spirit of the heavenly Man that is breathed. It is a most intimate transaction to be breathed into, and conveys quite a different thought to drinking of living water. His breathing into them in @John 20 was to give them an income equal to their dignity. Chapter 4 is like @Romans 6:22; "having got your freedom from sin, and having become bondmen to God, ye have your fruit unto holiness, and the end eternal life". As away from God, one's affections have been scattered hither and thither with a view to corrupt gratification, just as with the poor woman in this chapter, but the Lord proposes to give her living water so that her affections may be gathered up and directed *upward*. One must first be satisfied in mind and affection before one can know eternal life.
I think one ought to make it clear that eternal life is enjoyed over Jordan, but before one can know eternal life one must be satisfied and at rest in mind and affections. This woman had been grossly irregular; her affections had gone out with a view to corrupt gratification, but the Lord shows that His proposal of living water would bring in a solution of her case which should be permanent.
When we speak of *over Jordan* we speak of what lies outside human relationships; we are entitled to be there because of the death of Christ. We are apt to live in nature, but the Lord would lift us outside of nature. John's way of presenting eternal life is by showing that certain things have to be overcome in the mind and affections, and by that means you are placed over Jordan; you are lifted above natural things and relationships.
John's presentation of Christ corresponds to the position of the sun set in the physical heavens; it
{3}
is set there to control things, and to regulate things, and to set things in movement. So Christ is the One who sets things in movement divinely; it is in the way of impulse; He gives impulse. If Christ moves, others move, but they move under His influence. You get it set forth in @John 1; the two disciples are first attracted to Christ, and they follow Him; they are set in movement; and then in their turn they affect others. Andrew finds his brother Simon, and he follows, and then others, too, are drawn after Christ. The point was "Come and see". So here in @John 4, when the woman is set free herself, she is set in movement and attracts others to Christ; "Come, see a man who told me all things I had ever done: is not he the Christ?" It is intrinsic to the living water that it gives satisfaction; the mind is satisfied; the affections are satisfied. It is a great thing to have permanent satisfaction for your affections. The Lord proposes to give what will bring deliverance from sin and give permanent satisfaction to the affections. Then another great gain is that one is relieved from the pressure of death. Before the gain of eternal life can be known we must know what it is not to thirst. Most of us live in nature; we are ruled by nature and are content with natural relationships; but God brings in a new rule which is outside nature; He brings us under a new control, and that is proposed in the gift of living water; it springs up to eternal life. Natural relationships are right, but they must be held and regulated by the law of new creation; there is no other law for the Christian. A man who is over Jordan will be a better husband and father than one who is not, for you fulfil every right relation here, whilst living in your affections outside of them; you are not detained by them, and you are set free from the fear of death as to them. Whilst there is the fear of death you are not free for new creation. The great defect with
{4}
most of us is that we live in nature, and the more cattle we have the more we are detained.
What the Lord proposes is to give living water which should spring up to eternal life, so that the soul should be brought into the knowledge of the only true God, and of the true Man, a Man here who was entirely for His pleasure; to live in that knowledge is eternal life. "This is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent" (@John 17:3). Eternal life is consequent on the adjustment of everything on the *earthly* side; you are set free from the trammels of earth, and you live in the knowledge of the only true God and of a Man who was entirely free from earth. Think of living in company with such a Man as that! A Man who was entirely for the pleasure of God. But along with the knowledge there is subjective energy, and that is by the springing up of the water within. It "shall become *in* him a fountain of water, springing up into eternal life".
The Lord shows in @John 4 that He is going to set up the woman with something permanently within her; a source of satisfaction. A man rules his own family, and maintains every relationship rightly, but he has satisfaction outside of it. He is not afraid of death though it lies on his family relationships, he is lifted above it. I think that is a very great testimony; and a man who does not want things here, who is satisfied in mind and affections, is a testimony to God. Eternal life lifts us outside every natural relationship and outside of earth morally. The earth is the sphere where the flesh lives, but the Lord proposes to lift a man above it. He brings in resurrection, and eternal life is enjoyed in resurrection. Resurrection takes place here, but it lifts us morally outside of earth. The Lord was not available to us as eternal life till He was raised and glorified. So, though eternal life is known and enjoyed while we are still down here, it is as we are over Jordan;
{5}
that is the type, and the types refer to Christianity. You see, God is not developing any order of things in regard to the earth just now; we take up the ground, so to speak, but you cannot define as clearly today as we shall in the millennium just where the earthly line ceases and the heavenly line begins.
When we speak of the knowledge of Jesus Christ as sent here, it is the knowledge of *that Man*, the true Man as we say; we cannot omit what He was down here on earth from what He is up there. All that He is up there in the glory was seen in Him down here. How am I to know that blessed Man up there save as studying the gospels which show me what He was down here? "Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent" is the Man who carried out the will of God here, and who was entirely for His pleasure. He was not a man driven out of Eden, but One living to God and wholly for His delight. I think we have to see that it is no question of heavenly relationships here; but it is God and man brought together. The thought of the Father and the Son brings in family relationships, and leads us to heaven, but where it is a question of eternal life it is God and man.
@John 17:1 speaks of the glory which was His personally from the Father; it is the Father and the Son in connection with what they were doing. Verse 5 refers to another glory, "the glory which I had with thee before the world was". He prays to His Father in verse 1, saying, "glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may glorify thee", and then He says, "as thou hast given him power over all flesh". What we have to know for eternal life is the Father as "the only true God", it is a question of *revelation*, not relationship. For eternal life you must have God and man brought together. Man had gone away from God and become idolatrous, and man must be recovered to God. He learns that God is the only true God in contrast to all that is false.
{6}
Here in @John 4 the point is, that there is no possibility of eternal life being known in the soul except as one is delivered from need and is satisfied in mind and affections; and then what is prominent is that they should know the only true God. The Lord does not say, that they might know Thee, the Father, but Thee, the only true *God*. He is addressing *His* Father, but it is not the Father in relationship as regards us. Here it is a question of man knowing the only true God. Very often people are covetous, that is really idolatry, and they have to be brought out from all that to know the only true God. While such things are in question it is really too early to bring in the thought of relationships, for they are proper to *heaven*, but man has to be satisfied *here* first. On the one hand there is the entire overthrow of idolatry in the knowledge of the only true God; you are satisfied with God, and then, on the other hand, there is the appreciation of Christ as the Man of God's pleasure, the One who loved righteousness and hated lawlessness. It is in this way that God and men are brought together in relationships which are perfectly adjusted. You see it first in regard to God and Christ, but the thing is to be perpetuated in men here.
I think we may see eternal life coming out in the Lord's pathway here wherever He is in direct relation to the Father, especially in prayer. He lived on account of the Father. There was the bringing together of God and man in Christ down here, and now He gives the gift of living water to whosoever will ask for it, so that it may spring up and withdraw a man from every natural influence and from all that is of nature.
During the forty days in which the Lord remained on earth after His resurrection we see what is entirely spiritual; the apostles saw it; it was that out-of-the-world, heavenly condition and order of things in which eternal life consists. You have a Man there
{7}
who is entirely outside the reach and sphere of nature, One upon whom death had no more dominion. Even when here, He had His own blessed life with the Father, outside the path of dependence and subjection and responsibility which He had assumed here, so the apostles can speak of "that eternal life which was with the Father"; they had seen it. In the world to come, man will be under the influence of the Man of God's pleasure: he will be freed from idolatry and lawlessness.
As to @John 7, I think it suggests the *heavenly* side of things, and the Spirit coming in from heaven, with the result that there is a heavenly influence down here, rivers of living water. Chapter 7 supposes an Ephesian saint, for there is excess, a flowing out. You do not come to the divine thought of giving until you take heavenly ground. God would follow up His people with a heavenly influence. That is most beautiful. Though certain of the tribes of Israel elected to stay on the further side of Jordan, yet God gave certain cities among them to the Levites to dwell in, so that the influence of heaven might be secured to them. It is interesting that half the tribe of Manasseh broke away from the other half of the tribe, showing that there was special spiritual energy with them. The daughters of Zelophehad were of Manasseh, and they came to Moses, and demanded an inheritance among their brethren, the sons of their father. It all shows a spiritual energy that will not stop short of an inheritance in the land. It shows the energy of faith that breaks loose from nature.
{8}
HOUSE OF GOD AS PRESENTED IN MARK'S GOSPEL
@Mark 1:29 - 31; @Mark 2:1 - 5,15
I had thought that the early passages in the gospel of Mark would seem to illustrate the truth of the house of God. There are three houses mentioned here. The idea of a house includes a system of affection, and this is connected with the testimony. In this gospel it is the "glad tidings" as preached by Christ, and He is referred to more often as in the house than in other positions, and the thoughts connected with this work out ultimately in the idea of the house of God. Even if in Christendom the conditions are wanting for the house of God, one's own house can be right, like Joshua's. He said, "As for me and my house, we will serve the Lord" (@Joshua 24:15).
The first house mentioned here was Peter's. His wife's mother was there. The Lord Jesus entered this house, and the mother-in-law was in a fever, but He touched her, and she arose and ministered unto them. It is noticeable that on her recovery she was impartial. She ministered where there was need. Her case represents a Christian in an awkward position. Her position was a difficult one for any woman, for she was living in another person's house. Our position in the world is an awkward one.
When Jesus returned to Capernaum it says "he was in the house". This is the second house mentioned. It was no small liberty on the part of the four men to intrude through the roof of another person's house, but in this case it is evident there was sympathy on behalf of the person brought in, the palsied man, the four who brought him, and also the owner of the house. If one is not a preacher one can be in sympathy with the testimony through one's house. In an ordinary household, the youngest in the house can contribute to the general welfare.
{9}
In reference to the Lord's ministry, Luke magnifies *what* was done, but Mark *how* it was done. The house is a divine institution. Adam, Seth and others had their families, but it is formally stated with reference to Noah, that he prepared an ark for the saving of his *house*. This is the first mention in Scripture of the house. Jacob said when he awoke from his dream, "this is none other than the house of God". That is to say he recognised that God had a sphere which He dominated. The believer in the Lord Jesus begins his lessons in his own father's house. God has so ordered it that there is affection there. We cannot expect to be right in the house of God unless we are right in our own. In Job's case things were not right when his sons were feasting in their elder brother's house and their father was absent. The result of this was that the house was smitten at the four corners. It would appear that the secret of the matter was that Job's wife was not in true sympathy. It was she who said "Curse God and die" (@Job 2:9). The Lord Jesus met the kind of people in Levi's house, when he was called, whom He was glad to see, the publicans and sinners. The house of God is composed of such who have been reached and set right. The introduction of the gospel into Europe was through the household. I refer to Lydia's house and the jailor's house. This is very encouraging, for we all have our own households. It is remarkable that after finding communion in Lydia's house, in addressing the jailor Paul says, "Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved, *and thy house*" (@Acts 16:31). The apostle later received comfort in the jailor's house for he was washed and fed, and his wounds were cared for there.
In considering this we see how rapidly the Lord extended His territory, and in one way it all depended on the character of Lydia's house. The state of our households has a great deal to do with the meeting.
{10}
Of Philemon's house it was said, "the assembly in thine house" (verse 2). Of course, in the house of God we are not fathers and mothers. Natural relationships and distinctions do not appear. God takes account of a man's house, that is, what his desires are, although he may fail. It is an immense support to have all in one's house saved. The demoniac was sent back to his *house* to testify there. It was an unbelieving house. Our houses are the first place where our testimony ought to be heard.
Noah failed in government because he could not govern himself; hence the failure in his house. Government is by *example*. It was said of Abraham, "he will command his children and his household after him" (@Genesis 18:19). Moses began well, his mother was marked by faith. It was a good household. Isaac was governed by his appetite a terrible thing to be governed by and to set before one's children. He had only two children. Jacob had *twelve* children, he was a family man, and a man of prayer. He gathered his family together and told them what was going to happen. Set right principles before your children and present them before God in prayer and supplication; then leave them to God, He will make it good. The children may take a wide detour, but you can have confidence that God will bring them back.
If the Lord has His place in the house all will be right. This is seen in a striking way in Mark's gospel. Notice how even little children are considered, and such ought not to be overlooked by any of us. If you return to your home from a good meeting you will have to show yourself a better father in your household. The house of God is the place of prayer, and it is also evangelical. There should be sympathy there for all those who are around. The woman in the city, who was a sinner, found no sympathy in Simon's house, but the Lord
{11}
being there she found sympathy from Him. He called her "Daughter"!
We want all the affection that we can find. It is invaluable in our own house and equally so in God's house. In the household there is not only the child, but also the son. He has affections as a child, and intelligence in the thoughts of his father, being a son. In the house of God we have our place as children, where mutual affections between the Father and the children are known, and we have our place also as sons. As such we are intelligent in the Father's thoughts, and consequently we can serve acceptably.
At the end of Mark's gospel the *servants* are sent out to serve. They had been in the house *with Him*; hence they were qualified to serve.
{12}
THE RESULT OF DEPARTURE FROM DIVINE PRINCIPLES
@Judges 6
J.T. It is important in understanding the book of Judges to read the two opening chapters and the closing chapters. The closing chapters disclose the underlying moral state, and what one is forced to believe is that the difficulty lay largely with the Levites. Morals became extremely low. I refer to the chapters following upon the eighteenth. You have there the underlying moral conditions in Israel, and it is to be noted that they appear in connection with the Levites. There were two. The first hired himself to a common person to be a priest in a man's house (chapter 17:7 - 13); the second Levite took a concubine (chapter 19:1). In connection with these two men you have a remarkable disclosure of the underlying conditions in Israel. The responsibility of the people as a whole is seen in the opening chapters. Judah and Joseph were faithful in taking hold of their inheritance. The others, generally, did not take possession. Of one tribe after another it is said, "Neither did he dispossess". There was failure to dispossess the Canaanites; they were allowed to continue alongside Israel, hence the corrupt state of things that ensued. If the Levite and the priest had done right they would have saved the situation.
I thought it would be profitable if we looked at the history of Gideon, because he, above all others, represents the manner of the divine interventions that occurred in the days described in this book. What marked the state of affairs at this juncture was that the people were impoverished. The attack of the Midianites was to deprive the Israelites of their food, of their means of sustenance. It will always be found that where there is departure from
{13}
divine principles a scarcity of spiritual food will ensue.
The house of God was still in Shiloh; it was a serious thing for the people that the house was there and under the influence of Phinehas, the faithful priest: one who is typical of the Lord Himself, in a sense. The house was there, and the priest was there but the Levite was not under the control of the priest. The Levite had hired himself out to Micah, who had a houseful of gods, and ultimately became priest to the tribe of Dan, which had set up idolatry. The levitical class had dissociated themselves from the priesthood: they were, in other words lawless. The man went from mount Ephraim wherever he might, because he was doing what he pleased, and ultimately hired himself to these men, in that way setting up what was typically the clerical principle. Then along with that there is a licentious state, all of which is connected with a general low moral condition. There are certain outstanding traits, but that is the underlying condition you get at the end of the book. Inasmuch as we have to mourn the same conditions in our own day, nothing can be more interesting, or more important, than to see how God intervenes in such circumstances.
The clerical order has sprung up in that connection. Those who had the place of servants, ministers, Levites, hired themselves out to the common people, and that has resulted in the establishment of an idolatrous state of things. It is very important to see how God intervenes, and in what sort of a man He intervenes, and how He prepares His man. For it will be observed that in the opening chapters it is said that God, in His consideration for the people, while in a general way giving them over to discipline and the will of their great enemies, intervened from time to time in judges. But it does not say that He was *with* the people. He was with the judge.
{14}
They get the benefit of God being with the judge. God gives deliverance, and then He gives protection to the people during the days of any given judge; yet you will observe there is still departure. One feature of departure from divine principles is that there is poverty, deprivation; the people are wanting in right food, there is no spiritual ministry. The nature of the Midianite attack is to destroy all right food intended by God in His goodness as support for the people. Verses 3 - 5: "And so it was, when Israel had sown, that the Midianites came up ... And they encamped against them, and destroyed the increase of the earth ... and left no sustenance for Israel, neither sheep, nor ox, nor ass. For they came up with the cattle and their tents ... as grasshoppers for multitude". Verse 6: "And Israel was greatly impoverished because of the Midianites". That which God in His goodness provided for the maintenance of His people, the Midianite would take away. We cannot live spiritually, any more than we can live physically, without food. What you will observe is that where divine principles are departed from, there is really no spiritual food, and that becomes a guide as to how things are. The Galatians, for instance, were misled by Jewish leaders, and the effect was to vitiate the pure ministry of the apostle by mixing it with something else, and in that way nullifying it.
Rem. The Midianites are referred to previously as being a wily people.
J.T. It was through the Midianites that Satan sought to ensnare Israel in the wilderness. He taught Balaam to cast a stumbling block before the children of Israel. They are a people socially related to the people of God, they were descended from Abraham through Keturah. There was an outward relation with Israel, and it is in that that the greatest
{15}
danger really lies, to have relation with people who are not spiritual. Amalek is a descendant of Esau, and the spirit of that is seen in Amalek seeking to prevent the weak from getting into the land to enjoy it. Amalek himself represents the pure worldling, the Egyptian.
Rem. I suppose the children of Israel doing evil in the sight of the Lord would throw them open to attack by the Midianites?
J.T. God allowed it in the way of discipline. The result of it was that they cried to the Lord, and there was a deliverer brought forward. The Lord sends a prophet; He does not send Gideon first. Before you can feed the people their consciences must be put in relation to God. If there is departure, before you can set right food before a person you must put his conscience in relation to God, there must be a return to God. Where has God been in all this? How have *His* rights been regarded? "And it came to pass, when the children of Israel cried unto the Lord because of the Midianites, that the Lord sent a prophet unto the children of Israel, which said unto them, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, I brought you up from Egypt, and brought you forth out of the house of bondage; and I delivered you out of the hand of the Egyptians ... but ye have not obeyed my voice". That is to say, God has His rights over the people. He was their Redeemer, their Saviour, and on these grounds He has His rights over our souls. When difficulties arise, it is a question of where God is. What about His rights? That is what a prophet is sent for. It is to appeal to the conscience, to renew the link between the conscience and God, so that God should have His place in the conscience. The word brings God into the conscience. But you need more than that. The saints need to be ministered to, and Gideon is the man that God is pleased to bring forward to minister to the people.
{16}
So you find in connection with Gideon that food has a great place. In fact, he is symbolised by a cake of barley bread, *tumbling* into the host of Midian, and he destroys the camp of the Midianites. He comes in in an irregular sort of way. According to the vision it tumbled into the host of the Midianites, but it did the work. It is remarkable that it is a cake of *barley* bread; it is not wheaten bread. It shows that Gideon had Christ before him. The barley is Christ, the wheat is the saints. He began with the wheat: he threshed wheat, but he was himself symbolised by the cake of barley bread.
Ques. Do you think in that way the ministry of Christ helps the saints to dispossess the enemy?
J.T. That is the thought in it, evil principles have to be judged, and the prophet brings that about. Now, if this is done and the people brought back to God, then you get the ministry.
Rem. So that the point of recovery would be that they did not take so much account of Midian as they took account of their condition and relation to God.
J.T. Yes; that is the point. Midian was only a rod in God's hand which God can break into fragments and throw away, but the point was to bring Israel back to the recognition of God's rights over them. In @1 Corinthians 14 the prophet brings God in, so that, if there is an unbeliever there, he falls down and acknowledges that God is in you of a truth. We want to see people falling down in recognition that God is present. God *will* come in publicly. But He is in His house now. The prophet is indispensable in that way to the house, because the spirit of prophecy amongst the saints keeps God and His rights before us. A man coming in recognises that God is there, and he falls down. That is the wonderful effect.
Rem. The preservation of the people was in the
{17}
hands of the prophet. "By a prophet the Lord brought Israel out of Egypt, and by a prophet was he preserved" (@Hosea 12:13).
J.T. Yes, a prophet always thinks for God. The idea really is that he comes from God. The prophet's name is not given here. It is not a question of who the prophet was, but that there was prophecy. There was a ministry that asserted the rights of God over the people. We do have, however, a great deal recorded about the man who brings deliverance and food in, and who destroys the destroyer of the food. The ministry of the prophet is light, but there is power with it. It is not ministry in the way of food it is rather to awaken the conscience as to the rights of God. It is noticeable that it was after the people cried to the Lord that He came in, as in @Psalm 107. You find yourself in a straight place, then you cry to God, and God intervenes when you cry. It is the beginning of deliverance. It opens the door for God to come in. It is the way you arrive at the sense in the history of your soul that there has been departure; you arrive at a point where you feel there is no help anywhere except in God. "Vain is the help of man" (@Psalm 60:11). Directly you cry God sends His messenger, and he touches the spot where the difficulty really lies, because the difficulty is *always moral*.
Rem. When the Lord touched the woman's conscience, in @John 4, she said, "Sir, I perceive that thou art a prophet".
J.T. Yes. He brought her soul into direct touch with God, but then, He went further. He told her that He was the Christ. Gideon is typical of the Lord as "the Christ", the One whom God has anointed for the carrying out of His purposes. The woman looked on for "the Christ;" "when he is come, he will tell us all things". But the Lord says, "I that speak unto thee am be". He was the Christ.
{18}
His work as prophet made room for His person. So she went to the Samaritans and told them, "Is not this *the Christ*?" That was a step in advance of the prophet.
I think the thought of Gideon threshing wheat by the wine-press showed that he was qualified personally. He was hiding it from the Midianites; he valued the food. You may get a brother who is very obscure, but he values what is of God, and God owns that. Gideon threshed wheat by the wine-press to hide it from the Midianites. The wine-press is usually the place of judgment. I think it refers to judgment here, but his hiding it shows that he valued it. The Lord hid the treasure. He valued the treasure, and He hid it until the time would come that He could bring it forward to display it. When the Lord was here He was food for His people; He was the standing corn. The question of right food is most important for us. He was engaged with the wheat. The Lord was not with the people as such, neither did the angel say that. Gideon had a good bit to learn. "The Lord is with thee, thou mighty man of valour". That is in keeping with the dispensation. The Lord was with the *judge*.
It is very beautiful how tenderly the Lord deals with Gideon. "And the Lord looked upon him", it says in verse 14. How beautiful to think of the Lord looking on one! Gideon was figuratively Christ. Who would God look upon except Christ? At His baptism God was engaged with that Man as the One in whom all things were centred; everything is made to depend upon Him. As I was saying, the question of food is most vital, because the saints are weakening and succumbing for want of good food. If the food supply is cut off all is hopelessly lost. The Midianitish attack was to cut off the food supply, and it was necessary for Gideon to master the enemies who were preventing the people from getting food.
{19}
You get the Lord taking account of the secret exercises of Gideon. That is what is so beautiful about it. The Lord gives him credit. He is called a man of might and valour. It says, the Lord looked upon him, and said, "Go in this *thy* might, and thou shalt save Israel from the hand of the Midianites: have not I sent thee?" He does not say, "Go in this *my* might", but "Go in this *thy might*", showing that God took account of Gideon according to the Spirit he was to receive. It says the Spirit of the Lord came upon him. It is not what Gideon was then literally, but God speaks from His own standpoint and takes account of what was to come to pass. The Spirit was to come upon him. So that the work would be Gideon's work; in that way the power of the Spirit is attributed to the individual. The source of his strength lay in the place he took as a man; his was a small house in Israel, and he was a small man. That qualified him for the reception of the Spirit. He was morally suited to become a vessel for God. It was encouraging for Gideon that the Lord should call him a man of might. "Go in this *thy* might, and thou shalt save Israel from the hand of the Midianites: have not I sent thee?" God's principle is, "not by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit", (@Zechariah 4:6). God graciously attributes the power of the Spirit to the individual. Gideon was specially attractive to the Lord. The Lord looked upon Gideon; there must have been that which was morally attractive: and think of God adding to that, "Go in this *thy might*, and thou shalt save Israel". But the might was by the Spirit; it would be divine power. The soul may be faltering, as, for instance, Timothy, who was a timid man. The apostle says to him, "God hath not given us the spirit of fear; but of power, and of love, and of a sound mind" (@2 Timothy 1:7).
I think it was praiseworthy that Gideon should
{20}
think of the people. But it is right to be in keeping with the light that governs the position, and the light that governed the position was that God is with the judge. The Lord was not really with the people. We are very apt to connect God with a state with which He cannot be connected. It was quite out of keeping with the conditions and with what God is, to assume that He could be with the people, but He was going to be with Gideon. It would be quite right to think of the people, but God is careful about what is due to Himself, and He could not be with the people as they were, but He could be with a man like Gideon to bless the people. That is what comes out here.
Now, this question of food is most important. If the supply is cut off all is hopelessly lost in the way of testimony. People may get to heaven, but the question is whether we are sustained here in our souls now. When the Lord raised up Jairus¬ daughter He desired that something should be given her to eat. She was to be supported by good food. Our being raised with Christ, according to Colossians, is not in itself sufficient. It is wonderful light surely which entitles us to take the position, but we are only supported in that position by food.
Ques. What would you call food now?
J.T. We have to go to @John 6 for the general principle as to food, but you may have a variety of food. In the case of Jairus¬ daughter the Lord said that *something* should be given her to eat. It was for the parents to select some wholesome food for her. There is no doubt that there is variety in spiritual food. The Lord is like the parent of the house now; He apportions and He provides food; He sees to it that everything is provided for the household. If you have the prophetic ministry the next thing is to bring in the positive thing in the way of food. The faithful and wise servant is the one who
{21}
ministers the portion of meat. If you have not such you do not get the meat. If you have a man who smites his fellow-servants, and eats and drinks with the ungodly, there is no good food in the house; there is no portion of meat in the house. So that it is for the saints to see to it that they are not allowing persons in the place of ministers of food who have not any to minister. We must disallow the clerical principle. The underlying condition in the days of the judges was largely attributable to the levitical unfaithfulness.
Ques. What is indicated in Gideon having a desire to give a present to the angel of the Lord?
J.T. That is very fine. You have a picture of what takes place in the assembly there. It says, "And he said unto him, If now I have found grace in thy sight, then show me a sign that thou talkest with me. Depart not hence, I pray thee, until I come unto thee, and bring forth my present" -- I understand it may be rendered "meat-offering" -- "and set it before thee. And he said, I will tarry until thou come again". Then you have a beautiful picture of assembly activities. You have what Gideon does and what the angel does. There is what we do before the Lord out of the willing desires of our hearts to present something, and, on the other hand, what He does with what we present. It all ascends in perfection, and He goes up, He departs with it. Gideon now is in the full light of what God is, and he rears up an altar to the Lord. It says, "And the Lord said unto him, Peace be unto thee; fear not: thou shalt not die". Then Gideon built an altar there unto the Lord. There is a man now who has committed himself; he has built an altar. A man's measure is always his altar.
Rem. That would be answering to his light.
J.T. Yes; answering to the light he had in his
{22}
soul, the way in which God revealed Himself to him. Before a man ministers I want to see his altar. You want to see the measure of the man's altar. That is, what he is with God. He cannot be anything more with the people than he is with God.
The Lord said "peace". That is the meaning of his altar, and that was his measure, for, if a man ministers, and undertakes to serve the Lord's people, they are quite entitled to go and see the size of his altar, that which he has reared up Godward. You see that in his house. You do not build your altar in the house of God; God prescribes the altar that is to be built in His own house, the length, breadth and height of it. But if you are going to build one He will let you prescribe, and what you do indicates just what you are; that is your measure.
Ques. Do I gather that it is the measure of surrender or sacrifice we have made?
J.T. Yes. It is the place that God has in your heart: that is what your altar shows; anyone can see your altar.
Rem. Lot did not have an altar.
J.T. You could not have an altar in Sodom. Before you can have an altar you must be separate. Altars are reared by people who are separate. After Gideon has built his own altar, he has to go and throw down the altar in his father's house. He has set his own house right, now he has moral power to set his father's house right, which shows a man increasing in power, and ultimately he has to set Israel right. He began with himself first, then his father's house, then the camp of Midian. But before he goes to the camp of Midian he has to train his soldiers. They have all to become imitators of Gideon. That is to say, the Lord Jesus is the great model for us. We have all to do likewise, that is the idea.
When you come to the end of the chapter, the
{23}
signs are evidences of weakness on Gideon's part, but the Lord, I think, only uses our weakness to increase the light. They are typical, I think, of the two dispensations. The fleece is the Jews specially favoured on earth, but when the water is wrung out it is measurable, it is only a bowlful; whereas when the dew falls on the ground around it is immeasurable, unlimited, it falls all around. That is Paul's ministry. The one is Judaism, a limited sphere; the other is Paul's ministry, which is extended and unlimited.
{24}
THE NATURAL AND THE SPIRITUAL
@Job 42:1 - 17
I wish to show you from this scripture, as the Lord may help me, how recovery comes about, and how man is recovered for God through the Lord Jesus Christ in a spiritual, not in a natural way. We all need to be led on to spiritual lines. This book shows that one may be genuinely converted and have the fear of God before his eyes and yet may be still on natural lines. The first chapter of Job presents to us Job and his household as set up on natural lines, although he was a godly man himself, one whom God had taken account of among all the race, a perfect man, one who eschewed evil, one whom indeed God calls His servant. Now before the Spirit of God proceeds to give us this wonderful course of instruction He sets before us the spiritual pattern. After Job and his family are presented we are told that there was a day when the sons of God came to present themselves to God. Now that is a spiritual pattern. It does not go beyond the fact that there was a spiritual pattern. God had sons, and His sons were not lawless; they were not selfish; they thought of Him.
Now that is a spiritual pattern. On the other hand Job's sons and daughters, although they had a godly father, were not affected by his godliness; they were on natural lines. They were feasting in their elder brother's house; that is a natural pattern. That is a pattern of things as they are here in this world, formed under the influence of evil; for, remember, that what is natural now in humanity is under the influence of evil. So that is what you have in chapter 1 -- a spiritual pattern and a natural pattern. It is for you to determine for yourself as to whether you are on the line of the spiritual pattern presented; whether it is your habit to come up before
{25}
God, or whether your habit is to frequent the elder brother's house in a natural way. What marks the sons of God is that they come before God, they present themselves; they give an account of themselves, so to speak. God does not challenge any of them except one. So that it is not the sons of God as they are in heaven, it is what is down here. Satan came amongst them; he always comes to the meetings. But the fact does not prevent the sons being there. It does not say that he went to the elder brother's house, they were attended to from his point of view. He was not active in that connection. If you leave God out of your calculations Satan is not much concerned about you, for you are cared for from his point of view. Satan frequents the meeting-places of God's people much more than he does the meeting-places of the wicked.
Well, now, in a word the elder brother's house represents the natural line. It was a natural precedence to which the elder brother was entitled in the first place. But then what about Job? Where was he? What about your father? Disregard of your parents is disregard of God. God has been pleased to set His authority in those who love you. It makes it easy for you. "Obey your parents in the Lord" (@Ephesians 6:1). The sons and daughters of Job did not do that, they were on natural lines. They left God out. They left their father out. And what happened to them? If you proceed on natural lines Satan will visit you, not to support you, but as an emissary of God in the way of judgment. Now that is terrible. The house in which they feasted was smitten at the four corners by satanic power. Satan is but an emissary of God, a servant of God, but he can only touch you as God permits. It was his power that brought down that house of the elder brother. You may feast today and tomorrow, but down the house will come and the inmates be destroyed. It is a terrible picture,
{26}
beloved friends. If you are on the line of the natural it is disregard of divine order and authority, and from God's point of view that is sin; a terrible sin. It is a sin that as I said leads to that terrible end.
Now God had His eye on Job. There was one man God had His eye on. God never withdraws His eyes from the earth. Men would be thankful if He did. In fact, they persuade themselves at times that He does not look on. Ofttimes we show that we have much greater fear of the eye of our neighbour than we have of the eye of God, but God looks on. It is not that He is looking for sin. God never looks for sin. He finds it, alas, without looking for it, and it pains Him to find it. The Lord looked down from heaven to see if there were any that did understand and seek God. He found one man good before the flood, that was Noah. His eye rested on that man. He found another man in Job after the flood. The Lord is kind in calling you; would to God that it were accepted. If you are converted His eye is upon you; if you are unconverted His eye is upon you. He appeals to you. He marks your steps from the moment of your birth until He touches your conscience. We are told that His eyes run to and fro throughout the whole earth.
Satan was walking up and down in it like a roaring lion, seeking whom he might devour. Are you aware of that? Think of him coming up along with the sons of God! How he would have destroyed them! He had taken notice of Job, and he says to God, 'There is a hedge about him; I cannot touch him'. Thank God for that hedge. 'Where do you come from?' God says to him. 'Give an account of yourself'. Satan had to give an account of himself. God says, "Hast Thou considered my servant Job?" (chapter 1:8). God had His sons there, but He is not numbering Job amongst His sons, He numbered Job amongst His servants. Hast thou considered -- not
{27}
"my son", but "my servant?" You may well be in dread of Satan. He is a roaring lion, we are told by Peter, seeking whom he may devour. Thank God he cannot devour all, otherwise we should not be here. He is seeking whom he may. Are you exposing yourself to him? Beware! The snare is all about you. Satan had taken an account of Job; he had not been up and down through the earth for nothing. There was one man with the fear of God before him. Satan knew about the hedge. Thank God for that hedge. It may for you be the protection of a parent. That is for salvation. The young man that is followed by the prayers of his mother and of his father is protected. God has placed the hedge there, but the hedge is not sufficient.
I cannot enlarge on chapter 1, but I thought it worth while to show you how you have the pattern of what is spiritual and the pattern of what is natural. God sets out at the beginning what He is going to end with. He gives you the pattern. Now, He says, I am going to work out that pattern. And He works out that pattern in Job. He brings Job to that pattern. God will never give you up; He will bring you to correspond with the pattern that He sets before you at the beginning. What is the pattern? Why it is Christ. Paul's gospel presents the pattern. Paul presents both parents, the father and the mother, in order to bring in a spiritual family; that is what he is aiming at, and he wants you to get on to the spiritual line, that you derive from spiritual parentage; and belong to a spiritual family. The moment you get into that circle you will cease to respect the elder brother. You will always find that the elder brother brings trouble. Cain brought it; Ishmael brought it; Esau brought it; Reuben brought it. When the elder brother sees the younger brother feasting in the father's house he says, "Thou never gavest me a kid, that *I* might make merry with *my*
{28}
friends" -- not *your* friends (@Luke 15:29). Look at the grace of God entreating him to come in! But he did not come in; he was utterly unfit for the house in the state in which he was.
Man knows something about the natural dignity of the elder brother deserving precedence, and he holds to it. It is the stock-in-trade of the worldling. But it is vanity, nothing more; there is nothing in it. Now Paul brings in in his gospel the father and the mother. We have the pattern of the heavenly presented to us in Paul's gospel. "God", he says, "who called me by his grace". Paul did not come; he did not pretend to come. God called him, and he says it was "to reveal his Son in me" (@Galatians 1:15,16). It is a spiritual pattern. Jerusalem had no place in it at all; that is Hagar. It was "to reveal his Son in me, that I might preach him among the nations". The grace of God never gives up any one of us until He brings us back to that glorious pattern that we all should be conformed to the image of God's Son. Think of the design God has in His mind! The moment you see it you give up the natural.
As I said, God proposed to set out the pattern before Job in chapter 1 in His sons coming up before Him. Now, He says, I am going to work out on that line; your house is not in order; your sons do not regard you; but the difficulty is with yourself. Well, there are long chapters in which Job has a great deal to say. What can he speak about? There is no reference to the sons of God on his part. If they are referred to it is God himself who refers to them. In chapter 38:4,7 He appeals to Job, "Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth? ... When the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy?" God refers to the sons. Job had a great deal to say; every one in Job's condition has a good bit to say, but it is counsel darkened by words without understanding, without knowledge. It is a
{29}
wonderful moment when Job ended them himself. "The words of Job are ended". He thought he had said enough. It was not that he had laid his hand upon his mouth; his mouth was not stopped yet. No; he was his own judge of what he had said, a man of wisdom on his own account, who would say just so much and no more. A man's mouth has to be stopped not by himself, but by God. Job's three friends were not able to do it. Even Elihu was not able to do it. A man in Job's state has great pretensions and a great estimate of himself.
Now God is not going to leave it that way. He is not going to allow you to decide when you should stop speaking. He undertakes to shut your mouth. God is not only going to convict a man. The three friends of Job condemned him and they could not convict him. That was why Elihu's anger was kindled against his friends. You may see one of the Lord's people turning aside for a moment, and you condemn him, but you cannot convict him. To condemn him, without convicting him is sin. Convict him first and then condemn him. "Those that sin convict before all" (@1 Timothy 5:20). Do not condemn without convicting. That was the reason why Elihu was enraged with the three friends of Job. They condemned him, he says, but they did not convict him. Job said, 'My words are ended'. They saw that he had the last word; they could not answer him. If any mouth is to be stopped God will stop it. "That every mouth might be stopped". He has arranged for that, even Job's, in spite of his oratory. He was a wonderful speaker; his speeches contain very wonderful things, that are recognised by the Spirit of God as right, but his mouth had to be stopped, and it was effectively stopped. How? By the Lord Himself. The Lord takes him in hand. Your parents cannot help you; your best friend cannot help you. God alone can do it, and He does it effectively. So Job turns round to
{30}
God at the end and says, "thou canst do everything". That is a wonderful discovery, and yet it is obvious. There are miracles being performed every day. If I understand what a miracle means, it is something done outside human power. A miracle has surely been performed on me and on you. Every convert is a testimony to what the power of God is. God can convert; He can do anything. It is as if Job said, You brought this to pass in me, you can do anything. How persistent Job was in his self-righteousness. He said, You have brought me down; you have succeeded; I know now that you can do anything.
The greatest thing was to raise up the Lord Jesus, and God has done that. He had been calling Job's attention to the heavens and to the earth, the works of His hands. Job says, I see that you can do everything. Well, we may say much more than that as Christians. We see more than Job could have seen. We see what God has done in Christ. We see the exceeding greatness of His power. The visible things are all witnesses to the things that are unseen, even His eternal power and divinity, but they are not the witnesses to the exceeding greatness of His power, that refers to the resurrection of Christ. We say with much more force, Thou canst do everything. He has taken Christ out of the stronghold of death and He has set Him down at His right hand in heaven. There is the witness to the exceeding greatness of His power.
Do you think there is a brother who cannot be recovered? The Lord can do it. "Who then can be saved?" (@Matthew 19:25). Do not say that; do not give him up. The disciples said to the Lord, "Who then can be saved?" Let us not say that a brother cannot be saved. Job says to God: You can do everything. That is his answer. God can do everything. Hence the Lord says, "All things are possible with God" (@Mark 10:27). The rich man might as well try to get into the kingdom
{31}
as a camel to go through the needle's eye. Who can be saved? All things are possible with God. God can reduce the size of that camel. He knows how to do it. Conversion brings down the size. The difficulty with the man is that he is too big. *You* cannot reduce his size, but *God* can.
Well, Job says, You can do everything. My thought was to show you how that God sets up Job on spiritual lines, and the first thing after his mouth is stopped he abhors himself. Now, he is to be a benefactor. Do not spurn those people even although their speeches were against you, pray for them. Pray for your persecutors. The first thing is that Job prays for his friends, and God accepts the face of Job. That is the reading of it. God loves a praying face. Job never looked so well as when he was praying; neither does any one else. You never look so well in God's account as when you are praying. He accepts the face of a praying man. Is it your habit to pray? "Let me see thy countenance", He says (@Song of Songs 2:14). He loves to see a sinner look up. The woman who was bent for eighteen years was always looking down. To look up is that you change your countenance. God looked at the Lord Jesus praying, and it drew from His heart the expression, "my beloved Son, in whom I have found my delight" (@Matthew 17:5) He transfigured Him while He was praying on the mount of transfiguration. It is said that God accepted the face of Job, as I understand the reading of chapter 42:9.
Now, after Job is accepted, after he is recognised, for to accept his face means that he is adopted, to put it into Christian language; after he is adopted, he is no longer a servant, but a son. His countenance God accepts, and then he has a spiritual income. He has twice as much as he had before. Now, what would that be put into New Testament language? What would it be for the Christian? Think of the gift of the Spirit. Can you measure it? It is not
{32}
anywhere measured by fourteen thousand sheep, as we get here. That does not measure it. Fourteen thousand is just a suggestion as to the wealth with which the believer whose face is accepted of God as a praying man is endowed. The gift of the Spirit in Scripture is connected with prayer. The Lord received it while He was praying, and after He went to heaven He asked for the Spirit in order to shed it forth. Think of the wealth, think of the blessedness of coming to the living God!
You can look up into the face of God. God loves to look into the countenance of a praying man. See the effect! His friends are really restored instead of being judged. And now Job is on spiritual lines. All his friends come. As to his sisters, we do not hear anything of them in chapter 1 but in chapter 42 it says, that his brethren and his sisters, and all they that had been of his acquaintance before, were accepted of God and set on spiritual lines. What you have on these lines is brothers and sisters, all sympathisers; the sphere of your acquaintance is now spiritual it is a family connection, so it widens out your acquaintances. How well off you are! How well off Job was!
I am simply endeavouring to describe to you what God brings about for any one believer through the glad tidings. It is a wonderful result. You are set up down here; your face is accepted; and you are surrounded by family relations, by sympathisers, and by those who bring presents to you; you are an object of affection on every hand. It is a reality. These are the actual effects of the gospel down here.
Then there is just one other thought, and that is, Job has another family. He now has twice as much wealth, yet he has not any more children, but they are of a different order. There is not a word said about the elder brother. There is no elder brother amongst the brethren in this sense, the Lord Jesus is
{33}
supreme but He is not an elder brother. There is no reference to an elder brother in the last chapter; that order of things has been wiped out. It was wiped out in the first chapter, and we can thank God for it. Room is now made for the new family, and we get their names. There is not a name of any of the sons or daughters given in the first chapter. Here we have the names of the daughters; they are signalised in that way. I have no doubt each name has its own meaning, because names are never given for nothing. The more one reads Scripture the more one is convinced that every word is there for a purpose, every letter, so that the names have meanings. What I would like to say further is this, that the three daughters of Job are given an inheritance, not in their elder brother's house, but among their brethren. Is not that where you want it? If you love the brethren you do. You do not want your inheritance anywhere else; you want it amongst the brethren. Job is on spiritual lines now, and the inheritance is amongst the brethren; you could not get a more spiritual idea than that.
God is endeavouring to bring us on to spiritual lines, that things should be spiritual. We have to touch the natural, just touch it lightly, and press on to the spiritual. The spiritual is what is to abide eternally. So we find that the spiritual man lives on. Job lived for one hundred and forty years after that, and he saw four generations. It was not generations after the flesh; it was generations after the Spirit, and it rejoiced his heart.
{34}
CHRISTIAN EDUCATION
@Mark 3:31 - 35; @Luke 8:19 - 21; @John 20:16,17
I want to say a word about education, and I venture to select these scriptures as indicating the course of instruction which is available. I desire especially to dwell on the last scripture. Mary indicates by the term she uses in addressing the Lord that she was among those who had taken up the course of instruction and had progressed in it. She designates the Lord as He had been known to her; she says to Him, "Rabboni"; He was her Teacher, her Master. Nothing can be more important for us than to come under His instruction. The sun shines, there is a great deal of light: but there is much need for instruction. We get such a term as this, "instruction in righteousness" (@2 Timothy 3:16). Timothy was amongst those who had been learners; the apostle says to him, "Abide in those things which thou hast learned ... knowing of whom thou hast learned them" (chapter 3:14). In the prophets we have a suggestion that is very solemn. God's people were "destroyed by lack of knowledge", (@Hosea 4:6). Hosea tells us "we shall know". Having spoken of the Lord and of returning to Him, the prophet says, "After two days he shall revive us: in the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight". He says we shall know God, but there was something more than that: "then shall we know, if we follow on to know the Lord" (chapter 6:2,3). The secret of this knowledge is in the *following*.
At the outset of the Scriptures one is greatly struck with the intelligence displayed. Adam gave proof of very great intelligence; every creature of God is brought to him that he might name them. We are not told where he acquired his intelligence, or where he was instructed, but every creature of God was brought to him and he pronounced the name of each, and the name which Adam pronounced upon them
{35}
has remained; that was its name then, and that name remains. We have not a list given of the names which he assigned, but we are given an example in the naming of Eve which would indicate that Adam had a reason for naming each as he did. If he gave each a name, he would assign a reason for that name. One observes that much is said today, and much assumed, and yet no reason is given for it. We want to be able to assign a reason for things.
I refer for a moment to Eve; Adam assigns a reason for the name he gives her. It is a wonderful incident; a most attractive incident, the first marriage ceremony. Jehovah presents her to Adam, it was a test to the intelligence of the man, but Adam was equal to it; "This time", he says, "it is bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh: this shall be called Woman, because this was taken out of a Man" (@Genesis 2:23). That is what it is to be intelligent according to God; he can assign a reason for what he says. Adam was a figure of Him that was to come; he displayed very great intelligence, but he was only a figure of Him that was to come. Our Lord Jesus Christ gave names, and in the giving of them He displays not only His sovereign right, but His divine intelligence. He gave names when here, and He never gave them haphazard; there was always a reason.
When we come on to the end, we find the assembly in heaven, and the elders surrounding the throne of God, and what remarkable intelligence they display! These elders refer to ourselves, beloved brethren; putting it very simply, they refer to Christians. They are the result of the divine thought in taking us up; they are the outcome of God's thought for us in saving us. What does the Lord Jesus think when He takes any of us up, when He calls us by name? He thinks of the possibilities; He gives us a name according to the possibilities, according to the *certainties*, we might say; for every possibility is a
{36}
divine certainty with the Lord. He is thinking of these twenty-four elders. He has no lower thought for any of us than that we should be among them. He has twenty-four thrones, and they are to be occupied by men called elders, and what marks them is that in everything they do, and for everything they say, they are able to give a reason. They explain things; if they worship, they tell you why.
How humbling are the occurrences often when we come together to break bread. Why do we say things, why do we do things? Participation there ought to be grounded on wisdom. If you cannot give a reason you are put to shame, you are short of an elder. God measures you; every word is taken account of divinely. God measures the temple and the *worshippers*. There is that which He will not measure, the court which is without the temple. What a terrible thing to be formally omitted from God's measuring! I would rather be measured by God, even though it brings out my failure, than be left out as unworthy of measurement. The temple, the altar, the worshippers, all are divinely measured. God has His own standard; the Lord Jesus is the standard, He is the model. These elders were in the good of divine instruction; every one of them had learnt of Christ; they were full-grown; they were not afraid of being measured.
If we speak of the course of instruction, I think it begins with this chapter in Mark. The word "crowds" is used there, it is not disciples. Earlier in the chapter His relatives had, in a patronising sort of way, assumed that He was out of His mind. They were not His enemies, He had enemies, those who said that He cast out demons by Beelzebub, but these were not His enemies, they were His distant relatives evidently. His mother and His brethren would belong to a nearer circle no doubt, but here they were standing without, and they called to Him to
{37}
come out. How wanting in divine instincts they were! According to nature His mother had a right to call her son, but she lacked in divine intelligence; she was outside His interests. They were standing without; not opposers, but content to be outside.
Well, His mother and His brethren stood without and desired Him to come to them, but He will never join them on these lines. He disowns the relationship, and the crowds are respected. There are those who are around Him inside. I would call your attention to the word "crowd" in verse 32. The multitude encircling Him; there is no natural link between Him and them, but He looks round about upon them. He does not look on those outside. They desired to see Him on natural grounds, but they stood outside. Flesh is incapable of divine culture; nature is incapable of divine culture; but if you come inside you will be where you may be divinely instructed. I want to show you how the education begins. While you *stand* you are not a learner; you must *sit* to be a disciple, a learner. John the baptist stood: dispensationally he was right in standing, but he did not come into the Christian instruction, inside. He said, "the friend of the bridegroom, which standeth and heareth him, rejoiceth greatly" (@John 3:29); but a disciple sits.
Well, in this scripture we find a crowd sitting; these sitters had begun to take the course of instruction. They are not called brethren, nor even disciples, but a "crowd", yet see how the Lord honours them! It is a circle you see, a circle around the Lord. Everything for God is on the principle of a circle. Well, the Lord looked round on the circle, He looked upon those sitting around Him. What an attitude that was! They were sitting around Him, and He looked round in a circuit on them, and He says, "Behold my mother and my brethren!" They had come to see that here was teaching from God; they desired to be instructed. They knew very little
{38}
perhaps, but they were where they would acquire divine intelligence; they were sitting around Him. That is the beginning of the course of Christian education.
Then the Lord says at the end of the chapter, "whosoever shall do the will of God, the same is my brother, and my sister, and mother". He put the brother first; it is the brother He has in His mind; the Lord was thinking of the brother. What kind of brethren were they? The course of instruction begins in sitting around the Lord, and you are recognised as a brother because you are doing the will of God; it is in that way you recognise the brother. They were using not their hands, that would come later, but they were using their ears, and that is how you do the will of God; it is in listening to Christ. Your hands will come in later and your feet too, but the will of God begins with sitting around the Lord Jesus. It is wonderful to arrive at this position, to be sitting around the Lord listening to His word, doing the will of God; of such the Lord will say, "The same is my brother, and my sister, and mother". Well, that is how Christian education begins; it shows the will of God carried out by the believer.
Now in @Luke 8 the Lord does not look around on any one. What He says there is, "My mother and my brethren are these which hear the word of God, and do it". He did not point to them; I fear they were not there. It is a very great thing to say that any company hear the word of God, and do it. It is not a crowd in Matthew, but His disciples, His learners; they were learning from the Lord. In Luke He simply says of such persons as hear the will of God, and do it, 'They are my mother, and my brethren'. Who? Is there any one on earth today to whom the Lord can call attention in this way? "Those who hear the word of God". I desire to be
{39}
simple. God has been pleased to raise up those who have spoken to us the word of God; it has been opened up to us, unfolded to us; God for His own wise ends has removed them from us; it is very solemn. Are there those today to whom the Lord can appeal as having heard the word of God? God is looking for results. He has given to us to hear His word, and He never does anything without a purpose; He is looking for the result in us who have heard. The word has come to us, clearly, simply, but what has been the result? Are there those who not only hear the word of God, but who *do* it? It is a very serious moment for us. God raises the question with us, What about the doing? As we have received, even so will it be required of us again. So the Lord shows here, that those who hear and those who do, are the recognised brethren of Christ.
In @John 20 we reach the highest point of the instruction. In John's gospel the Lord is more often referred to as Teacher than in any other. He is the great Teacher sent from God. John's line implies more teaching than any other. All are to be taught of God. Think of *God* instructing us! What does He speak to us about? The great lesson is how to love. In @1 Thessalonians 4:9 the apostle says, "ye yourselves are taught of God to love one another". The gospel and epistles of John are all to the same end that we might be taught how to love. First, love itself is known; we are shown what love is, and then further, *we* are to love. If God takes in hand to teach us, the great lesson is love; and as we learn what love is, we also learn how to love on our part. It is all in Christ; He has shown us what love is. "He laid down his life for us" (@1 John 3:16), and that becomes instruction to us that we may love. If that is the great lesson we are to be instructed in, we can see that to enter into the truth unfolded in John's gospel requires more teaching than for any other. Nicodemus
{40}
in chapter 3:2 says to Him, "We know thou art a teacher come from God". That is the character of the whole gospel.
Now Mary, in chapter 20, uses the word Teacher, indicating what He was to her; she speaks according to what the Lord Jesus had been to her. If you are a true man you speak to Him according to the measure in which He has been known to your soul. The Samaritan woman, in chapter 4, said He was a prophet; she recognised the prophet in Him; He touched her conscience. She did not even known Him as the Christ; for the Lord's telling her that He was such did not prove that she knew Him in that way, but she was on the road to it, and He says, "I that speak unto thee am he". So again in chapter 9 the man is led along until finally he recognises Him as the Son of God. In the house in Bethany He was known as the Teacher; He had taught them love. So when Mary spoke to the Lord she called Him by the name by which she knew Him. Beloved brethren, I would say, Let us call Him by the name by which we know Him, in the assembly; do not be unreal; speak to Him as you know Him. Seek to convey what you have in your soul when speaking to the Lord. Mary did that; she called Him Rabboni, Teacher; He had been her Teacher, her Instructor, and she called Him by that name.
We have the finishing touches of the education in this scripture, and these finishing touches came from the Lord as ascended in principle; He was on His way to ascend. There are things, proper to the new position He is bringing to us; we need to acquire manners suited to the new position. He will make us spiritually refined and fit for heavenly relationships. @Psalm 22 is headed, "according to the hind of the morning"; it suggests a hind let loose. The Lord is seen in three positions in it; we have His death and resurrection, and He is perfected; heard from
{41}
the horns of the unicorns and let go? Where does He go as set free? He thinks of His brethren "I will declare thy name unto my brethren" (@Hebrews 2:12). He will give the finishing touches to their education. They are to be His companions in heavenly glory, and they will need those finishing touches.
So in @John 20 He comes into the midst of His own in all the dignity and glory of His person as the One who ascends to the Father; "I ascend unto my Father, and your Father". The message had been sent by Mary, the instructed one; she had the thing in her heart; she could convey it faithfully. She had been instructed in the garden, and He had said to her, "Touch me not"; do not connect the earthly with the heavenly; "I am not yet ascended to my Father; but go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend". Was it like a note written? Was it something put on paper? No, she received it into her heart; she could convey it because she knew it; she understood the spirit of it. I have no doubt she conveyed the spirit of it to the disciples as they were gathered together. We want to give out the spirit of things, beloved brethren, it is not just doctrine that will help us, but we want to give out the spirit of the truth. Mary had gathered up the spirit of things in her soul. There had been the interchange of names between herself and the Lord, and then there was the instruction in order that she should understand the new relationships He had brought about in heaven: the new position and the new relationships connected with it. Do you not think she was in the spirit of the thing? I am sure she was.
Then when the Lord Jesus comes into the midst, all that occurred in the upper room was instruction for the new place; His coming in and speaking peace, His breathing upon them, His words, all was instruction
{42}
for them, that they should take their place as His companions in the presence of the Father. The name of the Father is the completion of the instruction He would give them; they are brought in before the Father in association with Him, and He sings the Father's praises, the praises of God. In @Psalm 22:3 He spoke of God as "inhabiting the praises of Israel", but now He brings in the praise of the assembly. David's greatest work was to inaugurate the praise of Jehovah; he arranged the singing of the priests, and God delighted in the praises of Israel. David was the leader of Israel's choir; he was the sweet psalmist of Israel; his psalms were the outcome of his experience with God. But now the Lord brings His brethren in before His Father and theirs, and in the midst of them He sings praises; He becomes the leader of the choir of His brethren, and He sings praises to His Father.
One hopes that the word spoken may not be fruitless to any of us, that it may not be without profit. The assembly ought not to be just a religious meeting to be got through, it ought to be something for *God*. It should be the expression of our intelligent appreciation of the instruction of Christ, the expression of our love, for the Father seeks worshippers, and if you get the worshippers you will get the worship.
{43}
THE WORKS OF GOD
@John 9:l-38
I wish to say a word about *the works of God*, a subject that Scripture begins with. "In the beginning God created". God began to work, and Scripture ends with the great *result* of His working. I want also to show that what God regards as His works are presented in *man*. It is true that "the invisible things of him from the creation of the world are clearly seen; being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and Godhead" (@Romans 1:20). These are seen in the material system, but what He regards as His peculiar work is that which is seen in *man*. We have no such statement as we find in this chapter in @Genesis 1; it is not said there that the chaotic state of things was there in order that the works of God should be manifested, and yet the whole of @Genesis 1 is engaged with the divine works, and God says at the end of each day that "it was good".
It is very interesting in a simple way to think of oneself and to inquire whether God could say, "It is very good"; whether it is a success. I have no doubt that with many of us, as reviewing our experience and our history as Christians, we think things might be better. It is quite right to review your history as a Christian, as to what the result has been; but bear this in mind, that God reviews things. He reviews His own work. We get the sum total of it in chapter 1, and in the last verse we are told that He saw everything that He had made and it was "very good"; and He saw everything in detail. I mention this to show that everything comes under review with God. Before God takes you up as a stone to build you into the structure He passes you in review. He reviews His own work in each individual. If you look at the parts of the tabernacle, each of which
{44}
has some reference typically to the Christian, you will see each part was brought to Moses.
I do not know how long you have been converted, but I think the work in you ought to be brought before the Lord. If you bring it to the Lord He will tell you all about it and how much of it is really according to God. Each part of the tabernacle was brought to Moses. I have no doubt that in the end, when the structure is completed, when every item of the tabernacle, so to speak, every believer is brought in, it will be brought to Christ. It is very serious to think that we shall be presented, indeed I am only stating in another way what the judgment seat of Christ will be. But the actual work, not only what you may have *done*, but God's work *in you*, all is presented at the end. Each item of the tabernacle was brought to Moses, and Moses¬ judgment was that all was made accurately according to the pattern; that was his decision and he blessed it. If it had not been according to the pattern doubtless he would have pointed it out; so that we need not hesitate to come to the Lord as regards our progress. Judgment must be passed upon the work.
I would speak to young people and ask them, Did you ever come to the Lord as to the little bit of experience that you have gone through? Have you ever taken it to Him to let it pass through His hands? It *will* pass through His hands. Now think of this one thing, that in you the works of God are to be manifested, not hidden. Alas! they are often hidden, and so we often speak of the new birth, that such and such an one has long since been born again, but then it seems to have been hidden. If the Lord has taken you up at all it is that the *works of God should be manifested in you*.
The new birth is a work of God, it is not a work of man. It is a great comfort to faith that God has limiting powers. The greatest potentate on earth
{45}
cannot do as he pleases, even the very sun in the heavens can be stayed by God. But here the Lord says "the wind bloweth where it listeth ... so is every one that is born of the Spirit" (@John 3:8). You may shut the wind out of your house, but the Spirit acts sovereignly, and you are not wise in barring up your doors and windows; let Him come in, let the Spirit of God have to say to you. God says, "my Spirit shall not always strive" (@Genesis 6:3). Think of that! It is a solemn thing. He is striving now, and the wind, the Spirit, is sovereign in its activity, and it *brings down*, the wind throws down trees; with the idea that the works of God are to be manifested. The first great effect of the work of God is to *bring down*. I have often thought of Job after God's dealings with him; he says to God, I know that Thou canst do everything. It is a wonderful thing to come to that, that God can do everything. It seems an impossibility to bring down a man who is so difficult that you cannot reach him or affect him, but God knows how to bring him down, how to reduce him. The disciples said, "Who then can be saved?" How often we say that in principle. The Lord says, "with God all things are possible" (@Matthew 19:25,26). He pulls down before He builds up.
If you are exercised about becoming converted, you may depend upon it that God will not *add* to you as you are in this world. He will *reduce* you as to this world, but He will add to you with regard to another world. The feast of unleavened bread referred to so much in Scripture, prepared for the feast of Pentecost. The feast of unleavened bread is to reduce, and the feast of Pentecost is to enlarge. The gift of the Spirit enlarges. When the wind blows where it lists it brings down. On the day of Pentecost it was not like that. It was not then the "wind bloweth where it listeth": the wind blows in a certain direction. We can tell where the wind came
{46}
from on the day of Pentecost and we can tell where it was going. It came from Christ in heaven. They heard, it is said, from heaven a sound as of a rushing mighty wind; not blowing this way or that, but blowing down from heaven. The wind that brings down is a horizontal wind; that is the first work of God in you, but the Spirit indwelling you enlarges you and builds you up as to what is of God. I venture to speak in that way so that we may have clearly before us the means by which God effects His work, but the whole point is, as the Lord says here, "that the work of God should be manifested".
Now the first thing is that one should have one's eyes opened. In @Mark 8 you have a man similarly found by the Lord, as the one referred to in the chapter before us. The gospel of Mark is a remarkable gospel in this way, that you find sympathy around where there is need; you do not find that in John's gospel. There is not an atom of sympathy around this man in @John 9. In @Mark 2, for instance, there is a paralytic, who is borne of four; he is not only borne by a friend of his, but there is general sympathy for that man. That is how Mark presents things. You might say two would have done, but four gives the idea that it is not only one or two who are sympathetic with the man, but the surroundings of the man were sympathetic. It is a wonderful thing to have a number of people praying for you! I have no doubt that that is what is going on at the present time; there is a great deal of pressure, a great deal of exposure to death, and there is prayer, the spirit of prayer is all around. That is how God works. The man was borne of four; and the house in which the Lord Jesus was carrying on the service of God was entirely sympathetic; they let the man down through the roof and there was not a word of protest. But when it is a question of showing what the work of God is by itself, it is seen where there is no sympathy
{47}
at all; and that we find in @John 9, there is no sympathy in the surroundings of this blind man. The neighbours knew that he sat and begged. They ask, Did he sin? Did his parents sin? No! Why then was he born blind? His is an extreme case. In @Mark 2 it is not an extreme case; the man there was not entirely friendless, he had at least four friends, and the number four is universal. But if it be a question of showing what the work of God is we have an extreme case. This man was blind from his birth.
Well, no converted person would admit that his own case is not extreme; if you have not come to that you have not judged yourself. "God be merciful to me *the* sinner" (@Luke 18:13); "the sinner" is the extreme case. Then the Lord states, that "as long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world", and He spits on the ground and makes clay of the spittle and puts it on the man's eyes. It was a very remarkable thing to do to prove what He had just said, that "as long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world". The man's eyes are covered with the clay; a thick layer, as we might say, of the clay is spread over the man's eyes. Were we to pass a mere human judgment upon that piece of the Lord's work we might say that He was increasing the darkness of the world. We cannot judge by nature. You may say, How could a man see through a layer of clay even if his eyes were open?
In this type the Spirit of God would detain us with the consideration of the *humanity* of Christ! Do you inquire about the clay? It was a type of the humanity of Christ. The divine glory was all veiled there. All the light of God was veiled behind the "clay". In order that the light of God should burst forth He became man, and when He comes here He says, "Lo, I come to do thy will, O God" (@Hebrews 10:9). He was the "sent one". Behind all is the activity of the heart
{48}
of Christ as having come from God in obedience. It is Christ as the "sent one", the sent One from God with all the light veiled behind His humanity. If it were possible to make the man more blind the layer of clay would have done it, but if relief is to come there must be, in some measure, correspondence with Christ. Apart from the principle of obedience in your heart your salvation is impossible. That will of yours is in the way; it is the will that works in shutting the door of your heart against the Spirit of God and against the light.
The Lord says to the man, "Go, wash in the pool of Siloam". The man was already a subject of divine work or he would not have gone, but he went. We are told the interpretation of the name lest we should not understand it. The pool of Siloam was not a pool that was troubled occasionally as the pool in chapter 5, it was not stagnant; the pool of Bethesda was. Sometimes the meetings are like that; they are stagnant, and the "angel" comes; there is a stirring up, and then things lapse back to where they were. The impotent man at the pool of Bethesda got no benefit from the disturbance of the water. Siloam was not that; it went "softly". It was the principle of obedience. This man did not question, he obeyed Jesus; he went and washed and "he came seeing".
Now the Lord took the man in @Mark 8 outside the village in order to open his eyes; and after He had opened them He says, "Neither enter into the village, nor tell it to anyone in the village". But it is not so here in @John 9. There is no danger of this man going back to the village. John's converts are typical ones. For instance, of Lazarus in chapter 11, the Lord says, "Loose him, and let him go". Now in @Luke 7 the man that is raised is not "let go", he is given back to his mother. The examples that John gives take care of themselves as it were; they are
{49}
the subjects of the work of God, and the work of God gives an account of itself. Look into your heart and see whether there is anything like that there. Do not always be referring to the date of your conversion. The question is, What has happened since? Have you been able to take care of yourself? "he that has been begotten of God keeps himself", (@1 John 5:18). Must you be always under servants? That is a poor thing! Luke gives the young man back to his mother. Lazarus is not put in anybody's charge, but the word is, "Loose him" (@John 11:44); as much as to say, give him an opportunity of showing the effect of the work of God in him. How he justified the Lord! for he was found in the Lord's company, he "sat at table with him", (chapter 12:2).
Some young people would go to the theatre if they were "let go", but if the work of God is in you you will not go to the theatre nor read a novel. Nothing but the work of God can be trusted. No professions can be trusted, but the work of God *can* be trusted. This man was not told not to go into the village; the Lord knew he would not go. Whereas in Mark the man, is carefully warned not to go to the village, and told, "Go to your house"; go where you will be under control, under good influence. That is a very important warning for young converts: keep near your parents, keep near the brethren.
Look at the glorious history of this man. I have not time to go into it. "He came seeing", and then one class of people after another have to say to him, the neighbours first, and he gives an account of himself to them. The work of God never fails; it manifests itself. The neighbours are not opposed, but the Pharisees are opposed. Be careful of the leaders of worldly religion!
Many persons put forward their inquiries about this man; they could not believe that it was he
{50}
that was born blind; but it was he. Then, finally, his parents come into evidence. They are not opposed to him, but they are not prepared to answer for him. He did not need them however. They say, "he is of age", and so he was: nobody else can speak for him. He can give an account of himself, the man was of age *spiritually*. There are very few Christians now who are "*of age*". See to it that your exercises are keeping pace with the work of God, because otherwise they are of no account. Make sure they are exercises of the light. This man began with *seeing* things.
Now he makes a confession. He is formally asked as to what his judgment is of Christ. I do not know of any question so important as that. Sometimes the Lord Himself asks it: at other times, it may be, that one of the saints asks you, or it may be an enemy, as it was in this case. The Lord asked the question, "What think ye of Christ?" There was no answer to that. But when He asked His disciples, "Whom do *ye* say that I am", there was an answer: "Thou art the Christ". The answer of this man is, "He is a prophet". A Christian should always speak of Christ according to his own apprehension of Him, because we are now so supplied with terms and expressions that really we are stunted in using them. Speaking to the Lord in language that is not your own is offensive, and damaging to yourself. This man says, "He is a prophet"; he did not pretend to say a word more than that. That was all he knew, and his belief was based on evidence that brought conviction to his heart. He says: "If this man were not of God he could do nothing". He must be of God.
Well, before I close, I should like to say a further word to show how the works of God are manifested in one becoming suited, not only for testimony, but suited for God. This man became a worshipper. Solomon tells us, "Prepare thy work without ...
{51}
afterwards build thine house" (@Proverbs 25:27). This man in @John 9 was gradually led on until the works of God were manifest in him, in this sense, that he became a worshipper. Firstly, he speaks of the Lord as "a man called Jesus"; then he speaks about Him as a "prophet"; and then there is in him the idea of "the Christ", for the Jews had agreed that if any one acknowledged He was Christ he should be put out of the synagogue, and as the sequel shows he virtually confessed that Jesus was "the Christ", and he was put out of the synagogue. They said, "Dost thou teach us?" But he could well teach, for he was "of age". Such is the effect of the work of God. It makes you a teacher. It is not a question of how long a man has been converted, but what moral and spiritual power has he; what convictions has he? Instead of listening to him the Pharisees cast him out.
When the world rejects you, they *help* you. If you are offensive to the company you keep they will not keep your company very long. Enoch walked with God and he pleased God, otherwise he could not have walked with Him. At length we read of this man, that they "cast him out". Now look! "When Jesus heard that". He watched over the man's soul. He is the Overseer of our souls. He knew all that was going on, and when Jesus heard that they had cast him out, He finds him and virtually acknowledges him; He justifies him; the works of God were justified in him. It was a red-letter day for the man, and the Lord takes special account of it. When He finds him he puts the finishing touch to the work. He would lead him on to perfection. That is a real difficulty with many of us, and there are so few perfected. We have not full perfection yet, but every Christian should be *perfected*. Paul said, "to the end that we may present every man perfect in Christ" (@Colossians 1:28).
{52}
Well, the Lord was going to perfect this man, so He makes him a worshipper. You are never perfected until you are a worshipper. He had been a believer before. The question is, what is it that he believed? The Lord says to him, "Dost thou believe on the Son of God?" That was a very great question! The man says, "Who is he?" If you ask a question like that the Lord will put you back on your previous exercise. He says to the man, "Thou hast both seen him, and it is he that talketh with thee". What a moment! If the Lord is going to give you fresh light He gives it to you in relation to the light you have had before; He throws you back on your previous exercise. This man had seen the Lord before. Now he says, "Lord, I believe". Believe on whom? the Son of God! He not only said it, he proved it by worshipping. There is no greater evidence of the work of God in souls than that they worship. The Father seeketh *worshippers*.
We are taken up by grace that the works of God should be manifested in us. I believe that at the present time the great failure is the lack of completeness. The Lord says to Sardis, "I have not found thy works complete before my God" (@Revelation 3:2). What I would urge upon you, and what I would take home to my own soul, is that we should see to it that we "go on to perfection". Do not become stunted; go on to perfection. No work is complete in the soul until it is in the assembly, intelligently answering to God. The Father is seeking worshippers, and the work of God is to bring about that, to bring in the worshipping company. Let us go on to perfection.
{53}
BEHAVIOUR IN THE HOUSE OF GOD
@1 Timothy 3:14,15; @Hebrews 11:21
I desire to say a word about our behaviour. Taking up this verse from Timothy we see that the apostle is desirous that things should be orderly in his absence, that there might be right behaviour in the house of God. We all have to own, beloved brethren, that our ways in the house are defective, and I venture to connect Jacob with the subject, since it is with him that we first get the house of God introduced in Scripture.
I shall refer to Genesis firstly, as affording us examples of divine training through discipline, so that the believer might be enabled not only to recognise the house as being in existence, but that it might be his place of abode; then, secondly, that he should learn what is befitting in the house. @Hebrews 11 refers to Jacob when he was dying; it speaks of his faith at that moment. If the Spirit of God could have so spoken of him earlier, doubtless it would have been done, but one is thankful that we have the record of his faith when dying, amplifying what is stated by Moses in Genesis, showing us too that he reached the end God intended for him when he was dying, for he "worshipped, leaning upon ... his staff". That was the end of his course.
Now I desire to trace the history of Jacob from the beginning. I want to show you the roots of his history, for if you have the roots rightly set, you are sure to get the fruits in their time. The first thing stated of Jacob is that he was "a plain man", (@Genesis 25:27) and he dwelt in tents; that is what is said of him at the beginning of his history. Esau was a man of the field, doubtless a good athlete, a good sportsman, as we say, but Jacob was a plain man dwelling in tents; he had no fixed abode. He had acquired the habit of dwelling in a tent from his grandfather; Abraham
{54}
had been his model. @Hebrews 11 tells us that by faith Abraham sojourned in the land of promise as a foreign country, dwelling in tents with Isaac and Jacob, the heirs with him of the promise. In that way he had taught Jacob how to live; he had, by his good example, preserved Jacob from building a house; he had shown him what it was to be here a pilgrim and a stranger, though heir of the promises. So we read of Jacob, that he was a plain man dwelling in tents; that is the key to all that is developed later in the history of Jacob. He profited by the example of his grandfather. The thought of a model is seen in our day in Timothy, who was exhorted by Paul to be a model of the believers in word, in conduct, in love, in faith, in purity. All believers are the descendants of Abraham, for he is the father of the believing ones, so Timothy is exhorted to be a model for believers in the same way that Abraham was. Personally, one has not had much opportunity of living in contact with those who have opened up the truth to us, but one can see the very great advantage, especially for the young, of having those one can follow, of having a model, and of profiting by the model. Abraham was the father of all believers; he is our father in that sense, and he has shown us the way to live.
Well, Jacob profited by the example set before him by his parents; his roots are rightly set, and thus there is bound to be development in the right direction. I have often thought of the saints at Philippi, and they remind one of a tree planted by rivers of water, they brought forth their fruit in its season. The first movement of Paul there was to go outside the gate, that is a significant action to begin with; he goes alongside the river to a place where prayer was wont to be made. That is where the roots were set which ultimately grew into a tree. What they were at the beginning they continued to be. So Jacob
{55}
began in tents, a plain man, content to be that. A man with none of the attractiveness of the world about him; be considered not for that. He said, as it were; Abraham lived in tents, and I am going to live in tents. Abraham sojourned in the land as a pilgrim and a stranger, dwelling in tents with Isaac and Jacob, the heirs with him of the promises. Jacob began there. I am speaking of what is very elementary, but I feel it to be essential in this day. See to it, young brother, though we all need it, that you are living in a tent, that you are profiting by the example God has set before you in your elders. Consider those that have taught you the word of God, those who have gone before.
Well, the tent and the house of God go together; if you are faithful in the one you will be faithful in the other. We read of Moses that he was faithful in all God's house. That does not necessarily mean a fixed abode; it is used in reference to what was moved from point to point in the wilderness. Moses was like a nursing father in the wilderness; he was not like Paul, perhaps, for he did not beget sons like Timothy, but he was faithful in all God's house, and that is a wide conception, but in every department of the administration of that house Moses was faithful. But it was not a fixed abode, it was a tent. And we, today, are living in a tent period; there is no fixed structure, but nevertheless the house of God is here. That which the wilderness saw in the way of testimony was a very plain structure, composed of byssus, acacia wood, skins of rams, skins of badgers, and so forth; it was a plain structure, just as Jacob was a plain man; the two were in keeping. Of course, on the other hand, every man that has the Spirit is stately; he is like a cedar tree to faith, but the more he is like a cedar tree to faith, the more he is like the hyssop to men; the day of the cedar wood is coming. There was a day when Solomon reared up a fixed
{56}
abode for God, he lined it with cedar wood and covered it with gold; it shone in all the dignity and glory and beauty of the Spirit, but at present we should be content with our plainness, as Jacob was. We all know the history. Jacob fled from Esau, his brother, and in @Genesis 28 we get the introduction of the house of God. It is the plain man who gets the blessing, not the man of the field; the plain man secures it and he goes forth an exile from the land of promise. We find him on his way to Padan-aram, and there he sojourned for twenty years.
I want to show how we arrive at right behaviour in the house, how Jacob was led on to that. In @Genesis 28 he lay down on the ground with a stone for his pillow, and he dreamed that he saw heaven opened. That plain man, a lonely fugitive, fleeing from the heart of a murderer, but the light of God was in his heart, the blessing of God rested upon him, and what could he need more? Heaven was occupied with him, and what are the dignities of earth compared with the dignities of heaven? The angels of God were ascending and descending upon him. What a moment that was in the history of Jacob! God Himself expressing His interest in him. Jacob awakes and he says, "This is none other but the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven". He arrives at a just conclusion, for *God* was there, heaven was brought near to him. But he says, "How dreadful is this place!" (chapter 28:17). He knew nothing of right behaviour in the house then, he was wholly untaught as to behaviour, and sentiments, and language suited to that place, and he breaks out, "How dreadful is this place!" That may not be our case, beloved brethren, but, on the other hand, do we not often appear in the house of God in clothes which are too big for us, clothes which are far too great for us. I am not complaining, beloved brethren, but God is looking for right behaviour in His house. Do not let us borrow
{57}
clothing for that place, let it be our own clothing. The clothes Samuel wore in the house of God were made for him by his mother every year; they were suited clothes, made to fit him each fresh year. You know what I mean, do not let us borrow other people's language, let us approach with our own language.
Well, Jacob called it a dreadful place, but one thing he does in keeping with his intelligence is, that, he rises early in the morning, and rears up the stone on which he had slept and pours oil upon it. In chapter 35 he pours wine on first and then the oil, but here he simply pours oil. He avowed in that act that at the moment he was not pleasurable to God. How sad a confession that is, beloved brethren. To have the Spirit and yet to have to avow that one is not pleasurable to God. Let us pour the drink offering first; that is for the pleasure of God. You will remember when David longed for the water of the well of Bethlehem, how the mighty men procured it for him at the cost of their lives, but he would not drink it, he poured it out to God as a drink offering.
Now just think for a moment of a young man setting out to get a place for himself in the world; is he considering for God in that? Is he desiring to be for the pleasure of God? May be he has the Spirit, and sufficient intelligence to know it, but he is not pleasurable to God in that which he is doing. Jacob says, There is the pillar, and there is the anointing, and if God will take care of me and prosper me, then this shall be His house, and I will give Him a tenth of all that He gives me. I do not enlarge upon that. It is a good thing to make resolutions. I believe in making resolutions, because if you are conscientious you will be brought back to your resolution; God will bring you back to it.
So Jacob makes this resolution and then he went off to the land of Padan, and there he remained for
{58}
twenty years. But in the end, after many exercises, he returns, and then we read the Lord met him. He is on the way to his father, but he has to go to the house of God, and God meets with him. He wrestles all night to the breaking of the day. I touch on this for one reason; he asks the Lord for His name. It was a right desire on the part of Jacob, for if you have it in your heart to worship God, you must have a name by which to address Him. It is not a question of what others might say, but it is a question of the measure of light that has come into your own soul. So God says to Jacob, Why do you ask after My name? I have given you a name; you shall be Israel, a prince, for you have power with God and have prevailed.
One loves to hear people pray; our prayers disclose just where we are; that is, if we pray in our own language. To pray intelligently we must know what we are with God; we must know our power with God. God takes account of all the wrestlings of heart that go on within, however unintelligent they may be. We do not know what we should ask for as we ought, but *God* knows. He searches the heart, and He says, 'You have prevailed; you shall be Israel'. The power we have with God is exactly the power we have with men. We see that in Jacob's journey up to Bethel; the terror of God falls on all the cities round about, and he arrives at Bethel. It was a moment of great activity with Jacob; God had said to him, "Arise, go up to Bethel". A man is never so interesting as when he is exercised as to the house of God. Jacob was exercised.
With us no doubt the ministry of the Spirit is always to encourage us to go up to Bethel; we all need the exhortation, the old as well as the young. God says to us, "Go up to Bethel, and dwell there". We should take an example from those who have gone before. It is a time for models, a time for
{59}
examples; the word has come; Let us go up to Bethel. Beloved brethren, the exercise of the moment is not as to our path here, but as to our going up to the house of God. Let us go up to the house today. That is what Jacob said to his household, and he hid the idols away under an oak, and they started forth, and the terror upon the cities kept the inhabitants from pursuing after them. Our exercise today should be as to the house of God. God will never allow an evil to come to us, but what He comes with it, beloved brethren. He will cause His terror to be on our enemies. The house of God is the point today, and what goes with that is, dwelling in a tent. Now see how the sense of protection enters into the heart. Jacob says, "let us arise, and go up to Bethel". He is not afraid of the cities round about, though they had righteous cause for their anger, as Jacob recognised in chapter 34:30. It is an indication to us that as we take care of the house of God, all our enemies will be terrified. God will take care of His house and of every one in it.
Now, getting into the house, we have the opening up of the name of the Lord to Jacob. It is as if God said, I have a name which belongs to this place. I could not tell it to you before, for it belongs to this place. "I am God Almighty" (@Genesis 35:11). It is as if He said, I *have* a name, and I can tell you of it now, for it belongs to this place. If it meant so much to Jacob to have the name of the Almighty God revealed to him, how much more, beloved, have we today. We have had the name of the Father revealed to us; Christ has declared to us the Father's name. His first service, as heard from the horns of the unicorns, was to declare the Father's name. He said, "I will declare thy name unto my brethren". He would have us to know by what name to address Him. He comes to His brethren, and instructs them, so that all the members, all those of the company,
{60}
should know how to address the Father. We have been given the "Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father"; that is the beginning of the house language; we cry "Abba", by the Spirit of adoption. I daresay you have noticed that it is the Spirit Himself who cries in Galatians. That has reference to the state of the Galatians, I should suppose, but in @Romans 8 we are given the Spirit of adoption whereby *we* cry, "Abba, Father". But with Jacob it does not go as far; he learns Him as God Almighty, not yet as Father.
Then a further thought in chapter 35:14 is, that Jacob sets up a pillar in the place where God talked with him; it was the place of divine communications, and there he sets up the pillar; he stands by it there; he will hold the ground there. The pillar stands upright, and you take your stand by the communications of God to your soul; you support the light of God just there. I am a great believer in local responsibility, and I would say, If the light of God comes to you in your locality, stand by it; take your stand there; support it. It was in the place where God talked to him that Jacob set up his pillar. One has to stand upright and support the light that has come to you, publicly in your life, and words and ways. The drink offering is the man's appreciation of the communications made to him. He treasures them in his heart; he values them. He is like those the Lord spoke of in the gospels who hear the word and do it; there is a testimony to how we value the communications granted to us. That is the meaning of the drink offering. The assembly is spoken of as the "pillar and base of the truth"; it is something by which you take your stand. You stand up in the power of the Spirit where the light of God has come to you, and you seek to support the testimony; and as you do that you have the sense that God can look on you with pleasure; you pour
{61}
out your drink offering. There can be no greater joy and blessedness than to know that you are pleasurable to God. Then Jacob pours the oil on that. Jesus Himself was anointed, when He came up out of the waters of Jordan; as He prayed the Holy Spirit of God descended upon Him and abode there. He knew the Father's will; He was in the secret of it, but He was praying that it might become effective; that is the Man that is anointed, beloved.
Well, Jacob had come back to the house of God. He stood up in his place there, and the pleasure of God was in him, and he is anointed; dignity according to God is put upon him for witness. Now the more Jacob proceeds on his path the more honest he becomes, the more he admits his failures; he does not hide them or deny them. Though he blessed Pharaoh in all the dignity of his position as heir of God's blessing, yet he confessed that "few and evil have the days of the years of my life been". "Jacob said unto Pharaoh, The days of the years of my pilgrimage *are* an hundred and thirty years: few and evil have the days of the years of my life been, and have not attained unto the days of the years of the life of my fathers in the days of their pilgrimage". My pilgrimage; how one loves that thought; his life was a pilgrimage; he was passing on to the end of his course. He had to say that his years "have not attained unto the days of the years of the life of my father in the days of their pilgrimage", but for all that those few and evil days had been a pilgrimage. In @Hebrews 11 we learn that as *dying* he blessed both the sons of Joseph and worshipped; he did that when he died. It is not a question of dying with us, beloved brethren, but of living; we worship while we are living. "The living, the living, he shall praise thee" (@Isaiah 38:19). I need not remind you of that. The Spirit of life from God has come into our souls. What for? That our lips should praise Him; that our
{62}
hearts should worship Him. So the apostle says, "We are the circumcision, who worship by the Spirit of God".
Well, I took up the history of Jacob as representing spiritual education, and if God takes in hand to educate a man He never gives up till He has brought him to the point He had before Him; He brings him to *worship*. Jacob becomes a worshipper. I would say one word as to worship. The Father seeks worshippers, not just worship. You may say that is a distinction without a difference, but there is a great difference. God is seeking *persons*; He is seeking hearts, intelligences, worshippers. His house is to be filled with them. We might as well have a form of worship unless the thing is the result of His work in our souls. God *measures* the worshippers, do not let us forget that. And why does He measure them? Nothing is said as to the measure they attain; it does not say how far they reach, but simply that they are measured. It is the kind or character of the worship that God is occupied with. What God looks for is that the thing should be there in character. He never alters that, "they that worship him must worship him in spirit and in truth" (@John 4:24); it is that He looks for. So the language in His house in addressing God should be the language of our experience, it must be *in truth*. Do not let us use borrowed language, or we might as well go back to ceremonial religion, for both are ready made. But worship, to be acceptable to God, must be in spirit and in truth; that is not ready made, but is the result of the knowledge of the Father in the heart; it is the outgoings of one s experience of God from the heart.
I believe that you will agree with me, beloved brethren, that Jacob gives the outline of how one is to behave oneself in the house of God. He goes through certain experiences with God, and the result
{63}
is that he worshipped, leaning on his staff. That is, he began as a pilgrim and he finishes as one, and he worships God. God grant, beloved brethren, that we may be fitted more and more to be worshippers, that we may be before God according to the wonderful light in which He has been pleased to make Himself known to us. "Arise, shine; for *thy* light is come" (@Isaiah 60:1) is the word for us. It is for us to answer to it, that we may finish our course, as Jacob did, with worship.
{64}
LIFE POTENTIALLY AND LIFE AS ENJOYMENT
Redemption is that in which the soul apprehends Christ first, and the Lord is to have a place in our affections as Redeemer. But redemption is not all that is necessary; we require to live. The Lord is to be known to our souls as the Life-giver, which I think is the point of view in John's gospel. There is a state of impotency in man, there is no vitality, no energy there. Christ makes us to live so that we have power to walk and praise God. Man's state not only involves the need of redemption but the vital principle of life has to be introduced. This is needed not only because the sentence of death was upon man, but because of man's weakness; he is incapable of any movement toward God.
There are two thoughts in connection with life: first it is potential; secondly it is a sphere and order of things. The introduction of life by the life-giving Spirit is potential, and the vital principle is infused. Death is entire inability to answer to God. On the ground of redemption the Lord infuses life into His disciples. He says, "Receive ye Holy Spirit" (@John 20:22).
What each individual has to receive from Christ is the vital principle, not exactly the Holy Spirit as given to the assembly, but the Holy Spirit as given to the individual believer. When we say potentially, we speak of life as a matter of power. Life as a matter of enjoyment is a different thing; it is not a question of power only, but that you are at ease in the calm enjoyment of God's favour. But what precedes that is the getting of power. Apart from life in a potential sense, eternal life could not be touched by us. "The law of the Spirit of life" in @Romans 8 can be connected with it. The law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus sets free from the law of sin and death.
{65}
In @John 20 Christ had accomplished redemption and now He is free, and so He breathes into the disciples that which will pervade all in the future, the breath of life. @John 20 is pattern. The Lord is seen as the One who infuses life into the creation; what is to become universal takes place in that upper room. Thus life is introduced into the believer, a vital element or principle, but eternal life is that into which he may be said to be introduced. Eternal life is an order of blessing which depends on certain conditions, and these conditions are established in Christ as risen from the dead. But it is not only that Christ is risen, but by His quickening power He brings men into life here on earth, and puts them together so as to form a moral sphere where life for evermore is, so to say, commanded. According to @Matthew 25 the nations shall go into eternal life. That into which they go must be there before they can go into it. My understanding of the subject is that Israel as made to live according to @Ezekiel 37 will be the sphere of it. Eternal life now implies a sphere for us. If we could get a company of people, such as @Acts 2 presents, we should have the conditions in which eternal life, as it is to be known at the present time, is realised. The conditions are found amongst those who are made to live by the quickening power of Christ. Difficulties which exist are largely attributable to the fact that the conditions we have been speaking of are not manifest at the present time. My own exercise has been, not only that souls do not seem desirous of entering into eternal life, but that the conditions necessary to it are not apparent. If we were more acquainted with conditions which existed at the outset we should not have so much difficulty.
Eternal life is seen, as it will be, in @Psalm 133. First you must have brethren. These are brought into being by Christ; that is, He has breathed into them. The Spirit being here we may presume there
{66}
are those among us who live, there are brethren; if so, it should be a matter of profound exercise to each one as to whether we are dwelling together in unity. The conditions of life are found where such unity is. If you are part of that you do not miss the blessing yourself, but you help to form a sphere to bring blessing to others.
LIFE AND ETERNAL LIFE
Although "life" and "eternal life" are used interchangeably, especially by the apostle John, yet in Romans they present different ideas. Eternal life is an end in view, whereas life in chapter 8 is connected with the Spirit, "the Spirit is life", and so present. Life in this sense is *power*, it involves ability to be free from the flesh, so as to fulfil righteousness here.
There is also the *springing up into* everlasting life (@John 4). The latter is clearly objective and outside (above morally) the present conditions. I do not think it is right to connect eternal life with our present mortal condition, and therefore I regard it as wrong to place it in the wilderness. It is the life of God's purpose for man, and is necessarily the other side of death. The fact that it is said to consist in the knowledge of God and of Christ as the sent One only shows that the moral element is possessed by those who have it; that is, they *know* God as the supreme Object of veneration, and a Man tested in every way, and, in contrast to Adam, found to be infinitely obedient. All that entered into the cross was essential to this obedience being fully expressed; to apprehend rightly what *sent* involved we have to ponder Gethsemane and the cross. The light thus acquired has a great effect upon us, both as regards God and Christ, and negatively as regards the world, so that clearly eternal life belongs to another order of things; as it is said, "in the coming age life eternal" (@Mark 10:30).
{67}
THE FOUR POINTS OF THE COMPASS
@Job 37:9,17,22
I wish to connect what I have to say with the four points of the compass, and, in referring to them, not to occupy you with what is physical but with what is spiritual. There is such a thing as spiritual geography; indeed, it is said as to God that "the invisible things of him from the creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made" (@Romans 1:20). He made everything on His own account, having in view a race of creatures who should not only be physical but spiritual.
The physical part of our being is said to have been made by God out of dust or clay (very humiliating!), but the spiritual part of our being came from God. God breathed into Adam's nostrils the breath of life, and man became a living soul. We do not, therefore, receive our spiritual being from our parents, we receive it from God, as it is said, "Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was: and the spirit shall return unto God who gave it" (@Ecclesiastes 12:7). That does not simply refer to what Adam received personally, but to what each one of us has received. We receive our spirits from God, and thus we are in direct relation with God and in direct responsibility to God. Let us not forget this. When dissolution happens, the spirit returns to God who gave it. It is that part of us in which we have direct responsibility to God, and God claims the spirit. Where we are to be, as identified with our spirits, is determined in the time of responsibility, which is the present time. In that light I refer to what is material -- the north, south, east, and west -- in the hope of our apprehending the invisible things God would disclose. These being there, they have their own voice as the other things have that are made; they have a spiritual significance.
{68}
Those of us who have believed the gospel and received the Holy Spirit from God, and thus are in the house of God, have an outlook towards the east, which means that our hearts are always *full of hope*. How is it with your heart? Paul preached that those who believed might abound in hope by the power of the Holy Spirit (@Romans 15:13). How much hope is in your heart? If you look at the world as it is -- suppose you are a politician -- what is your hope as to the future of this world? What is to be the outcome of the wisdom of the governors and legislators of this world? It is a western outlook, that is, the sun is going down on all that system of things for ever. Whatever it is you are associated with, your hopes and aspirations, all have an outlook westward, and there is only "the blackness of darkness for ever" there (@Jude 13). I am not here to decry politics, but for the deliverance of souls from all that keeps them away from God and from Christ. It is said of those that are lost: "In whom the god of this world hath *blinded* the minds of them which believe not" (@2 Corinthians 4:3,4). If your hopes are built up in connection with this world, its ultimate end is "the blackness of darkness for ever". The politicians of this world are at their wits¬ end. Some of the leading ones admit that civilisation was well nigh destroyed through the Great War. What shall it be the next time? What will happen to this world if another such war occur? Let no one be deceived; it is a dark outlook, so to speak, a western outlook. That point of the compass refers to disappointed, unrealised, unsatisfied hopes!
The believer in Christ has light in his soul. His outlook is in another direction. He knows Jesus, who lives by the power of God in heaven as having accomplished redemption. The believer knows that just as the sun rises, so will Jesus arise as the Sun of righteousness with healing in His wings (@Malachi 4:2). In other words, we believers have something in our
{69}
souls. We have the light of the glad tidings which have been declared by the Holy Spirit sent down from heaven, and we have believed them. That is the one great thing -- to believe; to repent, and believe the gospel (@Mark 1:15). "If thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shalt believe in thine heart that God hath raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved" (@Romans 10:9). The Holy Spirit has come down from heaven to proclaim it. It is presented on the principle of faith to faith. Have you, dear hearers, believed the gospel? I press it home. If you have, a bright or eastern outlook is yours, you have a hope that "maketh not ashamed", for the love of God is shed abroad in your heart by the Holy Spirit (@Romans 5:5).
I want particularly to speak about the north and the south. The east and west refer to the future as the north and south refer to the present time. The east points to the coming of the Lord Jesus. Every time I see the sun rising I am reminded that Jesus is coming. The sun setting is the dissipation of all earthly hopes. It indicates darkness, which for the unbeliever or Christ-rejecter is the gloom of darkness for eternity. But there is the north, and also the south. These God made for Himself, and Elihu, in speaking to Job says, cold cometh out of the north. We all know it well; we know what the north means. God made it as a sign that judgment awaited guilt. Jeremiah in his day, as he began to serve, sees a vision, a seething pot, "and the face thereof is toward the north". God's explanation is, "Out of the north an evil shall break forth" (@Jeremiah 1:13,14).
But Elihu says again, "Fair weather", or as it correctly reads, "Gold cometh out of the north". That is why I say the north refers to the present time, as the south does, for if gold comes
{70}
out of the north it is because Jesus has borne the judgment of God. Jesus has faced the bitter cold winds of God's judgment, so that gold, or righteousness, is there for us. In order that we might be covered with divine righteousness -- the righteousness of God -- Jesus faced all that the north signifies. Think of Him in that hour! He says, "Abba, Father, all things are possible unto thee; take away this cup from me: nevertheless not what I will, but what thou wilt" (@Mark 14:36). We think lightly of sin, but Jesus did not think lightly of it. As He took the cup of judgment from God, He knew what was in it. He knew men had sinned from Adam onward; *all* had sinned. Does any one think otherwise? Let God be true and every man a liar. Admit the truth in God, the lie in yourself. If any think otherwise than that all have sinned, they think a lie.
"All have sinned"; you, dear hearer, have sinned. As the light of God comes into your soul, you say, I have sinned; "O God, have compassion on *me, the* sinner" (@Luke 18:13). There is no hope for any one unless he *repent*. God has opened a door of repentance for you: God "now commandeth *all men everywhere to repent*" (@Acts 17:30). We should face these things. As the light of God enters a man's soul, he acknowledges his guilt: "Against thee, thee only, have I sinned" (@Psalm 51:4). "All have sinned, and come short of the glory of God" (@Romans 3:23). When Jesus took that cup from the Father's hand, He knew what was in it -- the judgment of God against sin. Jesus bore that. Becoming Man He took upon Him all that lay upon man and glorified God in respect of it in His death.
This applies to the Chinese and to the negroes as it does to us in the west, for the simple reason that we are all *men*. As Man, Jesus stands in relation to all men; He is the one Mediator between God and
{71}
men, who "gave himself a ransom for all" (@1 Timothy 2:6). Luke gives us His genealogy back to Adam. As in death He was on our side to take up the liabilities which lay on man. The judgment of God on us was in the cup, and He drank it. Is that light to your soul? It is to mine, thank God. Jesus has suffered in my stead; I shall never come into judgment. Gold comes out of the north. The Authorised Version reads "fair weather". It is fair weather surely. What could be fairer than the morning of the resurrection when Jesus rose from the dead -- not a cloud to be seen in the sky.
There is, however, more than fair weather; there is clothing for men, the righteousness of God, for gold comes out of the north, and that speaks of divine righteousness. When Eve sinned and Adam sinned, both were irretrievable, as left to themselves, but God clothed them with skins. His righteousness is now the clothing which fits every believer for the presence of God; it makes us "meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light" (@Colossians 1:12).
What do you, my hearer, know of the gold out of the north? What has come out for *you*? The gospel deals with individuals; it was never intended to civilise the nations, but to take a people out of them -- a people sanctified by the Holy Spirit; it contemplates that each one has to do with God separately. What has come out of death for me? The best robe. In the story of the prodigal son, which never grows old, the prodigal is clothed with the best robe that God has. That has come out of the death of Jesus. We are not told what creature was slain to provide skins for Adam and Eve, but we read that God clothed them. Now God brings the clothing for us out of the death of Jesus -- He who entered into the judgment that lay upon us and exhausted it. The fierce blasts of the north wind bring cold. When Jesus was
{72}
forsaken of God on the cross there was darkness over all the land from the sixth to the ninth hour. The bearing of that is present; it is for us; hence the gold.
The reference may be to the Aurora Borealis, the wonderful lights that shine in the north; but the great moral truth is that God was glorified in the death of Jesus. Out of that death has come the gold by which God covers us, "the righteousness which is of God by faith" (@Philippians 3:9). "Now the righteousness of God ... is manifested ... unto all and upon all them that believe" (@Romans 3:21,22). Many here tonight have it on. Would you like to be robed with God's righteousness? He will never quarrel with that robe; it will stand in His presence. We believers know what it is to be in the presence of God perfectly restful; we are there in the full value of the death of Christ. We are before God clothed in His own righteousness.
Some do not submit to the righteousness of God, but this is the height of folly, for without it we must be shut out from God for ever. The righteousness of God is manifested "unto all and upon all them that believe". It may be yours now on the principle of believing. It is not on the principle of works. *God* has undertaken to save man; it is His own work. "He sealeth up the hand of every man; that all men may know his work" -- that is, that He might have a free hand (@Job 37:7). He has undertaken this in the death of Jesus. He seals man's hand; the law effected that. The gospel announces the work of God in the resurrection of Christ and the gift of the Holy Spirit. It is all the work of God. The benefits of the work of God are presented in the gospel. Every man is to see to it.
The south is just a continuation of what I have been saying. From the standpoint of Scripture writers the sun as it shone in the heavens was always
{73}
in the south. It speaks of the attitude of God towards man; we are in a south aspect. The place Christ occupies in heaven now indicates God's favour to man. He is on the Father's throne, It is a favourable aspect, and so grace reigns through righteousness unto eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.
The present is a moment of wonderful favour for all -- the Chinaman, the European, and the African. It is, as it were, the same sun in the heavens that shines for all. "For there is one God, and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus" (@1 Timothy 2:5). God is looking towards you in mercy to fill your heart with hope by the Holy Spirit as you believe. This blessed Sun remains in heaven and shines on all at the present time. The south is the present aspect. Elihu says to Job, "Dost thou know ... how thy garments are warm, when he quieteth the earth by the south wind?" (verses 16,17). Many have felt this warmth even before they were converted; I certainly did. I found the world bitterly cold and indifferent, but among the people of God there were those interested and sympathetic who cared for my soul. It is an external heat at the beginning. Your garments get warm when He quietens the earth by the south wind, but when you receive Christ the warmth enters your heart; the love of God is shed abroad in your heart by the Holy Spirit, who is given to you.
God is holding and restraining things in this world; it is the time of the south wind. If the north wind comes to believers, it is in discipline. It comes in love. The death of Jesus has changed the north wind for us. All discipline is in love. We are not afraid of the north wind, but God has quietened the earth by a south wind. It may be your garments are getting warm today. The favour of God is brought
{74}
to you now; He would save you now. Embrace the opportunity, beloved friends. You will get cold again if you go out without Christ. Now is the time to decide for Christ, while the atmosphere is warm, while the Holy Spirit is striving with you and the people of God are round about you -- all earnestly desiring your salvation. Many have ignored the word, and gone out into the cold, and never come back! "Behold, now is the accepted time; behold, now is the day of salvation" (@2 Corinthians 6:2).
{75}
Pages 75 - 152 -- "Notes of Conference in Bristol", November, 1915 (Volume 31).
READING (1)
@Philippians 1
J.T. It is in mind to see the mutuality that existed at the beginning between the ministers and the saints to whom they ministered. The apostle, as you will observe, omits to introduce himself as an apostle here. Where it is a matter of doctrine or order his authority was necessary, as in most of the epistles, but he omits it here. It is simply a bondman, "bondmen of Jesus Christ", and the epistle is based rather on what he was morally than what he was officially. In that way there is, I think, a suggestion as to how things are maintained amongst the saints. What is moral in the minister is emphasised so that he becomes a model to the saints.
F.H.B. He is seen more as a living exponent of the truth rather than as a teacher. It is very useful in that way to see that God has given us a man in whom the truth is exemplified.
W.H.B. Is that why he takes up Timothy as a man like-minded?
J.T. Yes, he was a son; a son just like his father. It is remarkable how the truth took form in family relations; we are the household of God. In relation to that Philippians suggests affections, in connection with which the word of God has free course, as having their beginning in a remarkable way in connection with the households of the saints.
W.J. You refer to the Acts?
J.T. Yes, @Acts 16. The chapter begins with hereditary faith. Timothy is there as replacing Barnabas. He alludes to the beginning here, what they were from the first day until now. The testimony opened at Philippi in that way. The chapter
{76}
begins with Timothy, who became Paul's son, and then we find him in the houses of the saints there. I think it will be found, the more we look into Scripture, that the testimony has run in connection with affections in that way. You will find it in Mark, which is closely allied to this letter because it is a question of the glad tidings; the Lord is seen in houses there more than anywhere else. I thought we might be helped to see, that if the young are to be led on it is to be in the way of example.
W.J. He was always glad to drop the apostleship, and to speak of himself as a Christian, what is proper to us all.
J.T. I think that in this epistle, as well as in Thessalonians and Philemon, the apostle is seen according to what he was morally. He drops the apostleship in this epistle. There can be no doubt that the ministers can be a greater help in that way by example.
F.H.B. He could speak of the things which they had *seen in him*, not only what they had heard.
J.T. There are many walking, he says in chapter 3:18, who are enemies of the cross. The difficulty with the young is, that they see men as trees walking; they are unable to distinguish. But they were to remember his walk; to have him as a model.
E.R. To fix their eyes on him.
W.J. If we look back we can remember that we have been more helped by what we have seen in some of our elder brethren even than by what they have said.
F.H.B. And is it not that which has given weight to what they have said?
J.T. It is not only by his word, but you get the idea from his manner of life. Abraham is commended because he would command his household and children after him. The Spirit's comment is that he dwelt with Isaac and Jacob in tents; in that way
{77}
they would get the idea of a heavenly man. Abraham is the father of the faithful; a father has in view what is to follow. Therefore he took care with regard to Isaac and Jacob where they lived. And Joseph was the fourth generation of the spiritual family. I think the preacher has in view what remains. He considers what is to follow; and if things are to be maintained, we must see to it that we set a right thought and example before the young.
W.H.B. Is that what the apostle means here by fruit, that he stayed behind in order that there might be fruit in them?
J.T. I have no doubt that there would be a continuance of that which was seen in him, but I only said that to make clear what I had in mind in suggesting the epistle.
T.H.R. I think it is a great thing to see in this epistle that the apostle's public service was over, and that he was not preaching the gospel, but he was standing for it. He was set for the defence of, to answer for, the gospel; and Satan got no advantage over him. His head is covered in the day of battle. Suppose he had got irritated by the circumstances he was in, Satan would have got an advantage; instead of that Christ came out, and Satan was entirely defeated.
H.D'A.C. It does not matter where the witness to Christ may be, his testimony is bound to have an effect on all around, as in the case of Paul in prison.
T.H.R. And Christ was greater than Satan. Satan would have liked to get an advantage, but everything turned out to salvation. Christ was covering Paul's head in his conflict with Satan: Satan was defeated. "According to my earnest expectation and hope, that ... Christ shall be magnified in my body whether by life or by death".
E.J.McB. Is not that rather the idea in the
{78}
epistle that when a person gets beyond active service, the light that has been there all the time is shown in living testimony?
T.H.R. Yes, apparently Satan had secured an advantage in shutting him up in prison, but all the way through we see that Paul is the conqueror; and I think that in this chapter Christ is more mentioned than in any of his other epistles.
J.T. Things had had a good start; the gospel was not only a benefit to the Philippians, they laid hold of the thing, and were sympathetic with it. Paul was simply a bondman of Jesus Christ with others; and it is very touching that he addresses along with the saints, the overseers and ministers; account is taken of all that the Lord had given; there is mutuality.
T.H.R. There were people who preached Christ of contention; but "*Christ* was preached", in that he rejoiced. It is a man who is superior in every difficulty; Satan gets no advantage over the gospel of Christ which Paul stood for.
J.T. It would be helpful for us to see the perfection of sympathy in which the word goes forth; the gospel flourishes in connection with sympathy. It is not only dependent on the preaching, but on the sympathy of the saints.
T.H.R. I think it is beautiful, the Philippians had sent him a little money, and he says, "ye all are partakers of my grace".
J.T. He speaks of their fellowship with the gospel. It is remarkable that though he speaks of their having him in their hearts it is a question of the glad tidings. In Mark it is the beginning of the glad tidings of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, as though the Spirit would emphasise the importance of the glad tidings. Paul would pass away, but the gospel would remain. They had had fellowship with the gospel from the first day, and that remains.
{79}
J.S.G. Do you read the epistle in two lights? In this way that if you think of the Philippians you think of what is collective; but if you think of the bondmen you think of what was presented in Paul and others; and Paul is counting on the Lord that what was true in him should be formed in the Philippians.
J.T. He looked for them to work out their own salvation. The gospel remains, and the saints remain. The great thing to see is that there is a model.
J.S.G. He is a model in every chapter.
T.H.R. And I think you get those who do answer to it. The Philippians were answering to it in sending the money, and then of Timothy he says, "I have no man likeminded". Then with Epaphroditus, there is the total absence of self; he would not have the Philippians troubled about him.
J.T. They were in sympathy with the glad tidings in consequence of its having taken root in their hearts. One would desire that the saints should see that the glad tidings remain here, and consequently inquire as to how it is to be supported. A Philippian Christian would be greatly pleased with Mark's account of the glad tidings, because it is the beginning of the glad tidings.
W.J. I think there is a very striking link between Mark's gospel and this epistle. In the third chapter we get the blind man seeing all things clearly. The line Mark takes goes with this epistle; you see the blind man of chapter 8 in the third of Philippians.
E.J.McB. Would you expect to find the remarkable features that were there at the beginning?
J.T. The Philippians had come to the end of @Mark 8. The man is led outside the town if his eyes are to be opened. Young people have to be led outside the town. Then the Lord touches him with both His hands, and spits on his eyes, but the young
{80}
man does not see clearly; then the Lord put His hands on his eyes again and made him look up, and he saw everything clearly. After that the Lord says, "Whom do men say that I am?" Peter says, "the Christ"! In this epistle Christ is everything.
W.J. Does not that mark the gospel? There is one blind man peculiar to Mark, and another to John.
J.T. In John it is that the works of God may be manifested.
W.J. The thought of sympathy comes out very strongly in Mark's gospel. His feelings are expressed there.
J.T. You find the Lord goes into a synagogue, and there is a man there with a demon. He casts out the demon, but there is no sympathy in the synagogue. But He goes into Peter's house, and Peter's wife's mother is sick; He heals her, and then immediately there is sympathy; she ministers unto them. Then when He returns to Capernaum He enters into the house, and the paralytic is let down through the roof before the Lord, showing that the house is completely won for Christ. Then in the second chapter you get another house, Levi's house, in which the area of sympathy is enlarged.
F.H.B. When He came to the ruler's daughter He cast out all who were not in sympathy.
S.H. Acts begins and ends with the house; and so in @Acts 16:15 Lydia said, "If ye have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my house and abide".
J.T. I have no doubt it was Lydia's house that put it into Paul's mind.
S.H. Both sympathy and the opposition come out in the chapter.
J.T. He said, I do not only want to have this man, I will have his house.
W.J. And in Philippians that had been maintained.
{81}
J.T. Yes, that is the point, what marked them at the beginning continued there.
S.H. I suppose your thought is that the house is the circle where it is nourished and goes forth.
J.T. It leads up to the house of God.
S.H. There is a difference between the house and the household, though the latter is often spoken of as the house.
J.T. You can control your house, "As for me and my house", (@Joshua 24:15) so that to that extent you are sympathetic with the gospel, but then it leads into the house of God. If a child grows up under the influence of the parents, that is divine authority; well, that eventually leads into the house of God. Hannah is a figure; if a child is begotten for the Lord, you bring it into the house. The influence of a parent over a child is to prepare for the house of God. If Lydia had children, how they would be prepared for the idea of the testimony.
W.J. And this epistle is written that they might be maintained and developed. There was a dead fly that would spoil it (chapter 4:2).
A.S.L. You just made a remark, Mr. H., as to the difference between the house and the household.
S.H. A house is where a man lives; the household is those who are in it. Acts begins and ends with the house; Paul preached the kingdom of God in his own hired house; he disappears in his house.
E.B. Would you say that is how the gospel goes on now?
S.H. That is how it ought to get its support.
J.T. You sometimes get one within the other, "the assembly which is in thine house".
Rem. In our houses we express what we are.
S.H. Here in this epistle Christ comes out in all His excellency.
J.T. The altar you rear up in your house is an indication of what you have in your heart; that
{82}
is the measure of your surrender, you give up your natural rights, you cannot maintain them. In the house in @Mark 2 they did not protest, it was quite clear that the Lord was the Master of that house.
S.H. It comes out also in @Matthew 9, they took possession of the house without invitation; they knew it was a sphere of blessing, and they all came.
J.T. If one is right with the Lord in one's house, one's influence increases. In Gideon's case he reared up an altar for himself; then he had to throw down the altar of Baal in his father's house his influence increased.
F.H.B. The effect of the gospel is to come out first in ourselves, and then in our own house.
J.T. So that one's altar becomes one's tell-tale.
Ques. What do you mean by the altar?
J.T. It is a question of surrender and sacrifice. You are marked by readiness to suffer, not by ease and comfort.
S.H. At the beginning of the third chapter you worship by the Spirit of God.
J.T. The thought of Christ is prominent throughout. The young woman in @Acts 16 announced that these were the servants of the Most High God, but that was not true, they were the servants of Christ.
J.S.G. Will not the development of all you have been speaking of be seen when the day of Christ will be brought in?
J.T. They were not the servants of the Most High God but the bondmen of Jesus Christ, and that involves suffering.
J.S.G. And is it not a fact that suffering brings us into sympathy one with another?
J.T. Well, it has a binding influence. The Lord called attention to the saints as sufferers, "Why persecutest thou me?" (@Acts 9:4). It seems to be a central
{83}
thought of their position, they are always in suffering, they are always in reproach. It is in one's house that one must have an altar; both Lydia and the jailer exemplified it.
H.D'A.C. I suppose that is why the Lamb is so very prominent in the millennium; all that have suffered will have a very great place there.
J.T. The Lamb's wife; she is qualified through suffering.
G.W.W. Is it not in this that the privilege of the present moment lies?
J.T. That is what it says here, "Unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake".
G.W.W. In that way the bride is made sympathetic for her association with the Lamb.
J.T. I think she is qualified. We have a peculiar line of suffering, and it begins with one's altar.
F.H.B. The gospel was the testimony of the Christ, and forms the saints according to Christ. Paul was formed by it.
G.W.W. I would like to hear a little more as to your thought of the altar in connection with your house.
J.T. In Genesis you have no special instructions for the altar; but it is a book that presents to us altar builders, and I gather from that, that they were left to act according to the light they had in their souls, so that each altar indicated the measure of the light of its builder. Now, when you come to God's house, He is very careful as to the dimensions of the altar. You are the ruler of your house, so it is left to you to build your altar, and the saints find out where you are thereby. One is disclosed publicly through one's altar; it is a question of what you are prepared to give up. It is in your house that whatever may have come upon you through nature is sure to show itself. Now the question is whether you are
{84}
going to value these things or Christ; whether you value any nobility that comes to you through nature more than that which comes to you through Christ. Then you throw down the altar to Baal and think of Christ. "If ye have judged me to be faithful to the Lord" (@Acts 16:15); she did not think for a moment that she was patronising Paul by inviting him to her house; but it was he that was patronising her. You must have your altar at the door if you want the servants of the Lord to come into your house.
One of the most baneful things that has marked Christians has been the recognition of what is according to nature. I have noticed it in regard of Job; in the first chapter you have Job's family, the number of them, and how Job regarded them; but they were feasting in their elder brother's house; that tells the tale; things were on the basis of nature. Alongside of that you have the spiritual family. What were they doing? They all came to present themselves before God; that is, God is in the hearts of the spiritual family. Well, Job's family were feasting in the elder brother's house, and the wind smites the four corners of it: there is an end of all that. Mind, Job was not feasting. Now, in the end of the book you get the spiritual family, the same number of sons and daughters, but not a word about the elder brother. Job gives the daughters an inheritance "among their brethren". The spiritual recognises the saints as brethren; there is no one pre-eminent except the Lord. That is what the Lord would bring us to, the recognition of spiritual principles, not natural ones, and if not, there is no room for the testimony; you may support it, but your house does not.
T.H.R. I think another thing that one wants to bear in mind is, that we ought to know God's altar, and the pattern and meaning of it, then our altar will be all right.
{85}
J.T. Quite; but there it is in Genesis, the altars are left to the builders.
G.W.W. So that as one's appreciation of the testimony of the Christ was raised, the character of one's altar would change.
J.T. In the first chapter we see how things began at Philippi; sympathy began in their houses.
W.J. The first chapter is a kind of index.
G.W.W. A man regulates things in his household in connection with the glad tidings.
J.T. So that a good Philippian Christian would admire the presentation of the gospel as it came out in Mark; he would say, I would like to have my house like that. With Luke, he presents the things the Lord did; but Mark emphasises how He did them. It is the "beginning of the glad tidings" (chapter 1:1) so that the course of the glad tidings is detailed. It is very striking how many times the Lord is found in houses.
Ques. Would Zacchaeus illustrate it, "To-day I must abide at thy house" (@Luke 19:5)?
J.T. Quite; he received Him that day.
F.H.B. So the first effect is to put matters right in your own house.
J.T. Then he refers to the overseers and ministers; you cannot have overseers and ministers unless houses are in order.
D.L.H. Might it not be well to say something about the gospel itself?
T.H.R. I think the gospel is largely connected with the truth of the altar, but when you come to the third chapter you are set for heavenly places.
J.T. It seems as if the gospel is synonymous with the testimony. We have often said that in Mark we get the perfect Servant; but the point in Mark is to show how that Servant introduced the gospel and maintained it. In that way I understand that the gospel is equivalent to the testimony as we speak
{86}
of it. That is what is in the heart of God for recovery and the reinstatement of things according to His counsels the question of *how* comes in. There is a great deal going on in Christendom in the Lord's name; but Mark would help us to judge things, not so much what things are done, but *how* they are done. Wisdom is skilful. One may see the thing done and admire it, but a skilled workman admires the manner in which a thing is done, not only the spirit but the skill. A thing may be done in a right spirit but be clumsy. "He hath done all things well" (@Mark 7:37) is said of the Lord.
T.H.R. It never wanted a finishing touch.
J.T. What the Lord alludes to in Sardis is that things are not complete, nothing finished. So the great thing is the completion. There was nothing ever wanted to be touched up after Christ, it was done perfectly.
E.B. Do we not get the gospel presented here very much in view of Christ's day, not simply for present blessing?
J.T. I do not think one is formed by the gospel until one is anointed. The tabernacle was all anointed after the parts were put together. First you have the pattern, then the workmen, and each piece is made as if it were to be passed judgment upon; and Moses put every piece in its place, but they are not yet anointed. You may have many converts, and so on; but are they anointed? The last chapter of Exodus gives the anointing, and it is when anointed that the glory fills the scene. God is complacent with things anointed. It was all like Christ, because He was the pattern. Paul was very like Christ; he had not quite arrived at complete conformity, but that was what he was after. I believe that is the idea, that the gospel brings in what is suitable for the anointing.
{87}
G.W.W. You mean not simply what we may call soul salvation.
J.T. No, it is what a man is outwardly, he is marked by grace, he is dignified. Take the Lord Himself, "the Spirit of the Lord is upon me" (@Luke 4:18). They marvelled at the gracious words that proceeded out of His mouth.
Rem. Oil to make the face to shine.
J.T. That is the idea.
Ques. Does the thought come out in verse 20, "Christ magnified ... in my body"?
J.T. I think so, very aptly.
Ques. How do you mean coming out in the face?
J.T. As our brother remarks, oil makes the face to shine. The natural boldness of the man disappears. Look at Stephen, he was full of the Holy Spirit, and his face shone as the face of an angel; that is a suggestion of it, I think. But it is a very striking thing that in Christendom you get nothing completed; in fact, they do not pretend to complete their cathedrals even.
J.R.K. Is it not an interesting thing that in Mark *power* comes out, and that links with Romans, so that we can understand what He has purposed to do?
J.T. Peter, in referring to himself with the others as witnesses, says, "we have not followed cunningly devised fables, when we made known unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ" (@2 Peter 1:16). They were affected by it.
J.R.K. And in @Mark 9:1 there were some standing there who did not taste death until they had "seen the kingdom of God *come in power*". In @Luke 9:27 it is, "until they shall have seen the kingdom of God"; and in @Matthew 16:28, "the Son of man coming in his kingdom".
E.B. Does verse 6 give us responsibility towards one another?
{88}
F.H.B. I thought we have in that verse what was underlying all we have spoken of as the expression of Christ in Paul and the saints; that is the work of God in the saints.
J.T. And that it will be completed.
F.H.B. Until it comes out in perfection for display in the day of Jesus Christ.
W.J. I think his prayer is the key to all that he says, he first prays about it.
E.J.McB. The apostle had confidence that God would bring the work to completion.
J.T. I think that is very important; and he laboured to present every man perfect in Christ Jesus. Take a convert, it is not what he is now, but the possibilities that are in him. The preaching has in view what a man is going to be. The apostle laboured that every man should be presented perfect in Christ Jesus.
E.J.McB. What encourages me is that you get a man like Abraham, and he looked to see Christ's day; but the gospel brings in the possibility of that day.
J.T. He "rejoiced to see my day", the Lord said (@John 8:56). It is a Man; faith always looked for a man; not a babe but a man. Now he "rejoiced to see my day: and he saw it, and was glad". Now Paul is looking to bring everything up to that day.
G.W.W. Does it look on to the future?
J.T. The question is what you have in your mind; you want to have an ideal.
S.H. You must have nothing less than the mystery.
J.T. Quite, and you do not want anything to be short of that.
E.B. You were speaking of Abraham dwelling with Isaac and Jacob; the responsibility really goes right on.
E.J.McB. Almost his last act was a very touching
{89}
one; he sends all the others away, but he gives all that he has to Isaac.
J.T. I have no doubt he saw Christ's day when Isaac was weaned; he saw the idea; he had to come to it. It takes us a long while to come to it. He had said, "O that Ishmael might live before thee!" (@Genesis 17:18). But that man would not do. Abraham saw Christ's day, and was glad: that is the Spirit's beautiful comment.
P.R.M. He made a great feast.
D.L.H. And he received him from the dead.
J.T. You have the child, and the young man, and the married man in Isaac. The married man is the complete thought. A new institution is established, and Abraham can disappear in the light of that. The marriage of the woman is on the sixth day.
S.H. Do you not think that the apostle is speaking from the height of union? He has come from that side, and I suppose all is embodied when you see that the evangelist goes forward in the light of union if he is to be effective for God. So the wilderness is not taken up as passing through, but as coming back from over Jordan.
F.H.B. That agrees with what Mr. Darby used to say, that for us Numbers comes after Joshua.
S.H. We must have the light of the land to carry us through the wilderness. I suppose we get here the pathway of Joshua and Caleb.
J.T. Pretty much; they had been in the land, and it was ever in their hearts.
T.H.R. Not exactly the heavenly calling, but the heavenly position. Then I think it is a very wonderful moment in any Christian's soul when he realises that he belongs to heaven by the grace of God; and you will find a thousand things drop off the moment you realise that, through God's grace, you are a heavenly man.
W.J. What strikes me is that it is brought forward
{90}
in connection with the circumstances in which we are found; but it is far reaching, and would touch us in a thousand ways.
J.T. I think we are apt to magnify the difficulties of our position; they are not nearly so difficult as the early Christians had to encounter.
T.H.R. I think it is interesting to see in Mark that the walking on the water is presented in a different way; in Matthew, Peter walks on the water to go to Jesus; but in Mark, Christ is seen walking on the water, coming to them. It is a pattern to my mind of @John 14:18, "I will come to you". They learn Himself as One who is superior to everything.
J.T. Yes. They had come to Him flushed with victory, the demons were subject to them; but He did not make any comment on that, but He says, "Come ye yourselves apart ... and rest awhile" (@Mark 6:31) and He sends the crowd away, all to the end, that they may discover what resources they had found in Him.
E.A.P. And while the epistle looks on to the completion of the work in the day of Jesus Christ, he has a present evidence as a basis.
J.T. You mean "even as it is meet for me to think this of you all".
E.A.P. And then he greatly longed after them.
J.T. He had good grounds for believing that God would complete His work, they had continued so long in sympathy with the gospel.
E.A.P. I was thinking of the Lord Jesus as a pattern of all that: He had surrendered everything, He had laid all aside to bring us the glad tidings.
J.T. And then they had Paul in their hearts. It is a remarkable thing in @Mark 4:36, "they took him even as he was in the ship". It is a great test whether we are just content to have the Lord without any conditions.
{91}
T.H.R. It is a great thing in this epistle that Paul tells them what they *are*, not what they ought to be.
J.T. What we are by the work of God. Some are very pious, and say, I am nothing: that is not true. Paul says, "by the grace of God I am what I am", (@1 Corinthians 15:10).
T.H.R. It is a great point, What kind of a Man am I linked to? If it is a heavenly Man, then I must be a heavenly man also.
J.T. It is not only what God has done in Christ, but what He has done in us. God has begun in you, and He will complete it. "According to this time it shall be said of Jacob and of Israel, What hath God wrought!" (@Numbers 23:23).
T.H.R. And yet it was all wrought at the Red Sea.
F.H.B. That was more what He had wrought *for* them; but, according to Balaam's prophecy, the people are seen according to what God had wrought *in* them.
J.T. It speaks of what *God* wrought at the Red Sea, but what *you* did at the brooks of Arnon. "According to *this time* it shall be said, What hath God wrought!" He had wrought silently all the time of the wilderness, and ultimately they are made suitable for the land according to that work. I think it is most important here that what God has wrought in you He will complete.
W.H.B. You were saying, this work was not completed in Paul; at what point was it completed?
J.T. According to this epistle he does not say it is completed. I think we may infer from 2 Timothy that he had finished his course.
F.H.B. I think the work is not completed until the Lord comes and changes the body, and fashions it according to His body of glory.
W.H.B. I meant in regard to his soul's history.
T.H.R. I think a full-grown man is one who has Christ before him as his one object.
{92}
J.T. Paul was not yet perfected. All his desires and energies were after Christ, but he was not yet perfected.
S.H. What you have said about the Red Sea, and what they had done at the brooks of Arnon, ought to help us very practically: what have we done?
J.T. And there is another thing: I think it will be found that Mount Nebo and Mount Pisgah correspond. One looks towards the wilderness, and the other towards the land; so that you look and see what God has done in you, and thus you are suitable for the land. I am quite sure we shall never be heavenly without the work of God in us.
{93}
READING (2)
@Philippians 2
J.T. We did not get far into chapter 1, and I think on referring to it again, that in no section do we find the apostle so great an example as in the way he speaks of Christ.
J.S.G. What do you consider the great point of chapter 1?
J.T. I think what I mentioned, the great regard of the apostle for the Lord Jesus, and in that way I think he sets out the idea of an altar, the sufferings which accompanied his regard for Christ, and his superiority to the circumstances. The idea of the altar is, I think, that one suffers, one is not oppressed by the sufferings, but rather superior to them.
J.S.G. Do you think he is seeking to lead the saints on, so that the day of Christ might be morally present with them?
J.T. It would be morally present in that way where there is superiority to circumstances; therefore his desire is for the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ.
F.H.B. I suppose the superiority to circumstances is a mark of his being under the influence of Christ.
J.T. I think there is correspondence to where Christ was as typified in the altar; the death which He suffered, but in the sufferings He was superior. Often with us, we are inferior to the sufferings, the Lord Jesus was never that, whilst feeling the sufferings He was superior.
J.L. Does Paul's singing in the prison illustrate that?
J.T. I think that is a marked illustration. The epistle suggests to us what Paul saw at the beginning at Philippi, and, through grace, they had gone on in it.
{94}
F.H.B. So that there was great sympathy between the apostle and the saints at Philippi.
W.J. I have often thought that the jailer could say to his wife in regard to the apostle, 'He is the same man as when we first knew him'. He could say, "Rejoice in the Lord always" (@Philippians 4:4).
J.T. One of the features connected with his being taken up was that he was to be shown how much he was to suffer. What we have here answers to that, and shows how in suffering he was superior.
W.J. It is very comforting that the Lord is above our failures.
T.H.R. He takes it all from the hand of the Lord, and the Lord honours him by putting him in the same path in which He was Himself, and he got sufferings such as no other apostle had.
F.H.B. He speaks of himself here as being set for the defence of the gospel.
J.T. In spite of being ill-treated at Jerusalem he was still defending the gospel.
G.W.W. Is not the last verse of the chapter very interesting as showing that the apostle was in the same moral elevation that he had been in Philippi?
J.T. That is very good. If he had failed, he had never failed from want of love to Christ. In fact it was the spirit of Christ in a way that acted in him in his great regard for the Jews.
T.H.R. If I may add a word, it was all love for Christ which took him to Jerusalem. "I say the truth in Christ" (@Romans 9:1). It was not merely a national affection, but he spoke the truth in Christ.
J.T. His going to Jerusalem was really a witness to the Jews of the spirit of Christ in Paul. The Lord stood by him.
E.J.McB. I think anyone with intelligence would see that the Jews should be Christ's. He ought to have them. But the wonderful thing is that there
{95}
was something dearer to Christ than Israel, and Paul learnt that in a path of suffering.
J.T. John the baptist represents a true spirit he says, "he that standeth and heareth him", there was the true spirit of the friend of the Bridegroom, but he did not proceed to bring in the bride: the time for that had not arrived. He rejoices that he hears the Bridegroom's voice, and disappears at that juncture. So that the voice of Christ is heard, but not yet effective. Now Paul hears the voice of the Bridegroom at his conversion, a voice from heaven; it was the same voice that John heard but it was not the voice of the Bridegroom of the Jew. Paul should have held to the original, but the sufferings he endured at Jerusalem and all the way to Rome only brought out the sympathies of the Lord, and the Lord only became the more dear to his heart.
W.H.B. Is not that the way the Lord does endear Himself to the hearts of His people?
J.T. In the sufferings; quite so. The Lord sympathises with us, even in the results of our failure. I think it is especially helpful to see how it is possible for a man to be completely engaged with Christ, yet governed by intelligence, so that though wanting to be with Christ, yet electing to be here for the sake of the Philippians.
H.D'A.C. What he brought before them at Philippi was the Lord Jesus, it does not say the Lord Jesus Christ. Now, he has much to say as to Christ; there seems to be something much deeper, it is more the inner side of things, not the power of the Lord, but more what was set forth in Christ; love and all the grace that was expressed in Him, and which was to come out in the saints.
J.R.K. Would you say that he speaks here of love and suffering in order that he may impress those to whom he was writing with the same spirit?
{96}
J.T. He would bring himself forward as a model; there was the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ.
J.R.K. He speaks of them all as having been partakers in his grace, and yet he prays that they may abound in love and in full knowledge and all intelligence, and presents himself so that they may be led to the same level.
J.T. The spirit of Jesus Christ is not exactly the anointing; it is the spirit of the Man. You are affected more by the spirit of a man than by what he says. A man who is anointed is a man whose bearing in public is dignified; when you admire the spirit of a man you would like to live with that man. The thought corresponds to "the spirits of just men made perfect" (@Hebrews 12:23) to which we are come. We shall come out in the future as the Christ, "So also is the Christ" (@1 Corinthians 12:12), we shall come out dignified.
J.R.K. You referred to dignity, which, I suppose, is being superior to the suffering.
J.T. There is a dignity about the anointing. The anointing is for the face, it affects the countenance; but the spirit is that which you would like to be near, to live with.
J.R.K. Unless you are established with the Spirit inwardly your face will not shine; the face is an indication of what you are.
J.T. Yes, but they are two different ideas. *Nor what is next Thy heart can we forget*. (`160:8) We shall "live together with him" (@1 Thessalonians 5:10). That is, we all have that spirit, the spirit of Jesus Christ, but we come out in the dignity of the anointing.
Ques. How do you characterise that dignity?
J.T. I would not define it. One would be exercised that one might have it. There is a dignity which is of God. For instance the Lord said, I am altogether that which I said unto you; His manner was always superior. I think it comes out through the work of God in our souls in freedom from the
{97}
pettiness of the flesh. I think we ought to cultivate the spirit in which we can live together, the Spirit of Jesus Christ; it is a lovely spirit, it is the spirit which pervades the house. That was really the oil which anointed the tabernacle; it was the spirit of a suffering Christ; the myrrh and the different ingredients suggest that.
F.H.B. We can see how the spirit of Jesus Christ comes out in chapter 2.
J.T. He went down for the good of others.
F.H.B. A contrast to the spirit of the natural man.
J.T. It really corresponds to @John 13, we are to love one another as He loved us. @John 13 was to enable them to live together.
E.B. "The Lord Jesus Christ be with thy spirit" is the last word to Timothy (@2 Timothy 4:22).
J.T. I think the opening verses of chapter 2 are suggestive, "If there be therefore any consolation in Christ".
W.J. That gives you the consequence, there had been this seen in them.
F.H.B. He wanted to see it completed.
J.S.G. Do you think he has before him in chapter 2 the manifestation of unity?
J.T. It is not that you agree to differ. "Thinking one thing", that one thing is Christ. That is what should be uppermost in the minds of saints.
J.S.G. Do you not think it is very important to see a company manifesting unity, because of the one spirit marking them? In chapter 2 the word *mind* is very prominent, whereas in chapter 3 the word *knowledge* is prominent? I thought the manifestation of unity depended on our having the mind which was manifested in Christ Jesus, a mind which was manifested in a downward path.
T.H.R. You do not take a step by trying to follow Christ in your own strength, but you take it
{98}
with the mind of Christ in you. He said, "Lo, I come to do thy will" (@Hebrews 10:9); it was not merely that He obeyed, but His whole mind was in that obedience. Then we want that our minds should be entirely subject, so that the obedience that comes out in this chapter is not merely in that way compulsory with us, but the result of having the mind of Christ.
J.T. You would say, the descending mind.
F.H.B. There will be no practical unity unless there is that mind with us. Would you not think that to have that mind we must first of all come under the influence of the love of Christ?
J.S.G. I think that was the object of the first part of the chapter, to present the mind of the Man who took the downward path.
T.H.R. I do not think that anything touches the affections like the down-stooping of Christ; that touches us more than the thoughts of glory. If I look up into the glory, it is all very great and wonderful, but it does not touch my heart like the down-stooping of Christ. We shall go into heaven, having known Him in humiliation.
W.J. He wins our hearts in His humiliation, and satisfies them with His glory.
J.T. He becomes the bread. If you eat leavened bread you become inflated, but unleavened bread is to reduce the size; there is a reducing principle in unleavened bread. In @John 6 the bread of God comes down: it is that sort of bread. The old corn of the land does not reduce you; that builds you up for the land.
T.H.R. There is great attraction for the saint in the down-stooping of Jesus, we feel the depth of the love of Christ.
J.T. I believe the thought in the feast, as it is kept now, is that we may be kept small, it is the feast of unleavened bread. The best way to help a brother is to feed him with unleavened bread,
{99}
otherwise inflation takes place. The bread of God builds up the constitution here where inflation is all round us, it tends to humble; it is the humbled Man here, Christ coming down. The old corn of the land is Christ going up to where He was before; there you do not need to be reduced, you can grow there, and you do grow there.
W.J. You must know the humiliation side to reach the glory side; you cannot divorce them, can you?
J.T. Chapter 2 is *in principle* unleavened bread, it is descending love, it reduces; whereas chapter 3 is expanding.
T.H.R. We may get very correct views of glory, and unless you eat the unleavened bread you may get very inflated views of your position. The hymn says, "And spotless in that heavenly light, Of all thy sufferings talk" (`270:2).
J.T. But the *feast* of the passover is really to bring us down to our true level. The passover is on the fourteenth day, then the feast of unleavened bread lasted seven days. The passover, of course, is what Christ was as sacrificed for us, but our side is to supply the unleavened bread, and it is to be done every day. The passover is reduction; the feast of Pentecost is enlargement. The feast of Pentecost is not limited by time at all, it is an eternal thing.
T.H.R. It is only one day, but it does not cease.
J.T. In @Deuteronomy 16 it is not divided by time like the other feasts, it is an eternal idea. We have already come by the Spirit to what is eternal, it goes beyond the millennium. But *who* comes into that? The Lord says, it is difficult for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, but the camel has to go through, and the Lord says, "With God all things are possible" (@Matthew 19:26). But the apostle says, "Be ye also enlarged" (@2 Corinthians 6:13).
{100}
G.W.W. In that way we may say that the passover and the unleavened bread were in view of Pentecost.
J.T. They were absolutely essential. From the divine side there was no need for the feast of unleavened bread at all; it is necessary on account of what we are, on account of our size. It is really the overthrow of Og, which is one of the greatest achievements in the history of God's people; that is, it is the bringing down that big, inflated man, the only man the dimensions of whose bed are given. So there is to be reduction before we can go into Canaan.
H.D'A.C. It is remarkable that Paul speaks of the down-stooping of Christ as he does; he had never been with Christ in humiliation, and yet he tells us more about His coming down than any. He had so seen Him in glory that he can trace back from that glory His whole pathway here, right back to the spot from whence He came.
J.T. The light that a brother gives you indicates how far he has travelled. Paul had gone on, and his experience went further than any of the apostles.
H.D'A.C. But he gathered it all from Christ in glory.
G.W.W. So that there is a process which goes on in the soul of a believer which really puts you through the eye of the needle.
J.T. Everyone of us is large in his own account, and all that has to be reduced.
G.W.W. Mr. Raven used to say, there must come a collapse of the inflated man.
J.T. As Job said: the end of his experience was, "I know that thou canst do everything" (chapter 42:2). He knows how to reduce as well as to enlarge.
F.H.B. Nobody can do it but God; we cannot do it for ourselves, or for one another.
W.J. "Christ our passover ... sacrificed for us" (@1 Corinthians 5:7) is a most blessed appeal to the affections.
{101}
J.T. Yes, undergoing the fire. There is nothing legal about it.
H.D'A.C. It was not only Christ's mind, but the mind of the apostle, or he could not have told it to us.
J.T. That was what I meant: he had it, he had gone that way.
G.W.W. You have a connection in your mind between the unleavened bread, and @John 6 and this.
J.T. Yes, only in the sense of the going down; it affords in that way food to the soul, you cannot but delight in a food like this.
G.W.W. If there is a desire in the soul to reach the divine end, this is the sort of food that the Spirit of God will minister in order that we may reach it.
J.T. It sustains the soul.
T.H.R. It has often been said, that it is as you really feed on Christ in death, which brings you to an end of yourself, that you value the manna, the grace of Christ in His lowly life.
J.T. The manna is support for a heavenly man here in daily circumstances. @John 6, of course, is for life.
A.S.L. Not exactly the manna.
J.T. Not exactly, but for life; what Christ was as a Man here.
T.H.R. But in order to have that you must know His dying.
J.T. Quite so, He is the food of your soul.
D.L.H. There is nothing typical that sets forth @John 6 exactly.
J.T. Not that I know of.
A.S.L. It is not exactly the old corn, nor exactly the manna, connected with the wilderness.
J.T. This is a world of death, and therefore it is the food of life.
{102}
P.R.M. It is blessed to distinguish between He "made himself of no reputation" and the further thought, "being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself".
T.H.R. He went down really lower than the creature, He went down to death.
F.H.B. Does not one refer to what took place before He became incarnate, and the other after He was found in fashion as a Man?
J.T. It is what we may call an act of mind, it was His mind to empty Himself in that way; but, being found in fashion as a Man, there is another step, He humbled Himself.
P.R.M. I think the gospels trace it out, the deep reality of His manhood, and that He took up things in manhood in that blessed way.
A.S.L. And is it not to emphasise the difference between Him and the other man who was in creature position and exalted himself.
E.J.McB. With other men there is no humbling themselves for them to die; but with this Man, He had the title to live.
J.T. It is a divine Person that is in view. That He should become obedient unto death, that that One, who had been in the form of God, should go into death, is the excess of humiliation as undertaken voluntarily in obedience to God; yet He was superior to death, He had power over it.
W.J. Where the great reality of His manhood came into view, there His deity is asserted.
J.T. In the presence of death He had shown He was master of it, so the act of humiliation is the more wonderful.
P.R.M. "Being found in fashion as a man".
J.T. It is an historical statement. The allusion is to Adam; Adam was only a man, but he exalted himself. No other man could say, he was obedient unto death, he had no power over it; but this One
{103}
had power over it, and He became obedient unto death.
H.D'A.C. But His humbling Himself is seen not only in His being obedient unto death, but in all His pathway here. He was the greatest Man that ever was here, but He did not go about as some great one, but was meek and lowly.
D.L.H. Could it be said of any mere man that he was found in fashion as a man? It seems to me that the expression could only apply to One who was a divine Person, and had previous existence.
J.T. I suppose that is right.
E.J.McB. I think it must suppose a previous existence.
J.T. But we can say, they were both in the same position.
J.S.G. It is the place He took; but now being found in fashion as a Man, He humbled Himself.
J.T. He had taken that place.
T.H.R. He took the place of a servant, and was found in fashion as a Man, He was not found in fashion as an angel.
P.W. Is there a hint of it in the Old Testament, "There was found in it (that is, in the city) a poor wise man" (@Ecclesiastes 9:15)?
J.T. He certainly was there. He emptied Himself, taking the bondman's form. "Taking his place in the likeness of men; and having been found in figure as a man, humbled himself", but the bondman's form is first, showing that the will of God was before Him in doing it.
S.H. Is not all this typified in the Ark of the covenant? He had the will of God in His heart.
J.T. I should say so.
F.H.B. Do you not think it is a great question with us how far we appreciate that Man?
{104}
J.T. I think that is the great point.
G.W.W. But the appreciation of this kind of man is going to establish mutuality among the saints.
J.T. It is evident the apostle writes to give us a perfect standard in Christ, and then to show how a man who had come under His influence would be likeminded.
F.H.B. God has expressed His appreciation of Him. He has highly exalted Him.
J.T. How a Man like this makes place for God! "Wherefore God also hath highly exalted him".
E.A.P. Does not all centre in His being *obedient* unto death, not simply that He went into death?
W.J. Do you not get that in "as ye have always obeyed"?
Ques. With regard to God working in you, what does that mean? What does He work in you, and how?
J.T. Well, in leaving the elders at Ephesus the apostle commended them to God and the word of His grace. Christianity was inaugurated with this, that they spoke all the wonderful works of God, and these wonderful works take form now in ourselves, and it is for the willing and doing of His good pleasure, so that the saints at Philippi and ourselves should be for the pleasure of God.
F.H.B. And that pleasure is that we are formed according to Christ.
J.T. God could not anoint anything else.
J.S.G. Do you think that in chapter 1 it is working *in* them, and now it is their working out? I thought that what characterised the saints at Philippi was that they had been brought into sympathy with the gospel, and that God would continue that and perfect it until the day of Jesus Christ; but now comes their working out; and I thought that salvation came in because the great work of Satan was to bring in discord.
{105}
J.T. I think the apostle's joy would be to see the work completed.
T.H.R. He had joy in them, now he says, I want you to fill it up, you be of one mind.
F.H.B. Well, what we see here in Christ was a pathway of divine love, it was love that led Christ to take that pathway (@John 14:31), and only as built up in divine love could we take it.
J.T. @John 13 fits in with this chapter. You have a man with genuine care as to how the saints get on: that is descending love, that kind of man could wash the saints¬ feet. It is remarkable that in @Ephesians 4 you have descending and ascending, so that if He is elevated it is to carry out the designs of love.
H.D'A.C. And while self-abnegation and lowliness mark a man his thought is to bring God to others. It is God that fills him, he has no thought of himself.
J.T. I do not know of any man in Scripture that comes nearer to us than Timothy. He is Paul's son, to begin with, and as Paul's son, or child, he cares with genuine feeling how the saints get on, and he is the kind of man that Paul hands things over to. Ordinarily a son is the one most to be trusted, and he is the kind of man Paul is at liberty to hand things to, and so it seems as if he is nearest to us. Things have come to us through him.
F.H.B. And that is interesting as showing the kind of man that would be begotten of Paul's gospel.
A.S.L. Is there not the greatest encouragement in that expression, "It is God that worketh in you"?
W.J. "Thy law is within my heart" (@Psalm 40:8); that was the spring, the law of love was there. Would you attach that to this epistle?
J.T. Well, I think so.
D.L.H. Is it not important to notice that the reception of the gospel must involve suffering; that is, if we rightly apprehend the gospel?
{106}
A.S.L. Would not that be the encouragement for the present time?
J.T. As you suggest, Mr. H., the gospel comes to us as the gospel of Christ; it comes to conform us to Christ, and that involves the sacrifice of one's natural manhood. I think, perhaps, what we are very slow to give up is our natural manhood. I think it comes about that you, like the Nazarite, have to wear long hair, you give up your natural glory, and that is how one may come under great reproach; it is the reproach of Christ in connection with the gospel of Christ. The thought in the gospel is that you are to become like that Man.
A.S.L. I take it that it is part of the reproach of Christ.
J.T. Because of the affection you have in your soul for Christ you accept it. You wear long hair here.
D.L.H. But then these things are quite elementary, in the very nature of the gospel itself; there is nothing profound in what we are talking about.
A.S.L. Well, if the younger saints find it difficult, how do you account for that?
D.L.H. Well, it means that the older ones have been very little up to the truth of the gospel.
J.T. The popular gospel has in view that Christians should become good citizens.
E.J.McB. I think we must admit that Timothy was very greatly affected by Paul.
D.L.H. I am thinking of the apostles who departed from the presence of the council, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer for His name.
J.T. Popular evangelistic work tends to qualify men to be good citizens in this world, and that is a bad beginning. The Philippians had a good beginning, and they were true to it (@Philippians 3:20). Christ is presented in the gospel, and the possibility is that we are to be like Christ. If a gospel like Paul's is accepted it is sure to bring us into reproach.
{107}
T.H.R. If I look back, I knew when I came out that it involved reproach; now I feel that people can come into fellowship very easily without any reproach.
W.J. The reason is that you were in contact with men who accepted that position.
T.H.R. What struck me was that there were men who would not go on with evil; the holiness of the place I had come to impressed me.
F.H.B. The character of the men impressed you.
S.H. The outcome of all this is to produce irreproachable children of God, and they realise that they are in midst of a crooked and perverted generation.
G.W.W. Is it not interesting that in chapter 1:29, it is connected with salvation? If you stop short of suffering, you stop short of salvation.
T.H.R. I have no doubt that the salvation in Philippians is the complete overthrow of every adverse power; Christ has done it, and we are to be in the good of it.
E.R. Is there not the other side in regard of suffering, that God has not given us the spirit of cowardice, but of power and of love and of wise discretion.
J.T. One is superior to the sufferings in that way.
Ques. What would you look for in those seeking to come amongst us?
T.H.R. I think I would look to see whether they had faith to leave the ship, and walk on the water.
{108}
READING (3)
@Philippians 3
J.T. Attention was called yesterday to the down line in chapter 2 and how it leads to the reduction of our size, preparing for expansion on the other side. And although the unleavened bread is not really the subject of the passage, in a way nothing could be more important than that the feast should be kept during the seven days. That is, that in having to say directly to what pertains to Christ in the heavenlies, there is room for expansion, God looks for expansion, because it is a very large place and requires great largeness of mind and affection; but in regard to things here, and what one is or may be in regard of the world, there is a standing necessity to feed on unleavened bread. As remarked in prayer, without the reducing process there is no possibility of apprehending the point of view of this chapter, because it is expansion. And there seems great advantage in that we have given to us in this chapter the exercises of a man like the apostle, not as an apostle, but as a Christian, his inward exercises in regard to Christ and in regard to the calling. He had other exercises which are also a model for us, such as levitical exercises. He is compelled in the epistle to the Corinthians to record his levitical exercises because of their envy and folly, though he would have preferred to have left those for the day of Christ to bring to light. But he is not compelled here, he delights to express his exercises in regard to Christ and the calling.
F.H.B. What you speak of as the reduction had already taken place in the case of the apostle: "What things were gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ".
J.T. The Lord gave him a good start in that way. From Jerusalem he set out as a very great man
{109}
according to man's estimate, and would have had a very fine reception in Damascus as the emissary of the high priest, but instead of that he was led in blind, but he opens his eyes, as someone has said, on a brother, a brother in whom the Lord had confidence. And finally he is let down from the wall in a basket, that is reduction. But in order to maintain that reduction we have to keep the feast, and that is by the food we eat. He further went into Arabia, which had a very reducing effect on him.
S.H. You were referring to the Bridegroom yesterday. It is very interesting that when the Bridegroom is taken from them they fast. We see here a man who in the absence of the Bridegroom is fasting.
J.T. Quite, while the Bridegroom is present you can eat and drink.
S.H. Now he is taken from them, then shall they fast.
W.H.B. Is it not important to keep before us the immensity of the revelation which leads one to enter into the assembly?
J.T. The reduction of the man is a necessity; you cannot stand the reduction without the revelation; the revelation becomes a leverage in the soul.
S.H. It began with the first word of this chapter; he rejoices in the Lord.
W.H.B. And that is maintained in the soul.
J.T. I think that the impressions we get of Christ ought to be expanded at the Lord's supper. There is room for it there, the effect and the intention of it is to expand the heart, but that involves that you feel the littleness of the flesh. It is as they entered Canaan that they had to make sharp knives. It is in the light of the glory of Christ. It is not so easy; it requires severe handling. They had to sharpen the knives; it was the urgency of the thing
{110}
in the light of the glory; it is urgent that flesh be got rid of, so the Lord told them to make sharp knives, for He knew better than they how difficult the thing was.
F.H.B. The fasting would serve to keep up the reduction.
J.T. I was going to add that the first day of the week ought to be a sort of beginning with us, and after the Supper the unleavened bread ought to be kept up. As you return to things here there are things which give you a status, and there the unleavened bread is a necessity.
F.H.B. That is practically fasting.
E.A.P. Can you have a fast of unleavened bread?
F.H.B. Well, from a natural point of view it would be fasting, you would not think you had much of a feast if you had only unleavened bread.
J.T. The difficulty, I think, with most of us is that we do not keep a supply of this bread. It is a very noticeable word with regard to Lot that he had it even in such circumstances as his.
P.R.M. "That righteous man vexed his soul".
J.T. That shows that he had it.
Ques. Would you say a little as to what unleavened bread is?
J.T. Sincerity and truth; you are transparent and sincere with everybody. It is food for the soul, a thing man naturally does not feast on; he feasts on insincerity and lust.
J.S.G. Must we not remember that in the feast of unleavened bread, it says, Ye are unleavened? Now fasting is more on the other line in regard to what is legitimate.
J.T. In fasting you deny yourself what is lawful.
E.B. In Corinthians is it not more in contrast to leaven; whilst in Philippians it is more what is positive?
J.T. I did not suggest that the thought was in
{111}
Philippians exactly, but I suggested it in connection with the down-stooping of Christ.
W.J. Did you say that the Lord's supper helps you to keep up the feast of unleavened bread?
J.T. I think the Supper is expansion to draw you into Christ's things. We can all lay aside our personal dignity when we come together; but when you return to your individual position in the world, there the necessity of unleavened bread comes in.
W.J. Does the Supper help you thus to take it up?
J.T. Well, it enlarges your heart, and gives you power to eat the unleavened bread.
E.J.McB. Would it not be the case that if one is in the good of the unleavened bread you would be ready for enlargement when we come together?
J.T. It is what you are when the brethren are not looking at you.
T.H.R. I think it is very interesting and a most important point that we do not get the circumcision until you have had the positive things; that is, you worship God in the Spirit, the whole man is, so to speak, prostrated before God, and then you have no confidence in the flesh. It does not say that we have no confidence in the flesh and then worship; and I believe it is thoroughly true, that we cannot accept the putting to death of the flesh except in the power of life.
J.T. It is the "second time" (@Joshua 5:2). They were circumcised the second time. In the light of the glory and of the new position, it is not now simply the legal requirement, it is an urgent necessity. The more you are in the light of the new position the more you see the urgency of circumcision.
S.H. It is the only way the position is maintained, if we have once touched it.
J.T. The idea of healing comes in, circumcision required healing, they could do nothing till they
{112}
were made whole. The process is necessarily a trying one; now in the healing you are conformed to the new place; it really is in the apprehension of the resurrection of Christ one is whole, as one has it in one's soul. He says here, "*we* are the circumcision", there is not another. Christianity is really the circumcision.
W.H.B. Besides "the circumcision" there were only dogs and concision.
J.T. Yes, now.
F.H.B. I suppose that is what he refers to in @Colossians 2:11.
J.T. It is more positive here, because he proceeds to show that there is activity Godward. We "who worship by God's Spirit". It is not a ceremonial system of worship. A spiritually circumcised man would utterly repudiate a ceremonial system of worship, it is a worship by the Spirit of God, it shows that the flesh is utterly repudiated as regards our activities Godward.
S.H. It is very interesting that the circumcision and the covenant are put together in the institution of it; it was the token of the covenant. I suppose if we have not that token in the soul, we do not enter into the truth of the covenant.
H.D'A.C. It is spoken of as the work of Joshua and of Jehovah. It says, "Joshua ... circumcised the children of Israel" (chapter 5:3); and "Jehovah said to Joshua, This day have I rolled away the reproach of Egypt" (verse 9).
J.T. Anything of the flesh that attaches to a man in the assembly is a reproach.
H.D'A.C. I think it is noteworthy that it was Joshua who circumcised them.
T.H.R. When circumcision is first brought in, God puts Abraham on a new platform; he is lifted on to a new platform before God, and then he fell on his face at once and worshipped. Then he gets
{113}
circumcision which separates him from all the nations around.
J.T. And another point there, which I think is very essential, is, "I am the Almighty God" (@Genesis 17:1). It is the Almighty God which stands over against circumcision. It comes in after the contrivance to bring in something on the line of flesh. Ishmael was a product of the flesh but now the almightiness of God is to be regarded.
T.H.R. It is important what we are looking at; they were on new ground in God's land, and God brought them in by Joshua, and the Ark of the covenant of the Lord of all the earth had gone before them.
J.T. In that way circumcision makes room for the almightiness of God, so that instead of the flesh, here they worship by the Spirit of God. In the activities of one's affections Godward the flesh is utterly disregarded. But then it is a question of what you might boast in when you return to what we may call your position in the world.
W.J. In that connection you would get "Walk before me, and be thou perfect".
J.T. It is perfection that is in view here, and a perfect man in Christianity is one who boasts in Christ Jesus; he has all his five senses in exercise, and he appraises things aright.
T.H.R. A perfect man is one who has one object, that is, Christ.
J.T. If a man is defective in his hearing or any of the other senses he is not perfect. It is by the exercise of our senses that things become manifest, so that if a thing is presented, you appraise it rightly. I think it is in returning to one's circumstances in the world that the test comes. The two and a half tribes go over the Jordan, and pass for good brethren, good fighters, in the land; but their affections and all their interests were the other side of Jordan.
{114}
W.J. Does not the Supper teach us on both sides? On the one there is expansion, but if true to the Supper we accept the reduction.
J.T. I think so. You cannot think of Paul whilst in the third heavens becoming inflated: it was when he came back to his natural position on the earth that the danger would arise.
W.J. Do you not think that is where we are tested -- in the expansion and all that is so blessed, and then coming out we are taken unawares?
J.T. So that you make post haste for Gilgal.
W.H.B. It is a great thing that the heart should be prepared to take the sharp knives.
J.T. It is after the wilderness the tenacity of the flesh comes out; how tenacious it is in clinging to its own rights, how it sticks up for itself.
P.R.M. "Knives of flints" flint is inexorable.
E.A.P. The apostle's prayer for these saints is that they might judge of, and approve of things that were excellent; not good or better.
J.T. That is a very fine suggestion.
E.A.P. And you get his idea of excellence, Christ Jesus.
J.T. You have a good judge here, a man's senses all exercised; he says, Now if ever there was a man that had a title to confidence in the flesh I am that man, and the sweepingness of the thing; all these things put on to the dunghill. One has to feel how very far away one is. He speaks of things we never had; but here is a man who did have them, everything that a man could have to boast in, and he puts them all on the dungheap. He is speaking of what he had. It is easy for us to apply this to what others had, but here was a man who had these things.
P.R.M. Why does he not include his Roman citizenship?
J.T. "What things were gain to me", it was
{115}
included there: but a spiritual man talks about what is excellent.
T.H.R. No one will ever give up things without they are in the truth of the calling. If you have not Christ bringing you into the new ground, you will never mortify the flesh, you must do it in the power of life.
J.T. Whatever gave Paul an advantage in the world, all was cast on the dungheap.
W.J. The apostle had these sensibilities they made him feel what these things were.
J.T. And then he begins with Christ; it is what Christ is to the heart. He is the beginning of things.
A.S.L. Is not that a very important point? Christ is presented in Colossians as the beginning; Christ Himself, and Christ in resurrection; and that involves removal. We have not begun at all unless we have begun in resurrection.
T.H.R. Then again in @Colossians 3:3 you have "your life is hid with Christ in God". You realise where your life is.
J.T. In beginning with Paul the Lord spoke to him out of heaven. It was such a revelation that he got the idea into his soul, there is a Man in whom all moral worth is. So that he counts these things loss and filth on account of Christ.
T.H.R. If you had not Christ, it would be mere monkishness.
J.T. The thing is to be happy in the denial; you do not want any regrets to follow it.
W.H.B. It is a wonderful thing to see that Man in resurrection. God has a Man in whom all that God wanted was complete and full, all the love of God, all the holiness and majesty, and Paul's eyes were opened on One in whom God was glorified.
J.T. Paul's light of Christ is in heaven. It was out of heaven the light shone, and the end of his aim is, "that I may know him, and the power of
{116}
his resurrection"; that is, his desire is not simply to know that Christ is in resurrection, but to know the power of His resurrection, to arrive at it from his own side; because you must arrive at it in your soul before you can ascend.
W.J. There was an increasing apprehension of the light he had seen.
J.R.K. Would you say that the first five verses give the position, and then what follows how Paul reached it?
J.T. Yes, but he had not reached it yet. He states definitely that they were the circumcision, they were that. They worshipped by the Spirit of God. The worship of the Father is in spirit and in truth. To be classified as a worshipper is not saying you are a circumcised worshipper. It is a question of the kind of worship; circumcised worshippers worship by the Spirit of God. But later on the apostle speaks of what he had not reached.
J.R.K. But when he says, "not as though I had already attained", was he not on the road?
J.T. Yes, on the road surely; but the chapter shows to us what were the exercises of the most spiritual man who had ever been on the earth besides the Lord Jesus, and he had not reached perfection; he was on the road to it. It keeps you constantly on the qui vive. A brother used the expression in prayer, not that there might be an *increased* appreciation of Christ but an *increasing* one. If it is *increased* you have stopped, but it is *increasing*.
W.J. Paul is perfect as to object, but not perfect as to attainment.
J.T. Quite; perfect as to exercise, but not as to attainment.
W.J. You cannot turn away from your glory here until you see your glory there.
T.H.R. The glory laid hold of him from the first
{117}
moment, a glory shining in the face of Jesus. Then the great thought is to reach it in resurrection.
J.T. The Lord took possession of him.
T.H.R. And he coins a word, the *out-resurrection*; which immediately shows that it was the resurrection of Christ he wanted to attain unto.
D.L.H. I should like to ask, particularly in view of present difficulties, what is to be said as to Paul's having three times fallen back on his Roman citizenship? One was at Philippi, "Let them come themselves" (@Acts 16:37), another on the steps of the castle at Jerusalem; and the third when he appealed to Caesar.
J.T. Well, there is what may be called in the language of Scripture "the present necessity". At Corinth there were necessities, certain difficulties confronted the saints; and undoubtedly there is at this moment a great deal of concern as to our course in view of conditions that have arisen, which believers that have gone before have not had to deal with. The antichristian tide has flowed, has risen, and especially in this country; and certainly there is a present necessity arising out of it, and it is a question as to what citizenship one is to take up.
W.J. Is it not a question of what measure of light you have? Paul started from this point, but practically we may not have reached it.
D.L.H. But the apostle reached it. Now then the question is, how it comes to pass that a man who had reached it in an exceptional way three times over in the course of his history fell back upon his Roman citizenship. What I have in my mind is the young people who are taken a certain stand, and they are confronted with what Paul did. How is it to be viewed? Was it defective in any sense in the apostle?
J.T. I would say unhesitatingly, without in any degree saying anything uncomely as to the apostle, that he had undoubtedly dropped.
{118}
H.D'A.C. But in this epistle he puts everything right as to the question of citizenship.
J.T. One of the most damaging things one knows of is to lower the standard, because you cannot maintain yourself equal to it. Now, though you cannot maintain yourself up to it you must not lower the standard.
T.H.R. It is important in every way to see that you belong to another country.
J.T. Quite. I believe nationalism has almost entirely obliterated the testimony on the Continent. They are so national. The house of God is a wider idea; it is universal.
H.D'A.C. That was a good word from saints abroad, saying though the nations are at war brethren are at peace.
J.T. Very happy if it is so.
Rem. As a natural man Paul was born a Roman citizen, and he was that when he wrote.
F.H.B. But do you take account of yourself as a natural man or a spiritual man?
E.J.McB. You pay your taxes because you desire to conform to the laws of the country where you reside.
H.D'A.C. The Lord said to Paul at the time of his conversion, "taking thee *out from* among the *people*, and the *nations*" (@Acts 26:17). That was never to be forgotten by him.
J.S.G. Unless in my own soul I have apprehended that the Lord has taken me out, so that I do not belong to the system that I am surrounded with, I am sure to make a mistake right through.
T.H.R. Yours is only a tent, you are not a dweller here.
H.D'A.C. It ought not to surprise the world when the saints go up on high, they ought to say, "Well, they never did belong to us".
{119}
J.S.G. When you pay your taxes you do it as serving God.
J.T. It is very striking as regards the young. Take @Hebrews 11, Abraham is the father of all the believers, and he shows us in his manner of life what a believer should be. It says, he was a stranger in the land, and dwelt in tents, with Isaac and Jacob; in that way he brought before them the idea of a stranger and a pilgrim.
S.H. We have had the altar, and now we are coming to the tent. It is a question how deep are the tent pegs. In starting from the standpoint of circumcision, on the negative side of it the reproach of Egypt is rolled away; have we felt it a reproach? And are we going to take it up again?
A.S.L. One has heard you say, Mr. C., that the reproach of Egypt is all that I ever was as a man in the flesh.
G.W.W. Abraham would not receive a place to bury his dead, he would buy it.
J.T. What I was remarking about lowering the standard is, I think, of supreme importance. We are apt to accommodate the standard to our state, and that is a most serious thing. It is very like the teaching of the doctrine of Balaam, it leads to that. Christendom is really the product of accommodating the standard to the state, so that it becomes ultimately the legalising of evil.
E.R. You hear the expression used, it is a question of the light you have.
J.T. Well, there is something in this, that one has to act according to one's own faith.
H.D'A.C. Jeremiah sought the protection of Zedekiah; it helped him for a moment, but the king soon failed him, and he got into a worse condition, into the dungeon and the mire; and but for Ebedmelech, a black man, he would have perished.
{120}
J.T. Now the end of the chapter shows us what our citizenship is, but how advantageous to have the exercises of a spiritual man! And then he turns back to call attention to the kind of walk that marked him, because he is a model, so that it would be well for a Christian to ask what would Paul do now, not what he did at Jerusalem, or at Philippi, but what would he do now.
E.R. What is the standard?
J.T. You have it here: "Fix your eyes on those walking thus as you have us for a model". This suggests that we act as he did. Paul had the light of the assembly and the calling long before this, but it had to be wrought out in him. This chapter supposes that all that process had been gone through, and he has the light in his soul, so that in that way he is a model for us.
F.H.B. As he says to Timothy, "thou hast fully known my doctrine, manner of life".
J.S.G. I suppose we must bear in mind that the standard is not my apprehension of the light, but the will of God.
J.T. Ignorance of the laws of a country does not excuse you for breaking them.
J.S.G. I think many are hindered because they, say, Have I faith? Have I love? But the question is, What is the will of God?
J.T. The Jewish remnant put us to shame, because they will not have the beast's name, they will only have the Father's name.
E.R. But what would you say is our light?
J.T. Our light is Paul's doctrine and example. "Arise, shine; for thy light is come"
(@Isaiah 60:1). It would be a poor thing in the future if we do not afford some light to the remnant; if we have not set them an example.
T.H.R. There is another thing besides faith and light, do not lag behind your conscience.
{121}
F.H.B. It is important that the conscience should be an enlightened conscience.
S.T. It all comes back to what Mr. T. started with, where have we been, which side of Jordan, and what have you seen, and what have you heard?
H.D'A.C. It does not appear that there will be any mercy shown to anyone who receives the mark of the beast; he is to drink the wrath of God (@Revelation 14:10). We are getting rather near to that line of things.
J.T. I think God is giving us a taste of it. No doubt Israel's light will come through the assembly; and it is a very poor thing as in similar circumstances now, only in a modified degree, if we cannot set them some example.
W.J. Do you not think that the position applies to us in many ways?
J.T. I was only thinking of the apostle's expression, "the present necessity"; only we ought to be occupied with the general scope of the truth. There is particular pressure at the moment.
W.J. The difficulty lies in this, that there are so few models. Mr. R. spoke about his young days this morning, that there were models; they were not holding truth in the abstract.
J.T. That is coming to the point, I am sure.
W.J. We have to look at things all round.
J.T. We have it here, "Ye have us for a model". But where are the others who walked thus?
S.H. Then, I suppose, we have to look at the thing in principle, how it applies to the whole company.
H.D'A.C. How far does "Render to Caesar" go?
J.T. The question now is whether *you* are Caesar's. I think it is very simple that I am not Caesar's, I am Christ's. Caesar may take my property, but he cannot take me.
{122}
P.R.M. @Romans 13:7 shows how far it goes. "Render therefore to all their dues", tribute, custom, fear, honour.
J.T. In chapter 12 it is, what have you done with your body? You cannot *give* it away, it is God's; you have *given* it to God.
S.H. I think that distinction will help us. He can take my property; and the Lord admitted that claim when He was here.
H.D'A.C. Is there not a passage where the Jews speak of their bodies as under the dominion of kings?
S.H. That is in @Nehemiah 9:37, but they were captives.
E.A.P. But on the other hand, Joseph went to Pilate to beg the body of Jesus.
Ques. In what way are we to obey the powers that be?
P.R.M. Tribute, custom, fear, honour.
J.T. Government is good in itself, and you respect it.
S.H. Would not the attitude of a sojourner help us?
J.S.G. Does it not make it very simple if we take Scripture? We are brought into God's kingdom, and I cannot do anything that violates the principles of that kingdom.
E.J.McB. I think if one did one's duty one would give one's body to God as a living sacrifice.
S.H. And that intelligently.
E.J.McB. And then you do not get wisdom and light from the Lord for circumstances like a judge has a book; you get light as occasion arises.
J.T. I think that is wise, because there is a good deal of attempt to meet circumstances halfway.
A.S.L. At the present moment the position is perfectly simple.
J.T. So that what we are saying now is in view of a position which we may never have to face. As
{123}
the Lord says, "Sufficient to the day is its own evil" (@Matthew 6:34); you are not to prepare for difficulties which have not arisen. Still, if the Lord allows an exercise, it is important that we should get the good of it.
G.W.W. It is important that we should get the principles.
S.H. And I think that is the importance of the moment, to ascertain the principles that are to govern God's house.
E.A.P. I was thinking of the principles which are necessary to govern us. There is a kind of settled idea that I am not ready until I have more light and more power, but in obedience you get the power.
J.T. As we had it yesterday, "it is God who works in you both the willing and the working" (chapter 2:13), if the disposition is there.
D.L.H. Then it is of great importance that we should know what the divine principles are upon which we are to act.
J.T. I think that what has been remarked as regards the body is very helpful. One's body is not one's own, it is for the Lord, but it is under one's own hand. I think in this passage the body is in view, "Who shall transform our body of humiliation", so that the body becomes exceedingly important as to how you hold it.
P.R.M. And God will make men to acknowledge it. I do not think anything can be more encouraging that Nebuchadnezzar's testimony in @Daniel 3:28. The body is for the Lord.
S.H. "Let him labour, working with his hands the thing which is good" (@Ephesians 4:28).
J.T. To "have to give to him that needeth".
S.H. But "the thing which is *good*".
J.T. We are exercised that there should be a right standard.
W.H.B. And it is a great thing to have a conscience exercised under that standard.
{124}
J.T. If we were to make the standard a test of fellowship, there would hardly be anyone in fellowship. Some of us were saying today that if Caleb and Joshua had made their light a standard of fellowship they would have had to put everyone in Israel out of fellowship. It calls for patience. You must go on with people so long as they are not apostate. And when I say apostate, I have in mind that the deliberate refusal of any truth is apostasy. Well, our brethren are not apostate.
{125}
CHRISTIAN CONFLICT
@Ephesians 6:10 - 24
J.T. The exercise was, that in view of the present conflict among the nations, and the tendency to be occupied with it, we may lose sight of the great conflict, the spiritual conflict for the testimony. When the great earthly conflict begins Jerusalem will be the centre of it; now it is the heavenly position that is the centre, it is in connection with that the contention is. It is when God moves to take possession of anything that Satan opposes, so that the Man Child going into heaven occasioned the conflict there.
F.H.B. So that the conflict is not to maintain anything for ourselves, it is in connection with the testimony such as Paul rendered at Ephesus, and with which he is connected here as a prisoner.
J.T. So that after the words, "For the rest, brethren", much less follows here than that which follows a similar expression in Philippians. You have two whole chapters in Philippians which follow this expression; the apostle was led on in a different strain in writing to the Philippians. The epistle to Ephesus is more formal and official as bringing out the assembly's place in the divine counsels, and the apostle does not let out his feelings. Having brought that out, the consequences would be that the testimony would be maintained in conflict; so "For the rest, brethren", is preparation for the conflict.
W.J. Hence "Be *strong in the Lord*"; in the other case, "*Rejoice* in the Lord".
J.T. Yes, in Philippians, joy in the Lord.
F.H.B. I suppose when Israel was planted in the land of Canaan, it was to be a testimony to God that He was the God of the whole earth; and their conflict was to maintain that testimony.
{126}
J.T. And the fear of them was to fall on the inhabitants of the land, the power of God being now *in* them. So that in Ephesians the position is answered to, the power is for conflict; whereas in Philippians the power is for worship and joy, but it is the same power. It was the Ark of the covenant that went over before them, but in the land it was power in the people. Rahab said to the spies, "The dread of you has fallen on us" (@Joshua 2:9). It was not that they should be exalted, hence the necessity for circumcision in regard of the conflict. So that the armour is God's armour, but worn by the saints. In the book of Joshua they are circumcised, they eat the old corn of the land, and then the man with the drawn sword appears; it is all education for Joshua. That is, that in spite of the fact that we are on right ground, we are apt to be partisan in our feelings; Joshua said, "Art thou for us, or for our enemies?" (chapter 5:13). The conflict is not for them; the conflict is for Jehovah. It is the "captain of *the host of the Lord*". It is as having taken our place as circumcised, and having a reverential regard for Christ as having been our Passover, and feeding on the old corn of the land, that He becomes our Prince. And then what follows upon that is the necessity for holiness; because nothing is more apt to intrude in conflict than envy and hatred. Feelings arise, hence the great necessity that it should be recognised that it is a holy conflict; our feelings must have no place in it.
J.S.G. Do you think this is similar to our position?
J.T. Well, it is an allusion to it. It is a great mistake to think that you get everything that is in the Old Testament, in the New. God does not repeat Himself. What is put down in Joshua is Scripture, and it is written for us.
J.S.G. Is it not with us more maintaining than obtaining?
{127}
J.T. It is standing. You are supposed to be in the land, and you are to occupy the ground.
J.S.G. So that the scene of conflict is here, and it is to maintain the testimony of what is heavenly upon earth.
F.H.B. And especially the truth as to Christ and the assembly as associated with Him (@Ephesians 1:19 - 22).
J.T. As you proceed in Joshua, Joshua is found with his face to the earth, and you learn that you are not only on heavenly ground but on holy ground. And the conflict begins with not only what Joshua would do, but what the priests would do. The main feature in chapter 6 is the carrying of the Ark; that is, the testimony of the Christ carried by the priests. It is "not by might, nor by power, but by my spirit, saith the Lord" (@Zechariah 4:6). We can do nothing by human power; I believe that is the education of @Joshua 6.
F.H.B. The truth of circumcision must be kept up.
J.T. After every conflict they had to return to Gilgal; and, if I may take the liberty of pursuing Joshua, I would say they learnt in chapter 6 how the victory was to be achieved; there was to be the clear sounding forth of testimony. They will have their fighting in due time, but it is the sounding of the trumpets by the priests which brings down the stronghold. To follow Joshua, chapters 7, 8 and 9 are chapters of failure, but in chapter 10 Joshua really comes to the truth; you have figuratively "a man in Christ" (@2 Corinthians 12:2). The Lord hearkened to the voice of a man: "Is not this written in the book of Jasher (the upright)?" The "man in Christ" is the upright man, that is the man for the conflict; the heavens stand still for him.
W.J. Would you say the new man? Would that cover it?
J.T. The new man is not quite the "man in Christ". I think the new man is what is for display here, but the man in Christ is for heaven; that
{128}
man goes up. I think the new man is where the old man was.
W.J. It seems that the new man is an obedient man.
S.H. The new man is a collective thought.
J.T. You cannot see it completely in any one individual. But @Joshua 10 is very fine in this way; he has learnt his lesson, and God hearkens to the voice of a man.
P.R.M. The sun and moon stand still.
J.T. A very wonderful thing to happen; but I think it should afford great confidence of heart to see that such a thing should have taken place on account of a man. I think it indicates what may be effected by a man in Christ.
P.R.M. Are the sun and moon not the ruling powers?
J.T. That ought to be a great encouragement to us in days like these. If the ruling powers are going to do damage to us, they can be held back; the issue will be largely dependent on the prayers of God's people; if the sun and moon can be held back by the voice of a man, the ruling powers can be held back. But the testimony is, that there never was a day like that, before or after, "that the Lord hearkened unto the voice of a man".
F.H.B. May we not gather this also from it, viz., that God can govern providentially the course of things in this world for the sake of the testimony?
J.T. Do you not think, in the light of 1 Timothy, which is closely associated with the epistle to Ephesus, that all centres in the prayers of the saints, and God hears them? He does not fail to hear them.
W.H.B. Evil is held back down here in view of God's heavenly people.
J.T. "He who now letteth will let", there is no doubt that the letting power is very largely in answer to the prayers of God's people.
{129}
E.B. Is that why prayer is so prominent in this chapter?
J.T. No doubt. I think, perhaps, this epistle is more official than any epistles of Paul, because of the great place of the assembly. It was very important that it should be presented carefully, and what is important for the maintenance of it, hence so much prayer. And the contention now is for the heavenly position; the great earthly conflict is to come later. Satan will not take much account of things on the earth politically until he is turned out of heaven. The assembly is the complement of Christ; He is given to be "head over all things to the church, which is his body, the fulness of him that filleth all in all" (@Ephesians 1:22,23).
T.H.R. I think what you are saying as to prayer is very important; we get it twice in Scripture as "in the Holy Ghost", here and in @Jude 20, where the apostasy has come in.
J.T. The upright man's prayer is effective: we are to lift up holy hands without wrath and doubting.
H.D'A.C. If God intervenes, like the sun and the moon standing still, His intervention in the present moment is not likely to be obvious to the world, but very clear to us; there will not be any public vindication as there will be in a future day.
J.T. Quite, you would not expect a public vindication; you could not get that after the candlestick has been removed. Faith takes account of what has been done.
P.R.M. And it is on the line of hindering, not pushing things forward.
E.A.P. There is the word "He reproved kings for their sakes" (@1 Chronicles 16:21).
J.T. "The king's heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the rivers of water; he turneth it whithersoever he will" (@Proverbs 21:1).
{130}
F.H.B. If we had a true sense of the greatness of the powers of evil with which we have to contend, it would turn us to prayer; there is such an array of evil, all against Christ and His testimony in this world.
J.T. To use a military figure, Paul is like a good general; a good general locates his enemy, and never underrates his power.
E.J.McB. It is striking, too, in the account of the conflict that there were more killed by the hailstones than by the swords of the children of Israel.
P.R.M. The hailstones normally should come down in rain and blessing, but God makes what should be blessing to come down in judgment upon man.
J.T. I feel it is a great advantage to have the enemy located, and to know all you have to contend with, and where it is; it is not in regard to the political movements on the earth, so that we need not be concerned about them.
T.H.R. I think, too, we have to remember that we are in the days of Philadelphia, and that the Lord has set before us an open door.
J.T. I was thinking of that, and that is what faith sees. There is no outward vindication of the assembly after the failure, but there is an opened door for faith. I have no doubt everyone of us would be a witness to the fact that our way is not entirely shut up.
F.H.B. I think we have had abundant proof of that.
H.D'A.C. The ground has never been lost for God, the Holy Spirit is maintaining it.
T.H.R. I have no doubt the position of quietness in which we can meet is in answer to prayer.
J.T. "No man forbidding" (@Acts 28:31) us. It would help with many Christians if they were to see where the enemy is, and that his actions against us are not in the political movements on the earth, nor the conflicts
{131}
on the earth; the position is a spiritual one, and the conflict a spiritual one, and the centre of it is in heaven.
E.J.McB. Do you mean that Satan has certain influences which he brings to bear upon the saints to destroy the testimony to the heavenly position?
S.H. What form will they take?
J.T. I think it may be learnt from the Lord's word to Smyrna; the Lord endeavoured to keep the saints alive, to keep the saints from settling down. Satan may use anything to induce us to give up the heavenly position. I believe the persecution in Smyrna was to keep the saints alive; but in Pergamos you get the statement where she was dwelling: I believe there was a settling down to earth.
F.H.B. When it speaks of the conflict being in connection with heavenly places, it means, I suppose, that while we meet these powers of evil in men here, the seat of them is in heavenly places.
P.R.M. We meet it in "this darkness".
D.L.H. But is not the opposition found very largely in the teaching and writings of men of learning?
J.T. There is no doubt about that, but what I was seeking to show was the seat of it, and the object of it to seek to induce the saints to accept a place on earth; because the moment that is accepted as a principle the ground is entirely surrendered.
F.H.B. With respect to the heavenly position; that is, that Christ is in heaven as Man, Head over all things, and the assembly united to Him there.
J.T. How Satan got into the heavenlies would be a very interesting inquiry, but that he is there is unquestionable.
D.L.H. Was he ever anywhere else?
J.T. I think so. The place he occupies in the heavenlies is a place connected with the earth.
T.H.R. Therefore he must be cast out, in order that Christ and the church may take that place.
{132}
Ques. When do you think he entered the heavenlies?
J.T. I think he got in in connection with government. The heavens are always the figure of the governing position. I think those to whom government was committed failed in it, and he got control of the governing powers.
P.R.M. Is not the conflict here a necessity from chapter 2?
J.T. That is the point, and that is what Satan contests. The Canaanites were really the descendants of Ham, the cursed descendants of Canaan. It was really that Noah did not govern himself to begin with, but the conflict arises not only because Christ is in the heavenlies, but the assembly is there. The whole point is to shut out the light of the heavenlies, leading the saints to give up the heavenly position, and of course, the heavenly witness.
T.H.R. The fact is that nothing can ever be completed in the purpose of God until the assembly is with Christ in the heavenlies. *Now* it is testimony, by and bye it will be reality.
E.B. And then the saints are encouraged to pray for that.
T.H.R. I think so.
Ques. What is the difference between this and @2 Corinthians 10: 4?
J.T. It is the same thing in principle. What I understand by @2 Corinthians 10 is that the testimony of the apostles brought down Satan's world, not in fact, but in principle. Everything that is established in your soul is viewed as a conquest. There was the city of books, and the city of learning, different cities in Asia; all these things had to come down. How was it brought about? The fact was that the testimony of the apostles, particularly Paul, was too strong for them; it brought them down for faith.
Ques. Is that peculiar to the apostles?
{133}
J.T. There has been no advance on the apostles, they conquered the territory; we do not conquer it, we have to "stand".
Rem. It is for us to enjoy it.
J.T. Sometimes we hear of new things, but there is nothing new; no one can advance on the apostles.
G. "To bring to nought things that are" (@1 Corinthians 1:28).
J.T. But our brother is referring to the weapons of our warfare. "Casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalteth itself against the knowledge of God" (@2 Corinthians 10:5).
T.H.R. I do not think that we think enough of it in regard to the book of Joshua, that the Lord actually took possession of that piece of land as a pledge that He is going to take possession of the whole earth. It is His, and no one can meddle with it. People talk of putting the Jews back into their land.
P.R.M. When did He take possession of it?
T.H.R. When the Ark of the covenant went over Jordan.
F.H.B. Now the proclamation is the rights of Christ.
E.J.McB. I think we need not be surprised that the enemy should use every subterfuge to prevent the people of God from occupying that land.
J.T. It is maintained if there is one man that has it in faith. What we need, I am sure, is not so much quantity but quality.
T.H.R. I do think we ought to see more God's hand in everything. Palestine is not the land of the Jews but God's land.
J.T. They have to wait for the year of jubilee. "The land is mine" (@Leviticus 25:23).
E.J.McB. I think one great point in this kind of conflict is that the enemy has been defeated in regard of Christ personally, but he would use every effort to prevent those that are Christ's from joining Christ in that position.
{134}
J.T. So that the end of @Philippians 3 says that our citizenship is in the heavens.
E.J.McB. It ought to give us exercise that the saints are not to be in that place in an arbitrary way, but just as Christ went up after a pathway of moral worth, so the assembly is translated as pleasurable to Christ.
H.D'A.C. I believe that is of the greatest moment.
J.T. I believe that the Lord is working at the present time to form a people pleasing to Him.
T.H.R. If we took it home to ourselves that we are heavenly, a lot of things would drop off.
J.T. I should say it is safer and surer to cut them off. The sharp knives, I think, are what is needed for these things. But I do believe the Lord will bring about a state like that which was seen in Enoch before the assembly is translated. It says, "before his translation" (@Hebrews 11:5). I do not know how long before, because he had been walking for a long time with God. I believe that God had been working to produce that state. "Before his translation he had this testimony, that he pleased God".
W.J. So that we have the sense that we go there of necessity.
S.H. Could we come out in the conflict until we have been there?
J.T. I think not. All the preparation of the first nine chapters of Joshua is to prepare a man in Christ; it is when you come to that you are fit for the conflict. Then all those thirty-one kings go down.
E.J.McB. "They loved not their lives unto the death". It seems to me that practically a person gives up his manhood. "They overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their testimony; and they loved not their lives unto the death" (@Revelation 12:11).
D.L.H. I was going to ask a question as to the distinction between the heavenlies and heaven.
{135}
J.T. I think heaven, where it is used in the singular, applies to the abode and throne of God, so it is entirely holy.
D.L.H. Our citizenship is in the heavens.
J.T. But that is plural. In the creation, every day's work was pronounced upon by God, and pronounced good. But the second day's work was not pronounced good. Now the heavens that we know are the heavens with Christ in them, and I believe that Satan secured a place there. In that way it was a sphere of rule; now the assembly is to occupy that, it is really what shall be seen in the millennium. It is good now because Christ is there. The seventy disciples returned to the Lord, and rejoiced that the demons were subject to them according to the Lord's word, but He replies, "Rather rejoice, because your names are written in heaven" (@Luke 10:20). They are not there yet, but they are there in principle, because their names are there; if one's name is there, one's position is secured.
D.L.H. Is that the singular or the plural?
P.R.M. "Written in the heavens"; it is plural. "I beheld Satan as lightning falling out of heaven" (@Luke 10:18) is singular.
J.T. Well, what I said as to where it is used in the singular may not be quite correct; but where it says, "into heaven itself", that is not where Satan is.
D.L.H. But where was the sphere of Satan's original creation?
J.T. We can say nothing about that, because we have to do with the heavens of @Genesis 1.
D.L.H. It is clear that Satan was created with regard to a sphere that was not connected with this earth.
J.T. It says in the book of Job that Satan was walking up and down in the earth; it would appear that his activities as hostile to God were on the earth.
{136}
Job was contemporary with Abraham. But no doubt he got into that position through the failure of those who ought to have maintained government on earth.
Ques. Were his activities on the earth consequent upon his fall?
J.T. He fell long before that, but his activities ever since have been on earth.
Ques. Would the earth being without form and void be connected with Satan's fall?
J.T. Very likely, but we cannot say much about that.
A.S.L. The first verse of Genesis stands by itself.
W.J. What about @Ezekiel 28:13, "thou hast been in Eden"? What does that set forth?
J.T. It shows what a wonderful place Satan had in nearness to God.
J.S.G. Does not that suggest that he had a place in reference to this earth? It is a remarkable thing, if you take the precious stones, that they are found again in the breastplate of the high priest, and in the heavenly city.
F.H.B. You were saying just now that Satan's opposition was against man, that beautiful creature created for God's pleasure; now it is still against the Man, and against those who stand here for that Man. We do not fight for our own blessing, but really for the testimony of the Christ.
J.T. Of course you have to add that every place on which your feet stand is yours, you get it by conflict.
W.J. But is not that peculiar to Ephesians, His inheritance, His calling?
J.T. But it is not now the garden of Eden. That was a very beautiful spot, and Satan envied God that beautiful spot and that beautiful creature; but it is now a Man in the heavens. The conception of it was a delight to God, and Satan's opposition is to all that.
G.W.W. What comes out is that that blessed
{137}
Man is there in the power of accomplished redemption, and that involves the carrying out of all God's purposes.
S.H. But is not the opposition here against the fulness of Christ? The attack is against the woman.
J.T. Satan is a clever and skilful general: he attacked the weakest point. I have no doubt he was envious of Adam.
S.H. Is it not rather a spiritual sphere, and the forces that Satan is bringing against that position are spiritual?
J.T. Yes, it says in Philippians they were in nothing terrified by their adversaries.
S.H. So that what we have here are moral influences, which would corrupt what God has brought about for His own pleasure.
J.T. There is "this darkness", as Mr. M. suggests, but I was thinking that if we can see the position, the location of the enemy, and the might of his power, then you have over against that the Leader, the Captain of the Lord's host, then the warriors and then the armour, because without the armour we are utterly powerless.
P.R.M. An indivisible whole.
J.T. A panoply.
F.H.B. All these parts of the armour are connected with our state.
H.D'A.C. Who would you say the Captain of the Lord's host is?
J.T. The Lord Jesus. In the conflict the first thing is, one's loins have to be taken account of, then one's breast, one's feet, and so on.
W.J. All these moral features are connected with your answer to the revelation of God.
S.H. What you have really is a new moral being.
F.H.B. Then if it is moral influences which we have to stand against, there must be a moral state in us to withstand them.
{138}
S.H. It has to be met by a new moral or spiritual being, and I think it is in that way we arrive at the constitution of the church.
J.T. So that the conflict takes form in your everyday life. The loins mean your internal affections; not so much the intelligent but the lower affections of man: these have to be girded about with truth.
S.H. These are the characteristics of the new man.
F.H.B. But we have to put these things on.
W.J. Was that your thought just now, that we have the new man here?
J.T. Yes, but you have affections, you had them before you were converted; take an unconverted man, his affections flow loose; he does not care whether he drags them in the gutter or not; but the idea of a Christian is that his loins should be girded by truth. You do not take up just any book and read it, you want to know who wrote it. Like the newspapers, you may have to read them: they are like a glass filled with dirty water; the deeper you drink the more dirty it is.
E.B. The great thing is to be kept by the truth.
S.H. Is it not that we are so formed, that every part of us is formed in regard to every other part?
J.T. As regards truth, builders understand it; you cannot build without truth.
E.J.McB. I think you see a beautiful figure in Elijah, when he girded up his loins and ran before Ahab.
J.T. I believe that we are greatly hampered by touching things so freely; they may appear to be legitimate, but the more you drink into them the more they defile you: you have to put a thing down immediately, otherwise you find yourself steeped in it and are defiled. Ephesus was the city of books; books are a most ensnaring thing for us, because they seem so legitimate.
T.H.R. And newspapers too.
{139}
J.T. I suppose the breastplate of righteousness is that you have a good conscience, a conscience maintained in the full light of the position.
W.J. It is fine the way the apostle maintained his good conscience in the presence of the high priest.
J.T. The next thing is the feet; what kind of shoes you have on.
Ques. Why is it the "preparation"?
J.T. Because if it were the preaching, no one but the evangelist could wear them, but every Christian ought to be prepared. The house of God ought to be evangelical; if you do not preach you go to the meeting in support of it. It may be a contrast to the preparation in earthly wars: our preparation is the gospel of peace.
S.H. Is it not like the rams¬ horns, the testimony?
J.T. You have beautiful feet. I suppose the rams¬ horns refer to the beauty of Christ. I suppose the horns would refer to the countenance, but who had beautiful feet? You often find a beautiful face, but poor feet.
P.R.M. Do you think that in @Acts 10 you see how Peter's feet were prepared?
W.J. It is an evangelical spirit and ways.
F.H.B. If we were in the light of the gospel, it would maintain us in peace in every way.
J.T. I think that is a very excellent suggestion according to the prayer of @1 Timothy 2. The prayer has that in view; you do not want war on earth, but we do want this spiritual war maintained at its full height; you do not want war with men, you want peace with them, but not with Satan. It is remarkable that it is the God of *peace* that shall bruise Satan under our feet shortly.
P.R.M. "The fiery darts", what are they?
J.T. I think the shield of faith is a very fine piece of the armour, because after all we are all more or less failing; even Paul must have thought how
{140}
he had come into prison; but how the shield of faith would come in there! So if failure has occurred, and Satan has had the advantage, faith covers you; you rest in this that God has not changed toward you.
T.H.R. So in @Psalm 3:3 David says, "Thou, O Lord, art a shield for me".
W.J. If we bow under His hand in failure, we can shelter in His love.
Rem. "I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not" (@Luke 22:32).
J.T. He does not think one whit less of me after the failure than He did before. I suppose the helmet of salvation enables you to lift up your head; you are not discouraged.
F.H.B. I think Paul in @Philippians 1 had on the helmet of salvation; whatever happened he was sure of victory.
W.J. All this armour is the effect of the knowledge of God?
J.T. And how beautiful the last exhortation to prayer, "Praying at all seasons, with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit, and watching unto this very thing with all perseverance and supplication for all saints; and for me in order that utterance may be given to me in the opening of my mouth to make known with boldness the mystery of the glad tidings, for which I am an ambassador bound with a chain, that I may be bold in it as I ought to speak".
E.B. That never fails.
J.T. No, it is as great a thing now as ever; things are made to depend, I am sure, on the prayers of God's people.
W.J. So we have "apprehended with all the saints", and "supplication for all saints".
J.T. Each individual has to have the armour, I should say.
{141}
REMEMBRACE OF THE LORD JESUS
@1 Corinthians 11:23 - 26; @Genesis 40:14,23; @Genesis 41:9; @Exodus 32:1
It is in my mind to inquire as to how we regard the Lord Jesus Christ in the way of remembrance, whether our remembrance of Him is an historical one, or whether we hold Him in affectionate remembrance. I have read the passage from 1 Corinthians because it suggests the latter. The Lord's supper is to enable us to keep the Lord so before us, that we hold Him in affectionate remembrance. The designation used by the apostle Paul shows that it was so in his case. He says, "I have received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto you, that the *Lord Jesus* the same night in which He was betrayed took bread". The *Lord Jesus* is the designation which denotes that Christ was held in affectionate regard and remembrance by Paul. We all know that in his different epistles he speaks much of Christ. If he is presenting a certain line of truth he uses the designations which cover that. If he speaks of the Lord as the One through whom things have been effected for God, he usually refers to Him as the "Lord Jesus Christ". Indeed it becomes an inquiry to one whether the habitual use of any designation by us does not in some sense indicate our regard for Christ.
Now, as I have said, the apostle in setting out some line of truth usually employs a designation which covers that line of truth. For instance he says, "there be gods many, and lords many"; and there are, dear friends, gods many, and lords many; "but to us there is but one God, the Father". That is not necessarily *our* Father, it is *the* Father; and he goes on to say: "of whom are all things, and we for him". The Father is the Source of everything. And then he adds to that "and one Lord Jesus Christ" (@1 Corinthians 8:5,6),
{142}
that is to say, "*to us* there is ... one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him". That is, he regards the one Lord as Jesus Christ who has effected things; and oh, beloved friends, what *has* He effected? Well, He has brought us in; "and we (he says) by him". He has brought the saints in; the great result of His work in becoming Man is that He has us all. I do not know whether you regard yourself in that light, but *I* do; one regards oneself as by the Lord Jesus, brought in, as it were, as a trophy, "we by him". But all things are by Him. Think of the vastness of the scheme, every divine conception brought in by Him; all that order of things of which the tabernacle is a figure, brought in by Him. But how blessed in the meanwhile that our place is *now* by Him. There it is "one Lord Jesus Christ"; and then if the apostle speaks about things that have been effected he refers to them as "in Christ Jesus"; they are in the anointed Man, I do not suppose any one of us would wish them elsewhere. God has been pleased to commit Himself to Christ; that is the idea of the anointed; God has been pleased to commit Himself to the Lord Jesus, and He has placed everything there; we do not wish them elsewhere.
If it is one's own position one is entitled to reckon oneself "dead indeed unto sin". The Lord resisted unto blood, striving against sin; we are entitled to reckon ourselves dead to it, but more than that we are to reckon ourselves "alive unto God", in whom? "In Christ Jesus" (@Romans 6:11). One is entitled to reckon oneself as in the Man to whom God has committed Himself. And if God has given to us, in His great act of favour, that which we so often dwell upon, and yet so little understand, eternal life, if it be that, *where is it*? Well, beloved friends, according to Paul, it is just there, it is "in Christ Jesus our Lord"; and the more we treasure it the more we
{143}
are satisfied that it is there. If it be a question of what God is going to introduce for His own satisfaction as Father, He has revealed His Son in the apostle. He "was pleased" (Paul says) "to reveal his Son in me, that I may announce him (the Son) as glad tidings among the nations" (@Galatians 1:16). So that in any line or thought of truth that the apostle has in mind, he uses the designation to cover it, and there are no discrepancies. But when it comes to what the Lord Jesus Christ was to Paul's own heart he invariably refers to Him as "the Lord Jesus".
Now I would inquire as to how *you* regard the Lord, and as I said, it just resolves itself into this, whether your remembrance of the Lord is simply historical, or whether it is an affectionate remembrance of Him. If it be the former I think I can point out to you that somebody else will ultimately take His place in your heart. In Christendom it is simply an historical remembrance, and never goes beyond that. What would be the result of what we learn in Christendom? They only honour the Lord with the lips, but what about the heart? The word says, "Son, give me thine heart" (@Proverbs 23:26). Their hearts are far away, Jehovah had to say. Well now, it is an historical remembrance of Him that is around us, and that is not the Lord's supper. If the apostle Paul were called to pronounce upon that which purports to be the Supper, what would he say? What *did* he say? "This is not the Lord's supper", whatever else it might be. And then he goes on to call attention to the Lord's supper, and says, that he received it of the Lord, and what he received was, "that the Lord Jesus, the same night in which he was betrayed, took bread". The *Lord Jesus*! Is that how you refer to Christ in your heart?
You will find a similar expression in Paul's charge to the elders of Ephesus. Having said much to them, and called attention to what he had been amongst
{144}
them, he says, you "remember the words of the Lord Jesus". *The words*; we have to remember Him affectionately, to remember *Him*, and then *His words*. Now what were these words that they were to remember? "It is more blessed to give than to receive" (@Acts 20:35); simple words to be remembered. Mark, *how* they are to be remembered, how they are to be treasured in the affections. You may give something as a trader; there is a good deal of that; you expect value back for what you give. Now to remember the words of the Lord Jesus would save you from that. God is comparatively little interested in your material gifts. It is not said, that He loves them, but that "God loveth a cheerful *giver*" (@2 Corinthians 9:7). He loves the giver. How do you become a cheerful giver? Well, I do not know a better way for that than to remember the words of the Lord Jesus. What are they? "It is more blessed to give than to receive". He shows the way; He shows the way in everything, beloved brethren.
Well now, I want to go back for a moment to Joseph, I want to show you from Joseph as a figure of Christ, how one had greatly benefited by him. I desire to be simple and elementary. It is a question of getting at the heart, for if the heart is not touched there is nothing done; we have to bear that in mind. Wisdom always gets at your heart. The chief butler had been greatly benefited by Joseph, and Joseph lays upon him the obligation, "Bear a remembrance with thee of me when it goes well with thee". That is the true reading. I need not say that for *us* that is the supper. That request was laid upon Pharaoh's cup-bearer by Joseph, and we are told that he forgat Joseph, but that does not signify that he forgot him historically; we know he referred to him afterwards and said "I do remember my faults this day". How often is it so with the convert, with the Christian? You may refer to what
{145}
has occurred; you can give the date of your conversion. Pharaoh's cup-bearer remembered his sins; it is remarkable how people recall their sins, but that is a poor way to remember Joseph. It is quite right to have a remembrance of your faults, but it reminds one of 'God be merciful unto us, miserable sinners'. That is not the remembrance of *Joseph*; though he did call to mind that such an event had occurred. But what about that remembrance he was to bear with him?
Young Christian, what about that remembrance you are to bear with you? Do you bear it? Joseph says, "Bear a remembrance with thee of *me*". He never made any note of it, he did not even put it in his diary apparently. Have you that remembrance with you? He adds, "when it goes well with thee". It *is* well with us, if we are Christians; how wonderfully well! If we do not know it, we *ought* to know how wonderfully well it is with us if we have become so through the *true* Joseph, through Him into whose soul the iron went. He went down into the depths, the iron went into His soul, it was all real to Him. He bore with Him a remembrance of us there, and oh, *what* a remembrance! Our sins were all there, He remembered them; that was the remembrance that we placed on Him. He could say, "My sins are more than the hairs of mine head". What a remembrance of us He had in the depths! He bore it with Him. Look at Him there on the last night. Remember the apostle says, it was *that* night; it is not simply that it occurred some night, it was that night, the night in which the Lord Jesus was betrayed. We may not all be conscious of what betrayal is, perhaps we have not endured it, but there is nothing keener in the way of suffering. He says, "the hand of him that betrayeth me is with me on the table" (@Luke 22:21). What a remembrance He had with Him of the natural heart of man and what it is capable of! It
{146}
is capable of betraying the Lord Jesus; "the hand of him that betrayeth me is with me on the table". What a remembrance the Lord had of that!
I could speak of other things that were there besides the betrayal. But, oh beloved, He thought of us there! The Lord's supper is especially intended to show the place that the saints have in the heart of Christ. How much He loves us! And that remembrance of Him is given to *you* and to *me* to bear with us. "Bear a remembrance with thee of me". It was in that night He said, "This is my body, which is for you". Do you ever think of that? "Lo, I come to do thy will, O God" (@Hebrews 10:9). That is what His body was for God. Think of what it is for you and me. "This is my body, which is for *you*". And as He journeyed from the supper table to the cross, He had them in His heart; not indeed their sins as yet, but He had *them* in His heart. They did not know it, they little realised the place they had, but He says, the day is coming when you will know it; the Spirit's day. "At that day ye shall know that I am in my Father, and ye in me, and I in you" (@John 14:20). They were in His heart; from the supper table to the cross they were in His heart; and as He hung there during those three hours of which we have often spoken, beloved, what a remembrance He had of us there! Would that these thoughts might sink into our hearts! They are very serious thoughts. He had a remembrance of us with Him. It was a most terrible time. At the table He was reminded of our traitor hearts "the hand of him that betrayeth me". That hand that took the money, the thirty pieces of silver, was there; and on the cross our sins were laid on Him in all their terribleness, as judged by his holy soul in the light of God. "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? ... But thou art holy, O thou that inhabitest the praises of Israel" (@Psalm 22:1,3). There in the depths He had a remembrance of us.
{147}
Well now, we are told that the cup-bearer forgat Joseph; but the time arrived when it seemed that it might give him an increased favour with his master, and *then* he remembered Joseph! Now how do you remember the Lord Jesus? Do you remember Him selfishly? Do you speak of Him only before the saints? Well, there is not much reproach in speaking of Him among the saints; the Lord Jesus is held by them in affectionate regard, they love to hear about Him. How do you speak of Him outside? What kind of designation do you use? Does it denote One whom you love, or is it just that of a benefactor, a public benefactor? The apostle spoke of Him as "my Lord". Mary Magdalene said, He is mine; "they have taken away *my* Lord" (@John 20:13). Did you ever say that publicly? That is what I regard as affectionate remembrance. It is a designation that denotes One that has a place in your heart.
The cup-bearer, as I was noting a moment ago, called to mind his faults; that was not calling *Joseph* to mind. I would emphasise that, to call to mind your faults is not calling Joseph to mind. It is quite right to judge sin, but calling Joseph to mind would be the remembrance that Joseph told him to keep with him, and that he *did not* keep; he made not even a note of it, so that he forgot Joseph. He did not forget the event, it was an historical event that he could never have forgotten. Do you think for one moment he forgot he was in prison, and this captive Hebrew revealed to him his dream? But he forgot Joseph in the sense in which Joseph intended him to remember him, he had no remembrance of Joseph.
Now that too was the case with the Israelites. The same principle appears in @Exodus 32. It was when Moses had left them. You always find it is when God leaves you to yourself it brings out just where you are. The Israelites were left to themselves for a little while, less than six weeks; it was not very
{148}
long. See what kind of memories they had! They had seen Moses go up into the mount, but they could not tell where he was. Now let me say to you that if your remembrance of the Lord Jesus is such as theirs was of Moses, simply that he had led them out of the land of Egypt, you will very soon lose all sense of where He is; you can give no account of Him. They say, "As for this Moses ... we wot not what has become of him". "This Moses", they say; it was the very opposite of affectionate regard and esteem. Yet they remembered the historical event, he had led them out of the land of Egypt. He had been their leader, they admitted it, but what account did they give of him? "We wot not what had become of him". You remember the day of your conversion, but what about every day since that? The second day of your conversion ought to be a brighter day than the first; and it would be if you had the Lord Jesus in affectionate remembrance, for things increase. The affectionate remembrance in which you hold Him as having converted you would be brighter, and so on; as the days are multiplied your remembrance increases, and your joy increases.
They said, "We wot not what has become of him". During those forty or thirty-nine days they had not taken account of the provision Moses made for them, in leaving Aaron and Hur to look after them. If I had been there with the light I have, I should have looked at Aaron as Moses¬ provision. They had Aaron and Hur. I should have looked at Hur and said, That is Moses¬ provision for me; but what did they say? "As for this Moses we wot not what has become of him". Now it is as sure as anything can be that if there is not affectionate remembrance for a person, somebody else will take his place, that is so in the history of Christendom. Presently some one else is coming in to take the place of the Man who is held in regard only in an historical
{149}
light. The Lord said, "if another shall come in his own name, him ye will receive" (@John 5:43). The way is being prepared for him. The seed was sown long since that has borne the crop which is preparing for his advent. "*This* Moses", what did that mean? There might be another equally good if not better. Is it not so with regard to the Lord, that in the minds of men He simply ranks with other men in the present day? That is the situation. I have seen His name put up with other men, with great leaders of thought in this way; we have not got Him, we may as well have another. Now the Lord's supper saves you from all that. Do not say, you have not got Him, and that you do not know where He is. If that is the language of your heart you will look for another. John the baptist said, "Art thou he that should come, or do we look for another?" (@Matthew 11:3). Christendom is looking for another already. Let us take it to heart. The word has gone forth that Christianity is a failure; they are looking for someone else. The thing is simply a fact in an historical light, the Lord Jesus Christ is not in their hearts. The way is being prepared for another, for they would have another to come.
Well, I do not dwell further on that, but I turn to the Lords supper. The supper is brought to us Gentiles from heaven, by one who valued it. The apostle Paul does not use dry doctrinal language. He says. "I have received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto you. That the Lord Jesus the same night in which he was betrayed, took bread". This is his own language; the structure of the sentence is his own. We must not assume that he quoted from Luke, Luke quoted from him if anything. The Supper is presented to us couched in the language of one whose affectionate regard for Christ is conveyed in it. "The Lord Jesus, the same night in which he was betrayed, took bread". When Paul
{150}
was amongst them he had delivered it to them. I have no doubt that the first breaking of bread at Corinth was by him; he says, "I delivered it to you". One would have loved to have seen Paul break the bread. The Lord Jesus was in his heart; the night on which He was betrayed was in his heart. How all that scene would come in power into the heart of Paul as he broke the bread at Corinth! He says, I delivered it to you.
We must not think this is the first time they heard of the Supper; he calls attention to what he had delivered to them. And how far they had got away from it! so far that he says, that what they were doing was not the Lord's supper. The Lord's supper is what I delivered to you; your supper is sectarian, the rich eating before the poor, that is not the supper of the Lord. One would have loved to have been there when Paul spread the supper table. He would take the loaf and break it and call to mind, using the Lord's exact words. "This do for the calling me to mind". Not an historical event, it is the Person; it is "for a remembrance of *me*". It was as if Paul, like Joseph, had left it with the Corinthians so that they might have it by them, a remembrance of Christ. How far away they had got from it! Sectarian views, carnal jealousies and pride, all that in the holy supper of the Lord Jesus! he says, It is not the supper. He does not say what it may have been, he could have said much. He says, This is the Supper, what I delivered to you. It was delivered tangibly by his own hands in their own sight; they had moved away from it. I believe the Lord would lead us back to the simplicity of the Supper, so that it might be with us, as Joseph desired it should be with the cupbearer, a remembrance of Him. Till when? Till He comes. "In like manner also the cup". That word "manner" is very suggestive; "in like manner also the cup, after having supped, saying, This cup
{151}
is the new covenant in my blood; this do, as often as ye shall drink it, in remembrance of me".
Now I just want to refer for a moment to the end of the Scriptures. In @Revelation 22:20 the apostle John says, "Even so, come, Lord Jesus". There is the same affection that he began with, but it had become intensified, if anything. The Lord at the end of the book announces Himself to the assemblies. He says, "I Jesus"; not appearing now as the long-robed Personage of the first chapter of the book. It is "I Jesus, have sent mine angel to testify unto you these things in the churches;" to you, not to the angels of the assemblies now. He speaks directly to us now, and what is the regard in which the assembly holds Him? It is triumph to dwell on this, it is the triumph of His care and attention all the way through the dark night. He is now the Morning Star; things are brightening into day. He says, "I am the root and offspring of David, and the bright and morning star". What does the assembly think of Him? What do *you* think of Him? "The Spirit and the bride say, Come". (verses 16,17). That is the Man they have come to admire. Antichrist is not admired, antichrist is the opposite of that Man, and he is not admired in the assembly, he is admired elsewhere. The remembrance the Lord Jesus left has been effective. He has not been forgotten, thank God; the assembly has come back to the remembrance of Him, as if to say. You are the Man. It is the Person she wants.
Now just to make the point clear, you will observe in regard to Enoch, that, though he was translated, he did not speak in his prophecy about translation. Enoch was a prophet. We are told in @Genesis 5:24, that he walked with God and that "God took him", and we are told in @Hebrews 11, that he was translated, but he says nothing about it. What Enoch said was, "Behold, the Lord cometh" (@Jude 14). Faith looks on to the
{152}
scene of testimony here that must be occupied. If Enoch goes, the Lord comes. Does He come with Enoch? No, with ten thousands of His saints, with the holy myriads. What joy and strength that would be to the heart of Enoch amid all the terrible corruption that surrounded him! Think of the Lord coming with holy myriads!
The assembly does not speak of her translation, the Lord is coming; that is her witness. Is antichrist to hold sway? Is he to prevail? No, he is not to prevail. The Lord is coming in with holy myriads, they are to occupy the ground. He is to take vengeance on those that know not God, and obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. So the assembly is not telling us about her translation, she is occupied with the coming in of the One she loves, the One of whom she has had the remembrance in her heart all the time. Then John, too, to add to the position after all He has said and done, says, "Even so, come, Lord Jesus". It represents the affectionate regard in which the Lord is held on earth through grace.
May the Lord enable us to give Him that place. I believe He is seeking it; as I was saying elsewhere, it is before our translation that He would bring about a state in us that is pleasing to God. The Supper brings it about. "Before his translation he had this testimony, that he pleased God". *Before it*. So that there is the affectionate regard in which John holds the Lord. He does not say, Lord, take us; no, "Even so, come, Lord Jesus". "Amen come, Lord Jesus".
Now just another word: David says, "Let all the people say, Amen" (@Psalm 106:48). Well, that is what the Holy Spirit would bring about. If there is anything right and true, and surely the truth of the coming of the Lord is, it is what is needed all around us, "Let all the people say, Amen". Let us not be divided about that, "Let *all* the people say, Amen". So John says, "Amen"; he wishes the Lord Jesus to come.
{153}
Pages 153 - 250 -- "Readings on the Epistle to the Ephesians". New York, May, 1916 (Volume 32).
READINGS ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS (1)
@Ephesians 1
J.T. Perhaps it may be to profit if we remark first on the exercise that has led up to this epistle. What is to be observed at the present time is the great demand made upon the saints in different parts of the world by the ruling powers, and it becomes a matter of great importance as to what principles are to govern us in these circumstances. I believe a distinction has to be made between the believer's position as recovered through the gospel and his position as viewed in God's counsels. In the former he finds himself here in the sphere of God's government, in which he has to recognise the ruling powers as ordained of God. In the latter the ruling powers are all seen as subject to Christ. In Colossians and Ephesians the powers are seen in subjection to Christ, whereas in Romans they are seen as ordained of God, as God's ministers; so that on the one hand the believer is the scene of God's government, though in his soul recovered for God; but on the other hand he is taken out of the sphere of God's government, and if he comes back into it, it is to influence it. In Ephesians he comes back into it as superior, and great enough to influence it in measure for God. Of course the believer is *always* to be subject, as taught in @Romans 13; I am speaking only of the way the truth is presented in the respective epistles.
R.S.S. How does that bear on Christians as we are in the world?
J.T. In the first instance the believer is viewed as recovered for God. Outwardly his condition and circumstances are unchanged.
{154}
R.S.S. Is that Romans?
J.T. Yes; in Romans he takes account of rulers as God's ministers, appointed for a certain purpose; whereas in Ephesians he comes out to influence what is here. He is connected with another order of things and he looks at everything as subject to Christ. He has put on the new man.
A.R.S. In what way does he influence this world?
J.T. He is a heavenly man in it, and so in that way he takes precedence of everything in it, and he moves in it as a stranger and sojourner, but, like Abraham, he is capable of influencing it for God. He has a priestly place, and so he supplicates, prays, and makes intercession for all men: for kings and all that are in dignity (@1 Timothy 2:1). That is to mark the house of God, but there is nothing said about being subject to the authorities here.
J.S. The believer has no place in the world, hence has no vote.
A.N.W. These kings are not exactly the powers that one wrestles against, as referred to in the end of this epistle?
J.T. No, but whatever powers there are, they are, according to Colossians and Ephesians, subject to Christ. @Ephesians 6 speaks of "the spiritual lords of this darkness", but all principalities and powers are subjected to Christ. As it is said here, God set Him "above every principality, and authority, and power and dominion, and every name named, not only in this age, but also in that to come; and has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be head over all things to the assembly". So that in Colossians and Ephesians the believer looks at things from a different standpoint.
T.R. He looks at things from the top where the power is that can never give way.
J.T. Yes, whereas in Romans, as recovered the
{155}
believer takes his place in relation to the government of God as it is here. The will of God in Romans refers to the believer's path here; whereas the will of God in Ephesians refers to His counsels. You have here "the good pleasure of his will", "the mystery of his will", and "the counsel of his own will". The mystery of His will has no reference to the believer s path through the wilderness, whereas the will of God in Romans has.
R.S.S. "That ye may prove what is that good and acceptable, and perfect will of God" (@Romans 12:2).
R.J.C. Has he an influence as a recovered man?
J.T. Undoubtedly he has; as walking after the Spirit he fulfils the righteous requirement of the law. He shows what righteousness is. In Romans it is a question of what God is. God is known in righteousness, love and power, and the believer is in accord with all this.
F.L. The righteous requirement of the law fulfilled in them that walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit is all connected with the path here.
J.T. In Romans man is seen as recovered for God in righteousness, but for the "new man" and the heavenly man we must go to Colossians and Ephesians. As seen in these epistles the believer is a stranger here. He sees everything under Christ, so that he is in the *faith-system*. @1 Timothy 1:4 speaks of "God's dispensation, which is in faith". That refers to the Ephesians standpoint.
T.R. As regards government, Romans is more the *sight-system*. In connection with what we have been saying, it is important to understand the distinctions that we have been making between Romans and Ephesians. The understanding of what is in Romans would help us as to this.
F.L. I suppose Philippians is the working out in an individual of what is presented in Colossians and Ephesians, as true from the assembly viewpoint;
{156}
so that, as subject to Christ, he does things according to the spirit and mind of Christ all through. "Children of God", "holding forth the word of life", "shining as lights in the world", citizenship in heaven, all applies to the individual formed according to Colossians and Ephesians.
A.F.M. @Romans 12 speaks of the body being presented. Would you say a word about that?
J.T. That raises a very interesting question. The body is the vehicle in which God's will is carried out now in the recovered man. @Romans 6 really prepares for chapter 12 in that sense, only that you have the additional thought in chapter 12 of a "living sacrifice". Now the doctrine of chapter 6 is well exemplified, I believe, in @Genesis 47. There Joseph is said to have secured not only the property of the Egyptians, but the persons themselves for Pharaoh. Now I apprehend that @Romans 12 answers to that. The believer is entirely in accord with the rights of God. The doctrine is developed in chapter 6, the body is for God, "an instrument of righteousness unto God". In chapter 12 the believer is in accord with that, so that he presents it to God as a living sacrifice. Hence it is in that sense different from his property. If the authorities lay claim to one's property, which they do in taxes, the taxes they receive are gone without recall, but if they lay claim to a man's body, there may be similarity to a point, but it is quite obvious that they cannot do what they please with the believer, for the reason that the believer's body is a living sacrifice yielded up to God, and it cannot be recalled.
W.B-t. @Psalm 105:17 - 22 would confirm this: "He sent a man before them, even Joseph, who was sold for a servant: whose feet they hurt with fetters: he was laid in iron: until the time that his word came: the word of the Lord tried him. The king sent and loosed him; even the ruler of the people, and
{157}
let him go free. He made him lord of his house, and ruler of all his substance: to bind his princes at his pleasure and teach his senators wisdom".
J.T. Yes, he is let go *free*. God had rights over Joseph, and effected his liberation. The believer falls into the line of the government of God on earth, beyond that he cannot go, because he is God's, and God's will, according to Ephesians, leads beyond the sphere of His government here. The believer has to hold himself in reserve for that.
P.H.P. Is it possible for the government of the state to overstep the boundaries in that way?
J.T. It is quite clear that it may.
F.L. One of the ruling powers in Paul's day was Nero. Well, the teaching of Romans is that you should pay your taxes, fulfil all like obligations. What Nero does with your property you cannot control, but if he said to a believer, 'Go and persecute the Christians; put them to death', a point would be reached where the government of God and the government of the ruling power part company. They go so far but part company, and then the believer would have to take the stand that he would rather die himself.
J.T. He must obey God rather than man.
Ques. What is the distinction?
J.T. They are not inconsistent if we see the termination of the line up to which the government of God and the government of man are parallel. The ruling power, the authorities, may retain one's property. Indeed as to money we know that the stamp on it according to the Lord's own remark admits that it belongs to the ruling power: "Render therefore unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's" (@Matthew 22:21). The fact that his stamp was on it signified his claim to it, but then Caesar's stamp is not on the believer's body. It is a poor thing for a believer to have a badge, or a button, or anything that denotes an ownership in
{158}
this world, but we cannot hinder it being on the dollar bill.
Rem. On the contrary, the believer is sealed with the Spirit of God.
J.T. Therefore, it is *God's* image and superscription. The "seal" is that; (compare @2 Timothy 2:19, and @Revelation 14:1).
W.B-t. Why is this epistle addressed "to the faithful in Christ Jesus"? I note that that expression is used here and in only one other instance, in Colossians.
J.T. I should say it refers to what they were; they *were* faithful. The facts presented in the narrative in the Acts would show that these Christians received wonderful light, and that they were governed by it. They had evidently been faithful to the light they had received so far. I think it is the ground on which further light is vouchsafed to us. It was a very great honour that they should have a letter such as this, which really may be viewed as the Christian charter. I say this because it is unique, as unfolding to us the place of the assembly in the counsels of God.
W.B-w. As being faithful you are given more light.
J.T. Yes, as being faithful. He that is faithful in little is faithful in much. Certainly this is much.
B.T.F. Would this bring in others besides the Ephesians?
J.T. It is addressed, "To the saints and faithful in Christ Jesus who are at Ephesus". It has been alleged it was more of a circular, referring to other assemblies, but the accepted text implying that it is a local epistle is undoubtedly correct.
A.F.M. In verse 15 he speaks of their faith.
J.T. Yes, this comes in after the incidents recorded in the Acts, including his charge to the elders. You see, having been left to themselves they had proved
{159}
faithful. It is as having received light and being left to ourselves that we prove just how faithful we are. In Ephesians you do not have baptism or the Lord's supper. Baptism is alluded to but not taught, it simply says, "There is ... one baptism" (chapter 4:5). Baptism and the Lord's supper run together in connection with what is seen here in the wilderness, whereas Ephesians is the faith system. You are connected with another system altogether, of which Christ is Head, and you look at every authority and power as subject to Christ. It is only a matter of time until all that shall be manifested, so that it is "the mystery of his will". That is the system you are in. "That in the dispensation of the fulness of times he might gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven and which are on earth; even in him".
T.A. How is the forgiveness of sins brought in in Ephesians?
J.T. It is "in whom we have". It is not a question of the administration of it, but of what *we have*.
F.L. To the company breathed into in @John 20 the Lord said: "I ascend unto my Father, and your Father". Then He says to them, "As my Father hath sent me, even so send I you". That perhaps gives us the view-point of Ephesians, that it is a sent company from the ascended One.
J.T. It does exactly. @John 20 corresponds with Ephesians. Mary leaves the garden with a message, the garden is figuratively what was on earth; now Mary goes to the Lord's brethren with a message. The message gave them their full standing, their place in heaven. The message came as a matter of light, and the breath of Christ gave them the spirit of heaven. It is not simply the spirit of the Man in @John 20, it is the spirit of the Man that ascended, the heavenly Man, that is breathed into them, and as breathing into them He says: "As my Father hath
{160}
sent me, even so send I you". They go out into the world not only as recovered men, but as dignified by their relation to the heavenly Man and possessed of His Spirit.
J.S. So if they are in the world it is in testimony?
J.T. In testimony from heaven.
R.S.S. That is very good. The message, "Go to my brethren", gave them their position, and then the breathing gave them the spirit of the ascended Man.
J.T. Yes, the spirit of the ascended Man is the point. It is a new spirit here altogether, come in here from heaven.
R.S.S. Well now, before we leave it, why is it that in Ephesians, when the standpoint is so high, it says, "and you hath he quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins", (@Ephesians 2:1); and "in whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins".
J.T. It is "in whom". It is more to show what we have in the Person, for we are viewed still as literally on earth. I mean the fact that we have had sins is mentioned, and all that, but it is not a question of the administration of forgiveness; that is Romans. Here we read: "taken into favour in the Beloved, in whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of offences, according to the riches of his grace; which he has caused to abound towards us in all wisdom and intelligence, having made known to us the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure which he purposed in himself for the administration of the fulness of times; to head up all things in the Christ". It is to present the subject in its clearness, to present the whole situation.
R.S.S. And in its completeness. Then as to, "And you hath he quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins", in Ephesians it is not exactly a recovered man, but a man taken out of death. I
{161}
mean the question in Romans is how a guilty man can be justified, but in Ephesians how a dead man can live.
J.T. In Ephesians you are taken out of death and placed in heaven. There is no wilderness here. You see there is no baptism and no Lord's supper. God takes us out of death, and places us in heaven. It is all private, we may say. The public thing is that you come out of heaven.
F.L. In bringing in the light of predestination and counsel, there is a passing reference to the fact that the whole question of guilt in man has been taken up and dealt with. It has not been ignored. It is recognised as dealt with, but it is incidental; it is not the theme. There is no need to dwell on it other than to clear the record that God has dealt with that side.
R.S.S. That is helpful, and in the two scriptures that have been brought forward one speaks of what was accomplished: redemption, the forgiveness of sins; and the other speaks of our state as dead.
J.T. Referring to this history of David in 1 and 2 Samuel, *recovery* took place at Ziklag. No children were born to David there, yet everything was recovered there. The idea of multiplication is hardly in Romans; what is lost is recovered, but there is no increase. David recovered all, but the passage in @1 Samuel 30 does not speak of increase. Now when you come to Colossians and Ephesians you are in the line of increase, so that in David's history we are told that he remained two days at Ziklag after all was recovered, and then on the third day he heard of the overthrow of Saul; that is to say, God has cleared the way for him. Well then, he inquires of the Lord as to what he is to do, and he is told to go to Hebron. That is another point. "Now it came to pass after the death of Saul, when David was returned from the slaughter of the Amalekites, and
{162}
David had abode two days in Ziklag; it came even to pass on the third day, that, behold, a man came out of the camp from Saul with his clothes rent, and earth upon his head", (@2 Samuel 1:1,2). Well, this man brought tidings of Saul's overthrow. Then you find the beautiful spirit of David that he was not elated by the overthrow of Saul; he was the rather humbled and regretful, showing the spirit of the recovered man. Then it says, "And it came to pass after this, that David inquired of the Lord, saying, shall I go up into any of the cities of Judah? And the Lord said unto him, Go up. And David said, Whither shall I go up? And he said, Unto Hebron", (@2 Samuel 2:1). And then it says: "So David went up thither, and his two wives also, Ahinoam the Jezreelitess, and Abigail, Nabal's wife the Carmelite. And his men that were with him did David bring up, every man with his household: and they dwelt in the cities of Hebron. And the men of Judah came, and there they anointed David king over the house of Judah", (@2 Samuel 2:2,3). So that he has changed his position now. He is in Hebron, which we know signifies a great deal in Scripture. It was built seven years before Zoan in Egypt. It antedated the world-city. So he is on the line of God's original purpose now, and he and his household and the households of his men are spoken of, which is in keeping with Colossians. They are on the *up* line.
F.L. But it is not Ephesians. The full position, Jerusalem, is seven years later.
J.T. Quite so: he remains seven years at Hebron, and there he gets children, showing figuratively that in Colossians there is increase.
F.L. The increase by the knowledge of God, (@Colossians 1:10).
P.H.P. But Colossians is not universality, is it?
J.T. No, it is not universality. It is on the line
{163}
to it, but there the assembly is not seen in heavenly places. So David has to go up to Jerusalem, which is the centre of the system. It is typically the centre of light for the whole universe, and so corresponds with Ephesians; there you have further increase of family, of children. Solomon especially was born there.
Rem. David had been there before with the head of Goliath.
J.T. That was in testimony.
F.L. That was typical of Christ going up to heaven, "Having ascended up on high, he has led captivity captive" (@Ephesians 4:8).
J.T. So that what it comes to, I think, is this, that what is to increase is the heavenly man. The man that is recovered, as in Romans, is a testimony to God's power, but the heavenly Man is to increase and fill all things.
B.T.F. Would you say a word in explanation of the counsels of God? We often refer to it, and I thought you might give us some help in understanding the meaning of the counsels of God.
J.T. That is seen in Hebron; that is, it was built before Zoan in Egypt. Therefore it was not built on the pattern of world-cities. It had reference to God, to what God does, and the fact that it had been given to Caleb makes it of all the more interest; it was Caleb's city, and withal it was one of the cities of refuge. I think one point in connection with the purpose of God is that the thoughts connected with it precede everything in this world. They are wholly of Himself.
J.S. And faith takes hold of that, just as Caleb did?
J.T. Yes, and faith does not want anything else but that.
A.F.M. You mean by that, that what is in the mind of God to bring to pass could not be improved
{164}
upon. He did not take dignity from this world. For instance, "The princes of Zoan are fools" (@Isaiah 19:11). The world system is coming down.
J.T. But the princes of Hebron are not fools.
A.N.W. How are the measurements of height, and length, and breadth understood?
J.T. They are understood at Jerusalem; that is, Ephesians gives us the full divine height. From there our bearings are taken.
A.A.T. Do you wish to convey the idea that any man who had been in Jerusalem under David would be a different man if he went back to Zoan to what he had been when there before?
J.T. He would go back an entirely different man. It is easy to see that. He would go back as a man from Jerusalem.
P.H.P. And have the characteristics of Jerusalem about him.
Rem. Our earthly position is governed by our heavenly position.
J.T. That is right, but Hebron only suggests the *idea* of the counsels of God. But in Ephesians it is, "Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenlies in Christ; according as he has chosen us in him before the world's foundation". That goes back very far; it is *before* the world's foundation.
P.H.P. Before Hebron?
J.T. Yes, the divine choice as to us has no reference even to the foundation of the earth. Wisdom was there at the foundation, but God's choice as to us was before that.
F.L. I think the distinction between the foundation of the world and what was before it is helpful to see. @Matthew 24:34, and @Revelation 13:8 speak of what is from the foundation of the world; but God's counsels as to the assembly are before the
{165}
foundation of the world. Wisdom also was before the foundation of the earth (@Proverbs 8:22 - 26).
B.T.F. What light does the Old Testament give on the counsels of God apart from @Proverbs 8?
J.T. @Proverbs 8 tells of wisdom being before the material creation, but there is nothing as to the assembly that was hidden. Of course there are certain allusions to the assembly *in type*; these we understand now by the Spirit. The foundations of the earth refer, I think, to the ways of God. The assembly comes into the sphere of God's ways, but its own place and calling are outside of it.
J.S. Would the world's foundation have reference to the responsible world?
J.T. That is what I was thinking. It is the theatre upon which the ways of God have been developed.
F.L. The idea of Christ and the assembly was in the divine mind, but it had to be brought to pass. The earth becomes a sphere in which all is effected, but the counsel of God precedes it, and goes on to the new heavens and the new earth.
J.T. Just as the sheet in @Acts 10 came down and went up, came down and went up, and came down and went up. That is complete testimony, but then it went up and stayed. I think that suggests Ephesians.
T.R. And all that was in the sheet went up.
P.H.P. Does it suggest to you that we are thereby rendered greater than anything that could be exhibited in the world?
J.T. Yes, one has the sense of the magnitude of Ephesians. It is our charter, if we could only lay hold of it.
A.A.T. Is Ephesians the position seen in @Luke 15 in connection with the house?
{166}
J.T. It corresponds, only Luke is in the presence of the elder brother, it is more before men. Ephesians is heavenly places.
R.S.S. The scripture referred to in @Hebrews 1:10 - 12 is very helpful. "And, thou, Lord, in the beginning hast laid the foundation of the earth; and the heavens are the works of thy hands; they shall perish; but thou remainest; and they all shall wax old as doth a garment; and as a vesture shalt thou fold them up, and they shall be changed: but thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail". It is very striking in this connection, the difference between the ways of God and the counsels of God.
{167}
READINGS ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS (2)
@Ephesians 2
J.T. According to @Acts 19:1, the apostle traversed the "upper districts" in reaching Ephesus. His epistle to the Ephesians is on an elevation. I think it might be well to point out that this epistle bears the marks of the official, whereas his epistle to the Philippians is more *mutual*. Ephesians is a letter treating of the counsels of God, just as the letter to the Romans treats of the gospel, but it is based on their being faithful in Christ Jesus, and having love to all saints.
F.L. That is a very important point -- love to all saints, as well as faithfulness.
J.T. I think therefore that they were qualified to receive intelligently and sympathetically a letter like this. It was not beyond them. I believe the formation of the Ephesian assembly indicates that it was to occupy a representative place in the assembly. The apostle arriving at Ephesus found certain ones who had been instructed only in the ministry of John the baptist. They gave heed to Paul's teaching, and received the Spirit through the laying on of his hands. Then we are told that the number of men was twelve. Twelve men instructed at the same time by Paul and receiving the Spirit at the same time afforded a basis of unity there that is not found elsewhere.
F.L. On the same lines as the administrative thought in the Old Testament economy, there is the suggestion of administrative completeness in the assembly.
J.T. It is not said twelve *disciples*, or twelve *Christians*, but twelve *men*. The foundation at Philippi was rather connected with women and households,
{168}
but Ephesus begins with "twelve men" receiving at the same time Paul's ministry.
F.L. I think what you say in regard to John's ministry has its bearing, because the element of repentance was introduced through it, and this was important in the foundation. It was a foundation of repentance, and that was fitting for the work of the Spirit. We are often very lacking in that.
J.T. I think that perhaps what local companies lack is *men* such as are seen here. In them you get intelligence and permanence, marked by unity.
C.H.B. The light was received by twelve men, and we may receive it likewise as men.
J.T. These twelve men were promptly separated by the apostle, and they met in the school of Tyrannus, in which Paul *reasoned* daily for a long time, a space of two years or over, and it says, "All that were in Asia heard the word". It was not merely dogmatic statements there, but a *reasoning* of things, so that Christianity as established at Ephesus was enforced through reasoning; the superiority of it was enforced in power. Hence the whole fabric of human literature came to nothing. The books were all burned. That was what marked the foundation of things at Ephesus.
A.R.S. I do not quite get hold of this thought about reasoning in the school of Tyrannus. Is your idea that the truth was put before these men in an intelligent way and they took it up intelligently?
J.T. That is it. The mind and soul are convinced.
A.R.S. The mind wrought on by the Spirit. The natural man does not receive the things of God. They are foolishness to him.
J.T. Then in verse 8 we read: "And entering the synagogue, he spoke boldly during three months, reasoning and persuading the things concerning the kingdom of God". And further, "But when some were hardened and disbelieved, speaking evil of the
{169}
way before the multitude, he left them and separated the disciples, reasoning daily in the school of Tyrannus, and this took place for two years, so that all that inhabited Asia heard the word of the Lord, both Jews and Greeks". But they heard it through reasoning, not simply by preaching, so that the mind was convinced of it.
A.R.S. I want to get clear the difference between this reasoning and the ordinary reasoning of man. Now when Paul was preaching before Festus he reasoned of righteousness, temperance and judgment to come. What did he appeal to in Festus?
J.T. I think he appealed to the intelligence of the man. He appealed also to his conscience. Surely temperance and judgment to come should appeal to his conscience, but the mind also is taken into account.
A.R.S. In Festus¬ case he did not get his convert, but in these twelve men the reasoning evidently did its work.
J.T. The twelve men were secured before the reasoning began. He did not have to reason with them. They were secured first as a basis. They were with him in the school. They would support him no doubt, but the effect of the reasoning daily was that all that inhabited the province, not only the city, but the province, heard the word.
F.L. Where it is a question of what we speak of as "convincing people" the apostle in his answers to contentions always includes that which pierces the conscience. We see it before Festus and Agrippa, and at Athens. The truth of the kingdom and of the assembly was unfolded and established at Ephesus through Paul's ministry.
J.T. The effect was to bring about faithfulness and love. The elders that Paul called over from Ephesus fell on his neck and kissed him. There was a distinct evidence of love, both for him and, as we
{170}
read here, for all the saints; the Ephesian Christians were universal in their affections. In this first chapter of the epistle Paul says "Wherefore, I also, having heard of the faith in the Lord Jesus which is in you and the love which ye have towards all the saints". Their affections embraced all the saints. They were not simply local. We are apt to love the local ones only. Of course it is very happy if we do love the local ones, but the nearer you get to God, and the more you enter into His thoughts, the more your heart is expanded in taking in all the saints. Hence the epistle in that way presents the assembly in its universal bearing.
B.T.F. As far as the spiritual history of the Ephesians at the beginning is concerned, it is described to us in verse 13. "Having heard the word of the truth, the glad tidings of your salvation, in whom also, having believed, ye have been sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise, who is the earnest of our inheritance to the redemption of the acquired possession to the praise of his glory".
J.T. They were sealed. God's stamp was upon them. The apostle had doubtless seen evidences of love while with them, but he is writing here in verse 15 on the basis of what he had heard, the report that followed him as to them.
F.L. This epistle suggests to me @Exodus 40; that is, it is the completed tabernacle, set up in all the perfection of its detail in glory. We do not get the same fulness in @Acts 2.
W.H.F. It is the general character of the assembly here. It is not confined to Ephesus.
J.T. Well, the first chapter opens up to us what was in the heart of God as to us before the foundation of the world. And then it proceeds to speak about the good pleasure of His will, the mystery of His will, and the counsel of His will. So the first chapter is largely stamped in that way by the will of God, the
{171}
good pleasure of it, and the mystery of it, and the counsel of it. Then verse 15 shows Paul's concern that the Ephesian Christians should have the eyes of their understanding opened by the Father of glory, and that they might have the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of God. That was a great point, because what he had in his heart to unfold depended on their being capable of receiving it, and that begins a section that runs on to the end of verse 10 of chapter 2. It runs on in that way uninterruptedly, firstly speaking about what had been wrought in Christ, and secondly, what He had wrought in the assembly so that the assembly was placed in heaven in correspondence with Christ. Then in verse 11 of chapter 2 he comes down to what they were historically. They were aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, strangers to the covenants of promise, but God had wrought to bring them into the house down here. They were fellow citizens of the saints and of the household of God.
Then in chapter 3 he is "the prisoner of Jesus Christ"; and in chapter 4 he is "the prisoner of the Lord". Chapter 3 is to unfold to the saints his ministry; and in chapter 4 as the Lord's prisoner, he enjoins upon the saints what would be fitting to their calling, the chapter is really built up on that. Then chapter 5 is a question of what God is. We are to be according to God's nature.
The exhortations begin in chapter 4 in that way, and chapter 5 is a continuation. They were to be imitators of God. He speaks of the danger that always threatens us, Satan's getting in at the *weak* point; the intimation is that Satan would get in through the *woman*, through the *child*, and through the *servant*. Hence you find the woman is mentioned before the husband, the child before the parent, and the servant before the master. Satan would attack the weak point. As to conflict we are to be guarded at the
{172}
vital points especially. We are to have on the *whole* armour of God.
A.R.S. As a result of the will of God being accepted you get faith and love. You are brought into a circle of faith, which has been the result of light from God. You are brought into a circle where divine affections are.
J.T. In chapter 1 verses 3 to 6 inclusive, you see what is in the heart of God on account of His love. We are before Him in love. That is according to the good pleasure of His will. If you take that in you are prepared for the will of God as regards what is outside. The mystery of His will refers to the dispensation of the fulness of times; it is not a question of what is before the foundation of the world. All things are to be headed up in Christ in heaven and earth. All that is according to the counsel of His will. I think the first six verses would apply expressly to ourselves. Then you are prepared for the mystery of His will, which goes beyond ourselves, because His will must prevail as regards heaven and earth. Our place is secured in the first six verses, but the mystery of His will refers to *all* things.
A.R.S. We are here in a scene where the will of man is paramount. That means hatred and it means lawlessness and the very opposite of what the will of God brings you into, so that when you accept this reasoning you step out of darkness into light.
J.T. You see what it is. It is not simply God's will for your path here, it is His will as regards the heavens and the earth.
F.L. The acceptance of this, and being built up in it, really makes spiritual statesmen of us.
W.H.F. The apostle had the heavenly city in view.
J.T. The assembly shall be the great centre of all administration. "The good pleasure of his will" has reference to the place the saints have as formed
{173}
in Christ before Him. "The mystery of his will" has reference to the dispensation of the fulness of times, taking in the things in the heavens and the things on the earth, to head them all up in Christ. Now being in the secret of this, we take our part in it. Our peculiar place is in the first six verses; "having marked us out beforehand for adoption through Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he has taken us into favour in the Beloved". *That is our place*.
Rem. That is the highest point.
J.T. Yes; taken into favour in the Beloved for God's pleasure.
F.L. I suppose that is the highest point that is reached, and really it includes the eternal state. The highest point in respect of the ages is in the end of chapter 3; that is, glory to God in the assembly.
J.T. That is the full result.
F.L. That is "the age of ages". The first six verses really take in the eternal place with God, but the other climax is at the end of chapter 3, glory to God in the assembly throughout the ages.
Rem. In this time the answer comes to the Lord's prayer: "thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven" (@Matthew 6:10).
J.T. In the mystery of God's will you have a political idea. It is a question of administration. I do not know of anything more important for us now, as showing where our politics are, than what we have here. It is a question of the mystery of God's will. It is not everyone that is initiated into it.
F.L. Here upon earth it is understood only by the initiated, but in the heavenlies all principalities and authorities see the all varying wisdom of God at this present moment in the assembly. It is not a mystery in heaven, but on earth.
J.T. The administration of the fulness of times
{174}
is already seen in the order of the assembly. The thing is there in mystery.
W.B-w. Fulness of times -- what does this refer to?
J.T. The fulness of times is the millennium, I apprehend.
W.B-w. All things are headed up in Christ in the millennium.
J.S. How things are done is seen now in the assembly.
J.T. That is it, and it is in that connection the word "mystery" stands.
Rem. The first six verses give our heavenly portion, whereas the seventh verse refers more to what we are on earth now.
J.T. Redemption is the solid footing which we need while here on earth, but our blessings are in heaven; we are blessed with every spiritual blessing in the heavenlies in Christ. The dispensation of the fulness of times includes *others*; but we have our part in it too.
B.T.F. Why does the apostle distinguish in verses 12 and 13? In verse 12 he says; "we should be to the praise of his glory who have pre-trusted in the Christ", and in verse 13 he says "in whom *ye also* trusted".
J.T. I suppose verse 12 refers to the Jews. The "ye" in verse 13 would be the Gentiles.
F.L. I would suggest a very simple thought, that up to the end of chapter 2 the Jew and the Gentile are seen as being on parallel lines. Then at the end of chapter 2 these two lines merge into one. Their separate and parallel existence is recognised up to the end of chapter 2. Then they merge into one, to become the one new man in Christ, and together we have access by one Spirit to the Father.
W.B. Will you say a little on verse 17? Is the thought that we should now know God?
{175}
J.T. Yes, that we should have the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of God. It is not simply that we are to have light, we are to have the spirit of wisdom and revelation. It is hard to define the spirit of wisdom and revelation, but it plainly marks those who have it. We must get it direct from God. Paul could impart knowledge, but he could not impart this. He *prays* for it on the behalf of the Ephesians.
W.B. In @Romans 12 you are transformed by the renewing of your mind, that you may prove what is that good and acceptable and perfect will of God. That is more in connection with our path on earth?
J.T. Romans is initial, and certain *things* are spoken of as new. You have newness of life, newness of spirit, and newness of mind. The principle of newness is introduced. That is most important, because you have to begin that way, you have to begin anew. That is a point in Romans. When you come to Ephesians it is not simply that you look at things in a new way, you have a good deal more than that. It is a question now of God and His wisdom and His counsels. Well, who is equal to that? One who has the spirit of wisdom and revelation. It is a new *man* in a new *place*.
F.L. This is connected with "the eyes of the heart", which suggests spiritual affection. Mary sitting at the feet of Jesus listening to Him, is very much on the line of Romans. Then she passes through death and resurrection with Jesus. Then in @John 12 the eyes of her heart are enlightened, and she does things in the spirit of wisdom and revelation. But I doubt if she could have told exactly what she was doing and why she was doing it. The Lord could interpret it. She did the right thing, in the right way, at the right time, in the spirit of wisdom and revelation, and it was because the eyes of her heart were enlightened.
{176}
J.T. The principle is seen also in @Luke 24. The two disciples at Emmaus had the presentation of headship in their own house by the Lord. What are they going to do now? They go back to Jerusalem. In other words, you might say they come to Ephesians. No one will understand Ephesians unless he apprehends the Head. It is dependent upon your apprehension of Christ as the Head.
W.B. I am sure that is right. Ephesians is often taken up without much profit because headship is not understood.
J.T. Yes. The two from Emmaus come back to Jerusalem and they find the eleven and those that were with them, and they tell them what had happened, and the point emphasised was that He was made known to them in the breaking of bread. His headship was acknowledged, but they were not in the right spirit yet, so when the Lord came into their midst, "they were terrified and affrighted" (verse 37). They were not equal to it, and He calms them by saying "It is I myself". So they sit down in the presence of the Man that fills the sphere of divine counsels. The soul is set at rest in the presence of that Man, and He talks and eats before them. It was a real Man in whose presence they were, and one who was the centre of all the divine counsels. It was a great thing for them to have their hearts set at rest in the presence of that Man. To understand Ephesians the heart must be at rest in the presence of Christ. "It is I myself", He said; a real Man who is the centre of all the divine thoughts. The passage in Luke goes on to show that He opened their understandings. That is the idea of the spirit of wisdom and revelation. I believe that is the line on which we shall understand Ephesians.
W.L.P. Is the spirit of wisdom distinct from the Spirit of God?
J.T. It is. Of course it is brought about by the
{177}
Spirit of God, but the believer is to have it just as you have an ordinary faculty.
F.L. Yes. It is not the Person of the Spirit. We ought to distinguish that.
J.T. So it comes to a question of spiritual ability, but it is through the affections, as you remarked.
A.F.M. I suppose such a passage as this excludes the mind of man from entering into these things?
J.T. Yes, mere mental ability is entirely outside of it. What is spoken of here is a divine gift. God acts sovereignly in the believer in giving him his faculties.
F.L. The line of the inheritance is interesting. It is *His* inheritance in the saints. It is not what *we* have, but what *He* has.
J.T. I suppose it is what God has in the saints. It is *His* calling, *His* inheritance, *His* power.
P.H.P. These things comprise what is to be known on our part.
F.L. Then the presentation of the raising of Christ here is not the ordinary presentation of resurrection. What He wrought in Christ in raising Him from among the dead is in view of exaltation.
J.T. What you were remarking last night, that resurrection involves a new sphere, is important, but that is not the point in Ephesians. Here we have the fulness of the divine thought, so it goes right on to exaltation. "Set him down at his right hand in the heavenlies, above every principality, and authority, and power, and dominion, and every name named, not only in this age, but also in that to come; and has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be head over all things to the assembly, which is his body, the fulness of him who fills all in all" (@Ephesians 1:20 - 23). It does not open up the new platform of resurrection, as Romans, on which God effects things for man, but is rather to show His *power* in raising
{178}
Christ and placing Him up there. This power the saints are to know.
F.L. "Has raised us up together, and has made us sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus", is the carrying out in His body what was effectuated in Christ.
J.T. Yes. What is so interesting about chapter 2 is that it is on account of God's "great love", and that in carrying out the thoughts of His great love in regard of us it is on the principle of association. While working in us He puts us in association with others, hence there is always an incentive for the activity of the affections. So "God, being rich in mercy, because of his great love wherewith he loved us, we too being dead in offences, has quickened us *with* the Christ ... and has raised us up *together* and has made us sit down *together*". "His great love wherewith he loved us" has placed us in association with Christ and with one another. We are always together.
P.R. Is that Jew and Gentile together?
J.T. Yes, Jew and Gentile, but the thought of association with others is prominent.
F.L. The dignity of all this comes like a weight of glory on one's spirit. In the first chapter it is for the praise of His glory. In this chapter it is with the end in view that in the coming ages the surpassing riches of His grace in His kindness towards us in Christ Jesus might be displayed. We think of things in an incidental and very haphazard way, but we get an indication here that God has *ordained* things. He has before ordained good works that we should walk in them.
J.T. It is very remarkable that the works should be ordained before.
A.R.S. In @Revelation 2:2 it says: "I know thy works". Works were still there, but love was gone.
J.T. That is "thy works". No doubt they were
{179}
good works, but here it is the works that God has ordained before, that we should walk in them.
A.R.S. That is not the good works in saints.
J.T. Here it is from the divine height. I have no doubt it refers to certain features of the Lord's walk and ministry. "He went about doing good" (@Acts 10:38).
F.L. "God was with him". I would like to get away from the spirit of restless activity, and to fall in line with what God has already arranged in connection with my day and the day of every saint. That is the thing I would covet.
J.T. Yes, it brings about a state of soul of waiting on God. "I have set before thee an open door" (@Revelation 3:8). God has opened it and you go in and walk in good works.
Ques. Is that a result of new creation?
J.T. Yes, we are created in Christ Jesus for good works. The word "walk" conveys the idea of deportment.
{180}
READINGS ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS (3)
@Ephesians 3
J.T. It may perhaps help to point out that in the first ten verses of chapter 2 we have detailed the work of God in taking us out of a state of death in trespasses and sins and placing us in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus; and that in the remaining verses we have what has taken place here on earth historically, so that the end is not heaven but the habitation of God here. In regard to the latter, we are seen as once nations in the flesh and uncircumcised, aliens from the commonwealth of Israel and strangers to the covenants of promise, having no hope and without God in the world. That is what we *were*. Now we are fellow citizens of the saints and of the household of God. That is what has taken place here on earth; what we were previously, and what the assembly is in relation to the testimony on earth now. Our immediate calling, therefore, is our place in the house.
R.S.S. Are the first ten verses true of us now?
J.T. We were pointing out this morning that from the beginning of verse 15 of the first chapter to the end of verse 10 of the second we have the whole work of God, both as to Christ and the assembly; the full result of His work, without any reference to the time it has taken to accomplish it, whereas in the second half of the second chapter it is what has come to pass on earth -- Jews and Gentiles brought into unity, and having access to God by the one Spirit, and being made fellow citizens of the saints and of God's household.
F.L. In accord with that, it is the temple and not the tabernacle. "Being built together increases to a holy *temple* in the Lord". That has the earth in view.
{181}
J.T. Yes, so that in the first part of the second chapter the end in view as to position is that we should sit down together in the heavenlies; whereas in the second part the end in view is the house of God down here.
R.S.S. The question is often asked, are we set down in the heavenlies now?
J.T. We are the habitation of God now actually, but we are not in the heavenlies actually but anticipatively. The first half refers to the work of God viewed abstractly. It is viewed as God's work in its completeness, and is therefore anticipative.
R.S.S. Would it be right to say that, while not there actually, we may be there in spirit?
J.T. We may be there in spirit surely, since our place is in heaven. The fact that we have a place there gives us our dignity, qualifying us for the house on earth. I think our every association is bound up with our place there, and it lends dignity and colour to our place in the house here. Therefore, the house is in that way a heavenly institution, composed of persons whose calling and place are in the heavenlies. The first half of the chapter lends dignity and character to the second.
F.L. I think that is supported in the opening of the epistle, where we get sonship, which is connected with the heavenly position and calling; then after the mention of access to the Father and our being of the household, we get, "Be imitators of God as dear children". Our position here as children of God is influenced by the light of sonship.
R.S.S. As to having been raised together and made to sit together, it is said as though it were so now; He *hath* raised us, *hath* made us sit together.
J.T. God speaks of things in that way, as though they were; things that be not as though they are. It is, as I apprehend, the *whole work* of God as to the assembly.
{182}
R.S.S. You make that very clear. It is not a question of time, but you get a view of the whole work of God. It is delineated for us here.
J.T. So, as to the working out of the thing in detail, it includes every item of God's work in the assembly from the coming of the Spirit to the rapture, but it is presented as already accomplished, so as to show us the fulness of God's work on account of His great love wherewith He loved us. If God is to show what He can do, as the full result of His great love wherewith He loved us, you would expect Him to give it all. It is not a question of whether I am in it or whether you are. It is God showing the full effect of His work on account of His great love wherewith He loved us. In carrying it out He does it on the principle of association; that those who are the subjects of His work are set in relation to Christ and to each other. We are quickened together with Christ and then raised up together and made to sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ. You have the idea of association all the way through. That is how He carries it out, and we know in our experience that it is so. The work that He accomplishes in us is on that principle.
Rem. In Ephesians it is God carrying on *His* work. The wilderness, and our side is ignored.
J.T. Yes. He carries out His work in us in relation to others on the principle of association. The wilderness typified the experimental side.
F.L. Unless we can really in our minds touch the assembly in that way, and see it complete, without reference to time, we must always be defective in our apprehension of it. We have to see it in its fulness in that way, and looked at as absolutely complete.
J.T. Yes, and then we come to what is taking place here on earth. We are reminded of *what* we were and *where* we were, the distance at which we were from God, and the apostle details how God has
{183}
brought about reconciliation, that the enmity has been removed, and reconciliation has taken place in one body. He has reconciled both in one body by the cross. All this has taken place here on earth.
A.R.S. Would the effect of our entering into this truth in chapter 1:1 - 10, be that we should act in the light of it as forming the house?
J.T. That is the idea; that in the house of God you act in the dignity of your heavenly position. You see you are in the house not simply as recovered, not simply on the ground of righteousness; you are in it as having a place in heaven, which gives you dignity.
A.R.S. Viewing us as seated in the heavenlies, is that the reason it is said here, "By grace ye are saved", because it is viewing the whole thing complete?
J.T. Yes, it is not only salvation from judgment, but from *place*. You have a new place in heaven, and so you are delivered from earth.
A.R.S. What you say makes it plain to my mind, but is not the whole assembly brought before us, those that are gone, those that are here, and perhaps those to come? It is true of the *whole* assembly of God. So that you can say in one way you are there in spirit already, and you act in the full light of it?
J.T. I think we are entitled to take that ground as before God. That is our place. When together in assembly we are entitled to that place, because God has given it to us. It helps in the chapter to see that the terminus, so to speak, in the first half is heaven, whereas the terminus in the second half is the house of God on earth. It is the second half of the chapter that is alluded to in the beginning of chapter 4, where he exhorts the saints to walk worthy of the calling, because he immediately goes on to say: "Endeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit". That refers to what is here in the house.
{184}
F.L. And so in chapter 5, "Walk in love". It all flows out of that point of view.
A.A.T. Will the house come to an end in time?
J.T. I should scarcely like to say that, because the idea of the house goes on. The tabernacle of God is with men. It never ceases as viewed in that sense, but as we are now, we are the house of God on earth provisionally; that is what the Ephesian saints were; they were built *together*, that word is emphatic. They were built *together* for a habitation of God in the Spirit. They were that on earth, and I think it is provisional. We do not *continue* to be that *on earth*.
A.F.M. Would the thought of the house have a wider place in the kingdom?
J.T. It will have a place in the millennium. The idea of the house runs right through from the time God introduced it to Jacob in @Genesis 28:17. It is never given up, but continues. Whether *we* form it or others, it continues, but one can easily see that the house now is superior to what it ever has been or ever will be, on account of the dignity of those who compose it.
C.A.M. Would the thought of increase be in growing, continuing? Is it a present thing?
J.T. It "groweth unto an holy temple in the Lord" (chapter 2:21). The thing is growing in that way. There is growth. Growth is in the divine nature. It is growth unto a *holy* temple in the Lord. That, I suppose, is what we shall be in the future. All the light of God will be there. It is that in which men are to inquire in the future.
R.S.S. Will not that be complete at the rapture?
J.T. I have no doubt it will be.
A.F.M. The house is complete at the present time. The glory of the Lord filled the tabernacle when it was complete. And we are said to be indwelt now by the Spirit, "builded together for an habitation of God through the Spirit" (verse 22). That is complete now.
{185}
J.T. Yes. There is that here in which God can dwell, "a habitation of God in the Spirit". I think we have a broader presentation of the house in this passage than in any other. It is the full idea of the house of God, "a habitation of God in the Spirit".
F.L. That necessarily involves reconciliation and one new man, or you could not have that presentation of the house down here.
J.S. Does this correspond to mount Zion? God said, "here will I dwell" (@Psalm 132:14). God chose mount Zion for a dwelling place?
J.T. I think it does. Directly David has taken Jerusalem he brings up the ark and forms a place for it in mount Zion, and this runs parallel with @Psalm 132 "here will I dwell, for I have desired it". It is God's desired place.
Ques. Would you say the presentation of the house in this book is similar to that in Hebrews?
J.T. Hebrews states that the saints are God's house and Christ is Son over it, but we have a broader thought here. In Hebrews the saints are said to be God's house as a fact, and Christ is Son over it, as having built it, and Christ is a great Priest over it, so that we can come near to God; but you have fuller thoughts here. Look at the way it is presented, in verse 19; it is said, "ye are no longer strangers and foreigners, but ye are fellow-citizens of the saints, and of the household of God". That is one thought. Then, "being built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the corner-stone, in whom all the building fitted together increases to a holy temple in the Lord; in whom *ye* also are built together for a habitation of God in the Spirit". I think the idea of the house of God in Hebrews is more official, but here the word "habitation" is a somewhat stronger word. God is actually dwelling there. All that God is in His attributes
{186}
rests there. There is nothing to mar or disturb the divine attributes in the house.
F.L. In @Hebrews 3:6 it is conditional. It is: "If we hold fast".
C.H.B. Do we get the thought here as to the holy temple, "there will I commune with thee"?
J.T. The idea of the temple was, I think, that it was a place of light, of communications, a p]ace to be inquired at.
R.S.S. What are we taught in the Scriptures in connection with the house and the eternal state?
J.T. "The tabernacle of God is with men" (@Revelation 21:3). The divine thought is that He should dwell with men. It does not seem to be mediatorial, as in the wilderness, the habitation is not surrounded by a court, and there is no veil. It is rather as seen in 1 Kings. God dwells immediately with men. In the house that Solomon reared up according to 1 Kings there is no veil. There are folding doors. It is *figuratively* the immediate presence of God without a veil.
F.L. You get the idea in @Revelation 21; "tabernacle" expresses the idea that God dwells there immediately. That is the supreme eternal thought.
J.T. It corresponds with what the Lord was here. The tabernacle of God with men is parallel with the Word become flesh and dwelling among us. He was approachable. God was there dwelling among men; (@John 1:14).
Ques. You used the word *provisional* in connection with God dwelling. Is that because of the evil around now?
J.T. It is because conditions in Israel do not afford Him a dwelling. The dwelling place begins with Jacob, but Israel does not now afford conditions for the house, hence God has taken it up provisionally in the assembly, but it will revert to Israel. That God
{187}
would have a house here shows what He is. He loves to be with men, hence He dwells with them.
F.L. One thought as to the temple is that the building itself has importance and attracts attention. The idea in the tent is simply that of a covering, so that the great point is *who* dwells there. Therefore the beauty of @Revelation 21, that the final state is a tabernacle.
J.T. Quite so. The temple, I think, is mediatorial. It is here said to be "in the Lord", and it scarcely goes on to the eternal state of things, because then there is no distance, no need of holiness outside in the eternal state of things. Here it grows to a holy temple in the Lord. Therefore, you can readily see the temple looks on to the millennium; it is mediatorial. A habitation conveys nearness and accessibility.
F.L. So in the eternal state holiness is the *natural* atmosphere, so to speak.
J.T. You do not need to assert it.
W.B. Did the apostle have in his mind the house as presented here when he wrote to Timothy: "These things I write to thee, hoping to come to thee more quickly; but if I delay, in order that thou mayest know how one ought to conduct oneself in God's house" (@1 Timothy 3:14,15)?
J.T. That epistle fits in with this passage. This is the presentation of the house in its highest form. 1 Timothy shows how you are to conduct yourself in it.
A.F.M. You said something about the house as according to the attributes of God.
J.T. The facts presented in the Acts as to the work at Ephesus would show that conditions for the house as it is presented here were there. Of course we are all in the house, but the question is whether we are equal to it; whether there is that in which God can rest. That is a feature of the dwelling place.
{188}
T.A. Declension set in at the highest point, declension of affection in Ephesus. Thus the idea of the house there ceased.
F.L. There is a distinction between the assembly, His body, at the end of the first chapter, and the house.
J.T. In the end of the first chapter He is said to be "head over all things to the assembly, which is his body, the fulness of him who fills all in all". The thought conveyed there is that the reciprocal affections between Christ and the assembly are intended to influence all below. All in the entire realm of the dispensation of the fulness of times is to be influenced from the top by the affections that are reciprocated between Christ and the assembly. So that one can understand what a great conception it is that in the future, in the fulness of times, all the different families come under that influence, just as in any household where affections are mutual between the husband and wife the children come under the influence of them.
F.L. It is interesting in that connection to see that in the passage quoted in 1 Timothy, the house of God and the assembly are linked together, and then it goes on, "God has been manifested in flesh".
R.S.S. You mention the end of the first chapter only, but our brother raised a question as to the difference between the end of the first and the end of the second.
J.T. It is quite clear that the end of the first chapter has reference to the future, that which God has in His mind to head up, placing Christ as Head over all things to the assembly. Mark that it is said, *to* the assembly. It is not here Head *of* the assembly, but Head *to* it. In Colossians He is Head *of* it, but here He is Head *to* it.
R.S.S. What is the distinction?
J.T. The distinction can be illustrated in the relation of the husband to the wife in regard of the
{189}
household. When they are by themselves he is head of her, but in regard of the children, of the household, he is head *to* her. That is, she is not under him. She has part in the headship, only subject of course; she occupies a different place from any of the children however advanced. Christ is "head over all things to the assembly". She is qualified, formed intelligently, so that there is intelligent communion between Christ and the assembly. Mark the change of word; He is Head to the *assembly*, which is His *body*. Assembly suggests the thought of counsel.
A.N.W. The assembly is complete there; she is the *fulness*. She is the fulness of Him.
P.H.P. Is this not the original thought in helpmate?
J.T. You go back to @Genesis 2 for the primary thought.
P.H.P. She is to help, and the word "help" suggests what you say.
J.T. The idea is that Adam was to have one his like, or his counterpart. Eve was capable of entering into Adam's thoughts. She was capable, as it were, of taking counsel, entering into his counsels and thoughts. I do not know whether the word *confidante* is a legitimate word to use, but it conveys a thought of the assembly's relation to Christ, as seen here. No other creature could have this place.
F.L. It is a primary thought. It was not to meet conditions occasioned by sin.
R.S.S. Adam said, "This is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh" (@Genesis 2:23). As a brother once remarked, "This is myself over again".
J.T. Quite so. He says, "This time", referring back to the other creatures brought to him.
R.S.S. Quite so. So the end of @Ephesians 1 is the body, and the end of chapter 2 is the temple. Is that your point?
J.T. Yes, the end of the second chapter is the
{190}
assembly's relation with God, what we are as regards God; whereas in the end of the first it is what we are as regards Christ. It is not the habitation of Christ, but the habitation of God by the Spirit.
F.L. When the question is of conduct in the house, the assembly is spoken of, not the body of Christ.
Rem. So God has something and Christ has something. God has the house, and Christ has the body.
A.F.M. It would encourage us to review the ways of God with us now, as being educational, in view of this wonderful position in association with Christ by-and-by.
J.T. Quite so. It *is* a wonderful position. Think of the influence, on all the other families, of the reciprocation of affection such as exists between Christ and the assembly!
Coming now to chapter 3, the apostle calls attention to his own place as a minister. He wishes the Ephesians to understand his knowledge of the mystery, and what I think should be observed is that the mystery comes within the bound of time. We were noting this morning that our proper calling is *before* the foundation of the world, but when you come to chapter 3 I think you will observe it is from the foundation of the world.
R.S.S. Yes, it is said "which from the beginning of the world hath been hid in God".
J.T. Yes, it is "throughout the ages" here, or from eternity, which means the same thing.
Rem. In @Romans 16:25, it reads: "Now to him that is of power to stablish you according to my gospel, and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the mystery, which was kept secret since the world began, but now is made manifest, and by the scriptures of the prophets, according to the commandment of the everlasting God, made known to all nations for the obedience of faith".
J.T. The mystery has reference to time. I am
{191}
not of course denying that it was in God's mind before, but the working out of the mystery belongs to time. The third chapter runs right on to the assembly being the vessel of God's glory throughout all ages.
F.L. We reach one climax in the previous chapter, and then at the end of the third chapter we reach another, that which has its origin in counsel from before the foundation of the world and continues to eternity. It serves a purpose in the ages, and the climax of that purpose is seen at the end of the third chapter, glory to God is there.
J.T. It is the vessel in which God's glory is, a wonderful end in that way.
F.L. At this present time the principalities and powers in the heavenlies see in the assembly the all-various wisdom of God, by looking down. In the world to come the earth will see the all-various wisdom of God in the assembly by looking up.
J.T. Yes, quite so, but how great is the conception now, and how great the administration committed to Paul, that there should be brought about through his ministry that in which the all-various wisdom of God should be seen on earth! One can understand why he bowed his knees. The thing was so great, so magnificent, that he bowed his knees. He does not say he bowed his knees in the first chapter, in regard of his prayer. The *weight* of it is more upon him here.
W.B. What do the principalities and powers in the heavenlies refer to?
J.T. I think it refers to angelic beings, that God would work out before them something infinitely beyond anything they had previously witnessed. They had seen the foundation of the earth laid, and they had rejoiced in it. They had seen the birth of Christ, and they praised God in connection with that. They had also witnessed His wonderful work in Israel, in taking Israel out of Egypt, the formation
{192}
of the tabernacle, etc., but in the mystery they would see the *all-various* wisdom of God.
R.J.C. Do the principalities and powers discover things as they view the assembly?
J.T. I think they see how God will govern the universe in the future. It is to be governed through affection. They understand how the physical system is maintained, a wonderful thing it is surely! How the worlds were framed and are maintained is beyond us. The angels are witnesses of all this, but there is no affection or intelligence in the great physical bodies in the creation. These things are all inanimate, without consciences and without hearts. They are all by weight and measure, as we say. That is the principle in the physical creation, weight and measure. The angels are cognizant of all this. They could teach us astronomy, no doubt. There is wonderful wisdom seen in the material creation, but the all-various wisdom of God was reserved for the mystery. It works out in connection with family relationships and the affections that are suited to them. That is, I think, what the angels see. Therefore, they learn how things are to be accomplished in the future. The regulation of the moral system is in all-various wisdom.
F.L. Therefore the apostle bows his knees to the Father, of whom every family in the heavens and on earth is named. He names according to moral worth every family in heaven and on earth. It emphasises His position as Father.
J.T. You see in the book of Job how God calls Job's attention to the physical creation. There were wonders in it, wonders far beyond Job's ken. He could not compass them. The book of Proverbs develops wisdom in connection with affections, for the speaker is a *son*. He was his father's son, the only one of his mother, tender and beloved. Wisdom is worked out in connection with affections flowing
{193}
from this relationship. When you come to this passage in @Ephesians 3, Paul says. "For this reason I bow my knees to the Father". He has created all things. He does not bow to the Creator exactly, but to the Father, of whom every family in the heavens and on earth is named; not the naming of the sun, moon and stars, but of *families*.
W.B. In @Genesis 8 we have a certain promise that God gave Noah, that while the earth lasted, seed time and harvest, cold and heat, summer and winter, day and night, should not cease. There is a physical order which God has promised will be maintained, but when you come to what is before us now we have the moral side, the affection side.
F.L. Every moral being that is left in this universe is brought under God as Father, and that is a wonderful end.
A.N.W. In the physical scene a man like David was reminded of the bridegroom; (@Psalm 19).
J.T. They are types. The invisible things are seen in the things made, even His eternal power and divinity, but not His love, nor the response to it. You do not get the paternal idea, the descending affection, in these things, but when you come to the Father of whom every family in heaven and on earth is named you have this.
A.F.M. Is there any connection between what you were saying and the additional words in the first chapter? In the first chapter it is "Father of glory", and here it is simply "the Father".
J.T. I think the apostle has more the paternal side in mind here. In the first chapter it is "the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory". He is the Author or Source of glory, but here He is the Father of families. They are intelligent beings.
F.L. I suppose Christ dwelling in our hearts and our being rooted and grounded in love is the way in
{194}
which we are in the appreciation of the relationships in which we are set.
J.T. Christ dwelling in the heart. It is "*the* Christ" here, which brings in another thought, namely, that He is now in our hearts as the One by whom God effects everything. The woman of Samaria said, when the Christ is come He will tell us all things. She had discerned that He was a prophet, but did not discern that *He* was the Christ, but she really understood that when the Christ should come He would tell her all things. We may add to that, that He accomplishes all things. It is such an One as that, that is in the hearts of the saints.
A.A.T. Will you just distinguish between "Christ in you the hope of glory", as presented in Colossians, and what we have here?
J.T. I do not think the article is there. @Colossians 1:27, reads, "to whom God would make known what are the riches of the glory of this mystery among the nations, which is Christ in you the hope of glory". It is more the Person having a place in them, but here it is "the Christ", showing that they had Him in their hearts as the accomplisher of things.
A.F.M. Officially?
J.T. More officially. That is to say, He is the Man who effects things. That is more the thought in Ephesians. That is the Man I have in my heart, the man who accomplishes things for God. In @John 4 the connection is remarkable, because "the Christ" is the one who really brings in the worshippers. The Father had sought worshippers. Well, "the Christ" is the one who brings them in, and so here "the Christ", I believe, gives character to every family. They all come under His touch. You take the group that encircled Him upon earth, He placed His imprint upon them; and so at Pentecost. Through Paul's ministry, He places His imprint on the assembly
{195}
in the full idea of it; and I believe the angels receive their character from Christ.
A.F.M. To go on to the thought of Christ accomplishing things, is that what is before the soul in contemplation in the holiest according to @Hebrews 10?
J.T. Pretty much. Entering the holiest you see the Man that is before God, and the Man by whom things are accomplished. That Man is dwelling in our hearts. If the work of God is to go on that Man must have a place in our hearts, and if He has a place in our hearts, He will accomplish things. Others will be affected. He carries on the work of God and accomplishes it.
W.L.P. Is it on our behalf He is accomplishing it?
J.T. If you do not make room for *the Christ* things are not accomplished. If Sardis had had the Christ dwelling in the heart by faith, He would not have had to say to them "I have not found thy works complete before my God" (@Revelation 3:2). If you give the Christ a place you will have things accomplished.
R.J.C. And if you give Him a place your vision is enlarged.
J.T. We are to be strengthened by the Father's Spirit. That makes room for the dwelling place of the Christ. It is a question of inward ability "that the Christ may dwell through faith in your hearts, being rooted and founded in love, in order that ye may be fully able to apprehend with all the saints what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height; and to know the love of the Christ which surpasses knowledge; that ye may be filled even to all the fulness of God". There is the position. The Father strengthens inwardly by the Spirit; the Christ has His place and dwells there; the saints are rooted and grounded in love, and hence are fully able to apprehend with all the saints what is the breadth and length and depth and height. It seems
{196}
to me that the Christ having His place in the heart we are at the divine centre of operations.
W.H.F. In principle it is the heavenly city.
J.T. If you could get into the cabinet of any of those nations at war now you would understand the purpose and plans of the government. It seems to me that is the position here, that the Christ has a place in the heart and you see what He is doing.
R.J.C. All His designs are before you. What is this the measurement of?
J.T. The measurement of the divine system, just as you look into space. Take the physical system, as you look into space there you have the scene of God's physical operations. Well, who can measure it? We hear of tremendous distances which we cannot take in, but they are there undoubtedly. The same thing applies to the moral system. We are in the centre of it, in that the Christ is dwelling in our hearts. Now you get an idea of measurement. It begins with the breadth and the length, then the depth and height. Evidently you are in the centre. You look up and down and this way and that way, and you are to *know it*.
J.S. From this wonderful vantage point.
J.T. From the vantage point we have through the Christ dwelling in the heart by faith.
Rem. Far beyond mount Nebo.
J.T. That is simply prospective, and you look into the land from the wilderness. But here you are in the divine centre.
A.N.W. "Son, give me thine heart" (@Proverbs 23:26). Do you think the end in view is that Christ might fill the heart?
J.T. Yes. In Proverbs it is: "My son give me thine heart". Here it is not only filling but *dwelling* in it.
J.S. And you are able to look out on all that God has before Him?
J.T. Hence you are not occupied with what men
{197}
are doing now. After the Holy Spirit came they spoke about the wonderful works *of God*.
W.B. Tell us why the length and breadth come first here.
J.T. I think you do not measure up to God until you love the brethren. It is a question of love. It is the horizontal first; the breadth and length first.
J.S. You must be adjusted down here before you can look up.
F.L. In @Revelation 21 there are only the three dimensions. Here there is a fourth dimension given us, there is depth. It refers to the distance downward travelled by Christ, and the height is the distance upward.
R.J.C. And what is the breadth?
Rem. You get in the first chapter "love to all the saints".
J.T. They understood something of the length and breadth in that way.
Ques. In Galatians we get Christ formed in you. Does Christ dwelling in your heart by faith go beyond that?
J.T. Galatians is a maternal thought. It is the initial idea there. Here it is the full thought, and not only that, but the Man who accomplishes things, the anointed Man, dwells in the heart by faith.
W.B. Will you say a word about the power that works in us?
J.T. "To him that is able to do far exceedingly above all which we ask or think, according to the power which works in us". What one is struck with in Ephesians is the *excess*. Things are always in excess in Ephesians. He does exceedingly abundantly above all we could ask or think, but it is in accord with the power that works in us.
F.L. Would you connect that with "strengthened with power by his spirit in the inner man"?
J.T. Yes, quite so.
{198}
READINGS ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS (4)
@Ephesians 4; @Ephesians 5:1 - 21
W.B. I notice the apostle speaks of himself as "the prisoner" in the beginning in chapters 3 and 4. What is the significance of that?
J.T. In the beginning of chapter 3 he is "the prisoner of Christ Jesus". This relates to what is brought out in the long parenthesis in chapter 3; he was a prisoner of the Christ on account of the nations. The apostle would have laboured amongst the Jews, but the Lord would have him continue the work among the Gentiles, and having alluded to that, he makes the long statement as to the mystery, and his work in administering it.
His work had been successful amongst the Gentiles; the administration of the mystery, which was given into his hands, would result in glory to God in the assembly unto all generations of the age of ages. In spite of the fact that he had gone to Jerusalem, nothing had been lost; Christ had retained him among the Gentiles. He was the prisoner of the Christ Jesus. He had been retained for the carrying on of the work of God amongst the Gentiles, and the Lord would not allow him to be diverted from that. Chapter 3 shows that the work of God had gone on, and his prayer, his great exercise, shows how completely he was now under the influence of Christ; he desired that the Christ should have a dwelling place in the hearts of the saints. Then in chapter 4 he returns to the idea of being a prisoner, only he changes the expression and says, "I, the prisoner in the Lord, exhort you". I think the prisoner of the *Christ Jesus* has reference to the *work* of God among the nations, whereas the *Lord's* prisoner suggests the *authority* of
{199}
the Lord over His servant. While the Romans were the instruments of his being carried to Rome, yet it was the Lord's doing.
R.S.S. So that in the government of God it pleased Him to move Paul, after he was made a prisoner at Jerusalem, to Rome.
J.T. The government of God is seen there too, but there is more than that: the testimony was involved and the Lord was concerned about that. Before leaving Jerusalem Paul had the comfort of the Lord's words that he had witnessed of Him there.
R.S.S. The ministry we now have from Paul emanated largely from Rome a Gentile city. It gives it a character it would not have had as coming from Jerusalem. So I think we can see a reason why he was, under God's hand, taken to Rome.
J.T. It is a question of the Gentiles in the beginning of chapter 3: "For this reason, I, Paul, prisoner of Christ Jesus for you nations".
F.L. Then it further shows in connection with the testimony that while a prisoner is bound, "the word of God is not bound" (@2 Timothy 2:9), and this epistle, Colossians, Philippians and Timothy are evidences of how the testimony is taken care of by the Lord in spite of adverse circumstances.
J.T. So that although in Rome, confined and bound with a chain, and surrounded by all the pomp and power of the emperor, he speaks of being the Lord's prisoner. It shows how entirely he was in the faith of the kingdom.
Now he says in chapter 3, "I, Paul". I doubt if the idea of *Paul* was so prominent in his going to Jerusalem. You will recall the statement as to the change in his name: evidently it is not only that he was *called* Paul, but that he *was* Paul; "who also is Paul" (@Acts 13:9). It signifies apparently that he *was* small. He had, it seems, come back to that in Rome. "I, Paul", he says. I think when he announces his name
{200}
it is characteristic. It was *that one* who was detained as the prisoner of Christ, so that now he is thinking only of the Christ and what is to be accomplished by the Christ, and of his being a minister of the mystery in that way to the Gentiles. He is now entirely in the hands of Christ in Rome.
W.B. That would explain verse 13, "Wherefore I desire that ye faint not at my tribulations for you, which is your glory".
F.L. One sees something akin to this in John in Patmos. He was put into circumstances which we might think would render the testimony impossible, but the Lord in the might of His power turns both the imprisonment of Paul and the banishment of John to the furtherance of the testimony.
J.T. In Philippians the apostle opens up more in detail how his presence at Rome had furthered the gospel. It should encourage us as showing that no circumstance or combination of circumstances can interfere with the testimony. Our wills indeed offer the most effective opposition, but God can overcome even these. We can readily see the moral fitness of one such as Paul exhorting as he does in chapter 4. He was little in his own estimation and he was subject to Christ. He is thus entitled to develop what is becoming to the calling, namely, "lowliness, meekness, longsuffering, bearing with one another in love".
A.N.W. It is evident, that his imprisonment tended to bring him low in his own opinion.
F.L. Onesiphorus came to Paul in prison and was not ashamed of his chain, and so he showed this spirit of meekness and lowliness. He wanted to identify himself with it. It not only worked in Paul but worked in those outside. I think it would be well to take note of Paul, because he is not only our apostle, but also our model. He is the model for the Gentile believers and he is that in the sense of being
{201}
a little one. In fact he says so in the previous chapter, "less than the least of all saints".
R.S.S. How could he say that, because he was the greatest?
J.T. Do you not think it was because of the great estimation he had of Christ, that he felt his own littleness? For the more we know of Christ the smaller we are in our own estimation. It is a truly great man that can be little.
R.S.S. Yes, quite so, and as Mr. Raven said, the great thing is to take account of yourself as before God, not before men. That brings about what you spoke of. But I was struck with the expression, "less than the least of all saints". He must have had a marvellous appreciation of Christ to have been truly brought to that point.
J.T. His estimation of himself seems to have qualified him in the Lord's eyes for this commission. "To me, less than the least of all saints, has this grace been given".
R.S.S. That is, he was a suitable vessel for it.
J.S. As Saul of Tarsus he was greatly inflated, but here he is reduced.
F.L. Look at the manner of his conversion! He had been an insolent, overbearing man, and the way in which he had been exposed was never after absent from him. That is, what he had been in that character caused him to feel in the presence of the grace of Christ that he was the least of all saints, and in that way he becomes a pattern for all that should afterward believe.
R.S.S. You were speaking of Paul as a model. Are not the words used remarkable; "lowliness and meekness" correspond with the Lord's own words in @Matthew 11:28,29, where *He* is seen as our model: He says, "Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest ... for I am meek and lowly in heart".
{202}
J.T. Timothy was like Paul, as the apostle says, "he will put you in mind of my ways as they are in Christ". He was like his father, and Paul brings him forward in Philippians as showing that he was of a like mind with himself. He could not only put the saints in mind of Paul's ways, but cared for them with the same genuine feeling as Paul did himself.
J.B. These characteristic people, such as Paul and Timothy, are being reproduced, in measure, in the assembly in our day.
J.T. We cannot get the work of God carried on effectively apart from the spirit indicated here. It is in those who have relinquished all idea of importance after the flesh that the work of God is carried on. I believe the Lord would bring about reduction. In the types the feast of Pentecost comes after the feast of unleavened bread; the feast of Pentecost involves the works of God: "We do hear them speak in our own tongues the wonderful works of God" (@Acts 2:11). Those who are affected by the feast of unleavened bread, which means the reduction of the flesh, are occupied not with their own things or doings, but with "the great things of God". They are thus qualified to be used of God to carry on His work.
R.S.S. Where are the examples of what you speak of as to the feast of unleavened bread and the feast of Pentecost?
J.T. In @Deuteronomy 16. The passover had its anti-type in the death of Christ, "Christ our passover is sacrificed for us" (@1 Corinthians 5:7). The feast of unleavened bread was instituted on the fifteenth day of the first month, and continued seven days; then the feast of Pentecost came in some fifty days afterward. It was the next feast, so that the feast of unleavened bread would, as it were, have taken full effect; then the coming in of the Spirit is to take the place of the power of the flesh. "That the excellency of the power", says the apostle, "may be of God and not of us" (@2 Corinthians 4:7). His
{203}
preaching was in demonstration of the Spirit and of power, that the faith of the saints should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God. The works of God are carried on in those who have relinquished all confidence in the flesh.
F.L. Philippians is much on that line. There is first the mind of Christ, then Paul is like Christ, Timothy is like Paul, Epaphroditus is of the same mind, and then Paul says, "Be ye imitators of me". The line runs through here.
W.B. The day of Pentecost was fully come.
J.T. That was it. God was now coming in to take up and accomplish His work. That is the thing we have to look into, to be in a state to be used. Therefore I take it that Paul saying, "I, Paul", meant that he was now where the Christ could use him to carry on His work among the nations. This is chapter 3, and in chapter 4 he is morally qualified to exhort them to be what he was himself.
J.S. Is it because of the moral qualification that the "I" is emphasised here?
J.T. I have no doubt. "*I*, the prisoner in the Lord", is emphasised. He calls attention to himself. He is morally qualified to exhort.
B.T.F. What is the force of what follows: the meekness, lowliness, and then the uniting bond of peace, and after that one body, one spirit?
J.T. The point is unity. I think the calling, the vocation with which we are called, refers to the end of chapter 2.
B.T.F. It refers to what Jews and Gentiles were brought into.
J.T. Yes, both have access to God by one Spirit. They are "no longer strangers and foreigners, but fellow-citizens of the saints and of the household of God". We are built together for a habitation of God in the Spirit, that is the vocation with which we are called. This exhortation is, I apprehend, that we
{204}
might walk worthy of it, and the point is that it is on the principle of unity. The spirit of unity is to be maintained.
T.R. I suppose verses 4 and 5 are the bonds of that unity.
J.T. Yes. There is one body, one Spirit, one Lord, one faith, one baptism, and one God and Father of all. That is the truth which is to become the basis of the unity, but then the tangible unity is in the Spirit. The truth is in these statements, but there is one Spirit indwelling us all, and we have enjoyed drawing near to God the Father. Now maintain it in *other* relations.
F.L. These things that are defined are, you would say, all fundamental characteristics of a unity which actually exists, the vital power of which is the Spirit. Then we are called to a state of mind; that is, to use diligence to have a state of mind, as taught of the Spirit, to move and act and think in accordance with the unity which actually exists. We have not to make the unity; it already exists.
J.T. The thing is to maintain the unity in *all* relations. It is all very well of course when we are together, and when we seek to worship God it is quite obvious we have not two spirits, but how is the unity to be kept in other relations? So that we begin with lowliness, meekness, long-suffering, bearing with one another in love. We do not have to bear with one another so much in the assembly when together, but in other relations; hence the need of bearing with one another in love.
W.B. Those other relations would affect the unity in the assembly.
R.S.S. He exhorts them. The fact that he does so, I suppose, is taking account of the work of God in them. I was just thinking of Paul at Antioch; he and Barnabas went into the synagogue, and after the reading of the law and the prophets the rulers of
{205}
the synagogue sent unto them saying, "Ye men and brethren, if ye have any word of exhortation for the people, say on" (@Acts 13:15). But it is very striking as you read the passage, that in what he said there is not a word of exhortation. He begins with God, the God of His people, and all that He did and all that He gave and all that He destroyed, but it was what *God* did. There was nothing there, so to speak, to exhort; but he preached the gospel to them.
J.T. The Jews would assume that they were qualified to be exhorted.
R.S.S. Yes, that was my point, that here in @Ephesians 4, Paul does exhort. There must be some basis for exhortation. The basis is the work of God in the saints, and this existed at Ephesus.
A.R.S. Will you explain the difference between the state of Christendom and the unity of the Spirit which we should endeavour to keep? Suppose a person meets you with the fact that Christendom is all broken up, what would you say to him?
J.T. You cannot very well convict a man unless he is willing to be convicted. I think this passage shows that; the Holy Spirit having come in house-wise, according to the end of the second chapter, remains here and will remain, although the house may be outwardly effaced, and the exercise a right-minded person has is, that he might arrive at the Spirit *in that relation*. It is not only that he has the Spirit himself, but that the Spirit is here in the house; God is here in the Spirit, and one would love to realise this, and I think you can if, as exercised, you get another brother like yourself. You have the same desires. It is dependent on "two of you". Saints become a test and discipline to each other, but if the mind is right and the will is not at work, they increase in spiritual power through the exercise. By learning lowliness, meekness, longsuffering and forbearance,
{206}
you increase in spiritual power, so that when we come together there is unity and liberty in the Spirit.
F.L. "Endeavouring to keep the unity" is a state of mind in the individual towards other individuals who are affected, and this leads to a withdrawal from what is contrary to the unity and a maintaining of what is in accordance with it. So if there are two they are an evidence of the unity, but it is really a state of mind effected by the Holy Spirit.
Ques. Is this in line with what we get in @Psalm 133 in regard to unity?
J.T. The teaching of @Psalm 133 follows on @Psalm 132, which has reference to the instalment of the ark in mount Zion, and unity among brethren hinges on that. We cannot have unity according to God unless the ark has its place, any other unity is not according to God; unity is based on that; that is, Christ has His true place in the hearts of the saints.
R.J.C. In what does the unity of the Spirit lie?
A.N.W. If a man does not discern the unity of the Spirit he is not likely to keep it. He may preach it, but if he does not really discern it he will not endeavour to keep it.
J.T. If a man has light about the wonderful privilege of having access to God in connection with others, he will say, 'This is a wonderful thing; it is something I would like to realise too'. If you are to realise it you must make sacrifices. There is a road to it. So he is prepared now and this passage helps him. You arrive at it by sacrifice, by surrendering your own will, and accepting a lowly place. The unity of the Spirit lies in the maintenance of thoughts and affections suited to the relationships in which we are set to each other.
P.H.P. The encouragement is that the thing is workable. If it works between two persons, you can add any number and the thing is seen and you can enjoy it.
{207}
J.T. It is something worth sacrificing for, that you might enjoy the activities of the blessed Spirit of God collectively, not only in each of us, but collectively. That is the idea of unity.
W.B. Referring to @Psalm 133 again, I have noticed that it brings in the thought of the Spirit, the oil, and then you have the blessing. Would you link them together?
J.T. Quite so. The Psalm is largely to call attention to what unity among brethren is *like*. It is like very wonderful things.
R.S.S. I suppose in Roman Catholicism we have the effort to maintain the unity of the body without the Spirit. The endeavour is to keep it up by worldly methods.
F.L. In Catholicism, or Christendom at large, the constant effort is to get a union, which is different from unity. It is to form a union upon certain agreed principles, a thing which has no relation whatever to unity as taught here.
B.T.F. The force of "One Lord, one faith, one baptism" is that there is unity in God's system. Is that it?
J.T. That is the idea; everything in the moral system is based on what God is. God is one and the Mediator between God and men one, the Man Christ Jesus. All unity flows out from that.
Ques. Is it that we are baptised by one Spirit? The Lord says, "Where two or three are gathered together in my name there am I in the midst" (@Matthew 18:20); so that when we come together the Spirit pervades that sphere and there is unity.
J.T. Yes, quite so. The Lord's supper helps to maintain it. We are all said to be made to drink into the one Spirit, which alludes to the cup, I apprehend.
W.B. What is the difference between unity of the faith and unity of the Spirit?
{208}
J.T. I think the unity of the faith refers to what is held as light in our souls; "until we all arrive at the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, at the full-grown man".
C.H.B. All speak the same things and think the same things. That is in keeping with the unity of the faith.
J.T. To the company at Ephesus the whole mind of God had been announced and presented. What they held and how they held it were important. The "twelve men" in @Acts 19 got the light together, they got it from Paul. There would be in that way a levelling and an agreement between them, they held the truth in common. There was no irregularity or incongruity in what they held.
W.B. As to doctrine?
J.T. The faith refers to the system of doctrine, and all the saints were to arrive at that so that what we hold is uniform.
F.L. What the unity of the faith really takes in, is the scope of the whole revelation of God.
J.T. Quite so. As you were remarking about the different sects each has its own set of doctrines on which they agree. That is not the idea of the unity of the faith. The unity of the Spirit is the subjective state in the saints; the unity of the faith refers to the doctrine, the truth that they hold in common.
R.J.C. Would it be possible to have unity of the Spirit apart from unity of the faith?
J.T. You might have the unity of the Spirit in the way of affection without the full understanding of doctrine. Ephesians, however, is not satisfied with anything less than completeness; things must be complete. The gifts are given "for the perfecting of the saints", so that we should all arrive at the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, at the "full-grown man".
Ques. "One Lord, one faith, one baptism": I
{209}
can see the one Lord and the one faith, but would you say something about the baptism, and the aspect in which it is presented here?
J.T. The point here is not the import of baptism. As we were remarking earlier, baptism is not *taught* in this epistle, the point is, there is *one*. So every ordinance of Christianity tends to unity, whether baptism or the Lord's supper.
F.L. Gifts come in on that line. One who has gone up on high centralises everything and gives the gifts in order to work up to the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, the full-grown man.
J.T. The unity of the Spirit includes us all in a collective sense, but then we have, "unto every one of us is given grace". The Lord singles out each one and gives him something. Now what have I? That is the thought that ought to arise. What am I contributing? "Unto every one;" that is individual. The Christ was carrying on the work of God, not only through Paul, but through all the saints. Paul in the third chapter shows that individually he wrought mightily, but the Christ would use each one of us. He uses each one and with that in view He gives to each one according to His own measure.
F.L. That wants to be driven home, because we so easily drop into the idea that there are a few who have something and the rest have nothing but what the few give them. We want to get in direct touch with the Head.
A.F.M. How would it work out practically if we came to the realisation of this?
J.T. It works out in this way, that you would like to be little enough to be used, like Paul. He is the model for us all. That is the first thing. To such an one as that grace is given by the Christ; the measure must be left with Him. Gift is subject to
{210}
desire, only Paul is not referring to specific gifts, but to what a sister might get as much as a brother. "To each one of us has been given grace according to the measure of the gift of the Christ", so that you want to know what it is you have and how you can use it, and how to make it as effective as possible.
F.L. That is the point. I am sure we are deplorably weak along that line.
J.S. Is the grace given that each one of us might be made effective as united in the Spirit?
A.N.W. You need grace to be lowly, is that the thought?
J.T. Yes, but I think "to each one of us has been given grace" is for service.
J.S. This would save us from drifting into clericalism.
R.S.S. Then in that sense grace is something you get from Christ which gives you ability to do something.
J.T. I think so. Each one has something distinctive, so that what he does no one else can do in the same way. Of course it is difficult to see it working out in our day of weakness, but undoubtedly in Ephesus each believer, each of those twelve men, for example, had some specific grace from Christ so that each filled a niche in the assembly there.
F.L. Each of our meetings resolves itself, generally speaking, into those who in coming expect to minister, and those who in coming, expect to receive. It is a wrong point of view, a source of weakness. We fail to discern that Christ has given something specifically to each one which works in its place for the edifying of the body.
J.T. That sort of thing is exactly what is brought about in the clergy, there are those wishing to be simply members of a congregation, glad to hand over all responsibility to others. That is what makes room for clericalism.
{211}
F.L. This is not exactly a question of oral ministry in the assembly convened, but of grace for pastoral care and the care for one another, which should mark all and is intended to be exercised in connection with the whole body at all times, not only when we are convened.
J.T. Exactly. The idea of the assembly convened is scarcely in this epistle.
W.L.P. That phase of the truth comes out in Corinthians.
R.J.C. But the gifts of grace can be exercised when the saints are not convened.
F.L. In the gathering where I took my place in fellowship there were about five hundred breaking bread, and one of the first things of which I remember the elder brethren speaking was that the number was utterly unwieldy. It was impossible for the joints and bands to work properly; people came in and went out and their presence or absence would not be noted. Since then I have thought of the Lord's provision for the multitude when He made them sit down in companies of fifty so that they might be properly looked after. I think small companies of fifty are much happier than large gatherings. The saints know each other better and hence there is more tendency to edification.
A.N.W. @Ephesians 4:16 is very striking in that connection, it leads to the "self-building up in love". It is not merely the ministry of an apostle or a prophet, it is *self-building*.
J.T. In a heart full of truth in the power of the Spirit, as Paul's was, it is remarkable to see how things run into each other as he tells of them. It is a continuous stream that rushes on. He touches on the thought of unity, then the thought of gift, then he must tell us about the ascension of the Lord Jesus and how all gift is from that Man up there. As he says, "Wherefore ... having ascended up on high
{212}
he has led captivity captive and has given gifts to men". In Ephesians you generally have the *full* idea of whatever is touched; hence you see here that gifts that are active on earth have come from Christ ascended. It says, that He has gone far above all the heavens. Think of the magnitude of the gift as come from that point!
B.T.F. The gifts enumerated here have a *general* application, that is, they were given to the assembly as a whole.
J.T. It is the whole assembly that is in view here. Apostles were not given to any local assembly.
J.S. His ascension far above all heavens that He might fill all things would involve a day to come as well as the present time.
J.T. He will fill "every family", but at the present time it is for the edifying of the body of Christ. Think of the power that is being exercised since Christ went far above all the heavens, all exercised here to one point, namely, the edifying of His body!
F.L. I suppose the bringing in of the evangelist here would suggest @Psalm 68:18 from which this is quoted. It says, "Yea, for the rebellious also, that the Lord God might dwell among them". The evangelist appeals to the rebellious that they might be brought into subjection.
Rem. In regard to gift the apostle says in @1 Corinthians 13:2, "And though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge; and though I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing".
J.T. He is simply pointing out and emphasising that without love things are utterly ineffectual. It is not, however, that anyone could have these gifts without love, but that even if it were possible to have them without love they would be valueless morally. What we may see here, I think, is the *wisdom* in which the gifts are given: they are given in the
{213}
order in which wisdom saw the necessity for them. Apostleship is the first one, because it was essential that the authority of Christ should be established upon earth. The apostle does that.
W.L.P. @1 Corinthians 13 would correct all assumption of man in these things?
J.T. Quite. Aside from love the greatest possible ability is valueless in the assembly.
C.A.M. I suppose you would say a sense that the Lord gave the gifts would prevent envy and that sort of thing?
J.T. I think so. You leave things as the Lord has placed them. The Head has placed things and you cannot improve on what He has done.
F.L. If you appreciate Christ and His system it should exclude any idea of envy or jealousy.
J.T. You can see the point of the apostle: he says here, "and some apostles". Apostles were brought in and they established the authority of Christ without which you can have nothing for God. The ministry of the twelve and Paul's ministry had established the authority of Christ. Then the prophets bring in the mind of God; if the will is subdued there is room for God. The evangelist adds souls. The evangelist really is for increase, gathering in.
A.N.W. Shepherds come after that, but they are very often forgotten.
J.T. Yes, quite, "shepherds and teachers".
A.F.M. What is the prophet?
J.T. The prophet brings *God* in, he affects the conscience.
W.B. It is very remarkable that we are told of Philip's four daughters that they were virgins, "which did prophesy". While they could not have spoken in the assembly when convened, yet they had the gift of prophecy. One can have the gift and yet very properly remain quiet.
{214}
J.T. It is quite right for either a sister or a brother to bring in the mind of God. However, these women are not formally called prophetesses, whereas Agabus is referred to in @Acts 21:9,10, as "a certain prophet". The fact is simply stated that Philip's daughters did prophesy.
B.T.F. The order here is most striking, the evangelists, then the shepherds and teachers.
J.T. But it is the wisdom in which they are given. If the evangelist comes he will bring in the sheep; but the sheep need to be shepherded and they need to be fed.
F.L. Shepherds and teachers go together.
R.S.S. Teaching may be very good but often does not effect much because the need of those present is not known to the teacher, and I imagine that is the reason why they go together.
J.T. The Shepherd knows the sheep; Christ calls His own sheep by name. The shepherd knows the saints¬ houses. Paul at Ephesus went "from house to house".
R.S.S. There is far greater want of pastoral care than of ministry amongst us. I think we are very sensible of that as to almost every meeting.
J.T. You think there is need of shepherds?
R.S.S. Yes, of shepherd care, especially with those who take part in meetings and otherwise. If they knew the people better at home I think that more would be added in the meetings. So the wisdom of connecting the two together is very manifest.
C.A.M. It is remarkable how many prominent men in the Old Testament were shepherds, Moses, David.
F.L. All those who led the people of God were shepherds. The false prophets were unsparingly condemned in Ezekiel and Jeremiah.
R.S.S. It is a much more arduous place to fill than that of a teacher.
{215}
W.H.F. I would like to ask a question in relation to verses 15 and 16. I see the gifts are for the edification of the body, but the body receiving from the Head increases itself with the result that it builds itself up in love. I would like to know how that is carried out today.
J.T. I think the effect of gift is directly on the individual: it affects me individually and it affects you individually, "in order that we may be no longer babes". As it reads here, "Until we all arrive at the full-grown man, at the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ; in order that we may be no longer babes, tossed and carried about by every wind of that teaching which is in the sleight of man, in unprincipled cunning with a view to systematized error". It seems to me as if the gifts are to prevent that. Each member, instead of being a babe, must arrive at full growth. I think it is in those who are *full-grown* that you get the self-edifying. That is, the necessity for gift is not in verse 16. It has done its work.
W.H.F. The body, as such, works according to its organism, independently of the gift?
J.T. But the gift prepares you for that.
W.H.F. Yes, and I want your thought now as to the exercise of that in the present day, because the saints are scattered all over.
J.T. I think the effect of the gift is to bring the saint and fit him into the organism; that is its function. I do not say the saint is independent of gift, for there is always the need of the gift, but we want to see that there is a point where I receive directly from Christ the Head and contribute as in the organism. The need of the gift is not exactly in the body, but in connection with what He is preparing for it.
W.H.F. Do you think that saints today receive
{216}
help and encouragement from the Head, as they are mixed up in the sects of men?
J.T. I am under the impression that saints in systems are dependent on gift. They have to be regarded as babes and as in "systematised error". Headship can scarcely be availed of under those circumstances. Gift is intended to deliver from such conditions.
{217}
READINGS ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS (5)
@Ephesians 5:22; @Ephesians 6
J.T. A word on the "new man" in chapter 4 and being imitators of God in chapter 5 may help. The second half of chapter 4 evidently refers to our relations with the outer world. Up to the end of verse 16 the chapter speaks of what we are in relation to each other, but then the apostle says "This I say therefore, and testify in the Lord, that ye should no longer walk as the rest of the nations walk". So that it is a question of their outer conduct now, hence the "new man" is introduced. It may be noted that both in Colossians and in Ephesians we have the new man. It is not simply, as in @Romans 6:4, "newness of life", but a new man, and this new man is a creation. It is not simply the recovered man here, it is a creation.
F.L. Therefore it emphasises the truth as "in Jesus". I suppose there is significance in the personal name of Jesus, it is what is set forth in Jesus; in *that* Man.
A.N.W. You say it is not the recovered man, but is there not a reference made to what they had been here?
J.T. Yes there is, but then what is remarked is that the new man is *created*, which you do not get in Romans. In Romans it is that the one who is baptised continues here in *newness* of life, whereas in Colossians and Ephesians it is a new creation. What is seen is the new man. It is not what you were before continued on account of recovery, but a wholly new thing. I think what distinguishes Colossians and Ephesians in this respect is that there is a new man, and that he is a new creation.
{218}
A.N.W. So the man who stole does not only cease stealing merely, but he gives. Is that the thought?
J.T. Yes, he is not simply restored to righteousness but he *gives*. There is increase.
J.S. The new man here is "created in truthful righteousness and holiness".
J.T. It is that which stands the test in the sphere of unrighteousness and unholiness.
W.B. Your thought is that the restored man is seen in @Romans 6; he reckons himself alive to God in Christ Jesus.
J.T. In Romans God has brought back what He lost, just as at Ziklag David recovered all. There was not, of course, more to recover than there was lost, but increase is seen in the new man. The new man is a creation.
R.S.S. Is there any distinction between the way the new man is presented in Colossians and in Ephesians?
J.T. I think it is a *fuller* thought in Ephesians.
R.S.S. It says in @Colossians 3:9,10, "Do not lie to one another, having put off the old man with his deeds, and having put on the new, renewed into full knowledge according to the image of him that has created him".
J.T. And in Ephesians it reads, "And being renewed in the spirit of your mind; and your having put on the new man, which according to God is created in truthful righteousness and holiness". You might say the attributes are more pronounced here. In Colossians it is after the image of Him that has created him, without saying who created him, but here it is, "which according to God is created in truthful righteousness and holiness". "Truthful righteousness" would convey that one is righteous in all due proportions, that there are no incongruities. Do you go with that?
{219}
R.S.S. Yes, as I understand it.
W.B. Is new creation a subjective work?
J.T. New creation must be subjective; that is to say, it must be something effected in the believer. Of course there are not a number of new men. I do not apprehend that any believer could set out the complete idea of the new man in himself, it is a great thought conveying what Christ is, but especially as having to do with evil. It refers to what we are here. In chapter 2:10 we are "created in Christ Jesus", but it does not say the new man there, because there it is a question of our place in the purpose of God in heaven. Here it is what we are among the nations in our walk, therefore the idea of "new". In the new man I think you have uniformity. The complete idea of what Christ was on earth is presented in the saints. That requires the *whole* company of the saints.
F.L. So in the thought of holiness we would get the love of righteousness. I mean one can be righteous and be consistent because one feels compelled by his obligation, but with holiness there is a love of righteousness for its own sake.
J.T. In Romans you grow from righteousness to holiness, but in general the epistle does not go beyond the idea of fulfilled righteousness. Now in the new man you have completeness; you have righteousness in relative proportions; things are proportionate. And in addition to that you have the element that excludes evil; holiness *abhors* evil; it not only judges it, but will not tolerate it.
F.L. In connection with the new man as we get it here we touch what was seen in the meal offering. In measure that appears in the body, which expresses the new man, that is, everything is rightly proportioned.
J.T. It is what Christ was here as a Man for God. There was righteousness, but in right relations and
{220}
proportions, and then in addition to that the absolute exclusion of evil.
A.N.W. Is that suggested in, "Be angry, and do not sin" (chapter 4:26).
J.T. I think so. Being angry might be righteous, but holiness would save you from sinning.
R.S.S. The new man is Christ characteristically, not personally.
J.T. It is important to note that. He can never be said to be the new man, because the new man is said to be created and it is after the image of Him. Christ is the image, Christ is the pattern, the new man is formed after Christ in that way.
R.S.S. You could not speak of Christ as a creation.
F.L. Christ is the Second Man out of heaven.
W.B. Is the recovered man in Romans more individual, while here it is what the Spirit forms in the whole assembly, a collective thought?
J.T. The new man is a collective thought, and the old man is a collective thought too. The old man includes all sinners. I think it reached its height when Christ was crucified. The strength of it lay in that the system at Jerusalem had primarily divine sanction.
P.H.P. You would not object to saying the new man was Christ, but Christ characteristically?
J.T. If you modified it in that way, although He is never said to be the new man. The new man is said to be *created* after the image of Him who created him, and I think in Colossians it is Christ that is alluded to. I think it is after the image of Christ.
A.F.M. He goes on to say, "namely your having put off according to the former conversation the old man which corrupts itself according to the deceitful lusts and being renewed in the spirit of your mind" (chapter 4:22). Why does that verse follow?
J.T. Truth as in Jesus emphasises what we put off, but that would include His death. If He has
{221}
had to die on account of sin we must put these things off. Our old man is crucified that the body of sin may be annulled, that is Romans; the *body* of it; that is to say, the totality of sin was annulled.
F.L. That is what Colossians required, our members put to death.
A.F.M. Then you come to the expression, "and being renewed in the spirit of your mind". How do you understand that?
J.T. I think that is how things are brought about in the soul. The mind is really the eye that takes in the light, and renewal in the spirit of it brings about a complete change in the way you look at things. You look at things entirely differently now.
J.S. So having put off and put on is an act of mind?
J.T. An act of mind precisely. Being renewed in the spirit of your mind you take up a new attitude; you have a new standard; "as the truth is in Jesus" (chapter 4:21) is that standard.
F.L. With the natural mind we look for right men in Washington, London, or Berlin, but with the renewed mind we look to Jesus.
J.T. That is the attitude of your mind. The putting off and on is undoubtedly an act of one's mind.
W.B. There seems to be quite a difference between Romans and Ephesians. In Romans you are transformed by the renewing of your mind, while here it is the *spirit* of the mind. What is the difference?
J.T. I do not know that anyone can define a spirit, whether it is the spirit of life or the spirit of your mind, but it is easily *discerned*. It is discerned in one that the spirit of his mind is altered, as renewed.
T.R. I suppose the idea of the spirit indicates life.
{222}
As our brother said, the activities of the mind are controlled by the Spirit.
J.T. That would be true, only here I think it is the spirit of one's mind. The spirit is the characterising thing.
T.R. That is better, that word *characterising*.
J.T. We were speaking of an act of mind, but I would add to that, that in putting on the new man there is the recognition of a positive creation, so that certain features are there. There are truth, righteousness and holiness. These may be said to be attributes.
R.S.S. The point you are speaking of is not very simple and yet it is exceedingly important and I think quite a test. I believe it is really the test of conversion whether you are renewed in the spirit of your mind. Take a Christian Scientist, you would not find such renewed in the spirit of his mind; his mind is still what it was before. A friend was telling me that he was speaking to one who was endeavouring to persuade him that Christian Science was right. After he had gone on a while my friend stopped him and said, 'You need go no further, you never could convince me. Are you aware that in nearly every sentence you have used a profane word?' You will not find anyone who is converted given to the use of profane words.
J.T. That is very good, because it is in one s casual conversation that the spirit of one's mind comes out.
R.S.S. You were going to say something about "imitators of God as dear children".
J.T. I think there you come to another line. It is not now the new man as answering to Jesus, but what *God* is. There was a conception of God in Paul's ministry at Ephesus, he presented God to them. That conception brought about a *generation*, but a generation gives the *parental* idea. The thought
{223}
is not of what is creative, but generative. Creation is chapter 4, but chapter 5 speaks of a generation, hence we are to be "imitators of God as beloved children". Ephesians always gives the highest thought. The adjectives here usually convey the full thought, such as "beloved children".
R.S.S. Is *God* not a characteristic name in Ephesians, as *Christ* is characteristic in Colossians?
J.T. In John's epistle you have the "children of God", but they are a class there. The children of God are manifested. Here you have a strong expression; they are *dear children*. The connection with God is more intimate in that way. The two thoughts, the "new man", and, "imitators of God as dear children" are, I am sure, most important features of the epistle.
F.L. One is according to Jesus, the other according to God as He has made Himself known.
J.T. As Christ also loved us and delivered Himself up, an offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savour: that is the model.
R.S.S. The burnt offering.
F.L. The sweet savour comes now from God's children, those that are imitators of Him.
R.S.S. Would you say just a word as to why the relationships of life are now introduced in this epistle?
J.T. I think it is very fitting that they should be, and as we remarked yesterday, what is to be observed is that the weaker element in the relation is in each case mentioned first; that is, the wife in relation to the husband; the children in relation to the parents; and the servant in relation to the master. In each case the weaker element is mentioned first. This is in reference to the fact that sin came in through the weaker element, and to guard against it. Deception came through Eve.
R.S.S. And would you not also think that God
{224}
gives prominence to the subject ones, the wife, child, servant?
J.T. The one in the place of subjection is more exposed to the tempter than the one in authority. The one in the place of subjection is sure to have more grievances.
F.L. The end of the previous verse, "Submitting yourselves to one another in the fear of the Christ", is general, is it not? It would embrace us all.
J.T. Yes; viewed as a company, and no one is regarded as in the place of authority. In family relationships you have one in each circle in authority and one in subjection. The one in the place of subjection is sure to have more grievances, and the more grievances you have the more exposed you are to Satan. He is sure to take advantage of the grievances to incite sin.
J.S. And the Lord in building His assembly would not leave any weak points of attack.
J.T. That is the idea. I think it is put in the way of guarding.
J.S. The gates of hell shall not prevail against it.
A.F.M. That paves the way for the wonderful thought of Christ and the assembly; does it not?
J.T. The apostle's heart is so full of the truth that if he touches the husband and wife he must present the great thought of Christ and the assembly. When it comes to child and parent, servant and master, he only deals with them as such, but the marriage relation being introduced, he cannot but go on and speak of Christ and the assembly; as he says, "I speak as to Christ and as to the assembly". That was what was in his heart. I think we should specially note the end of chapter 5. It is introduced you might say incidentally, and the introduction of it shows how fully occupied the apostle was with the great subject of Christ and the assembly. You do not get it anywhere else in this way and yet it does not
{225}
appear in the doctrinal part of the epistle but comes in under the exhortations.
R.S.S. Is it not the scripture that sets forth the truth of union more than any other?
J.T. I think it is. Paul alludes directly to @Genesis 2.
R.S.S. You remarked about grievances, would not these in large measure account for various troubles amongst the saints? Our grievances are largely groundless, and no doubt Satan takes advantage of this. I am not only thinking of wives, but of others, although the passage begins with the wives.
A.N.W. It is true also of children and servants.
J.T. I think it is very much true of children. Their grievances are very often imaginary, but the position of subjection suggests a grievance in itself. Unless the will is curbed the very fact that you are conscious of being in a subject place incites a grievance or a grieved spirit, whereas there may be no real cause for it in the person in the place of authority.
F.L. Satan suggested that subjection to God was irksome and lacking in privilege and dignity, therefore grievances on account of subjection are the result of Satan's promptings.
J.T. It is very remarkable that he selected the woman for his attack. She was in the place of subjection. He selected her and suggested that there was no need for that either in her or in Adam, that God was holding back something from them, so that it is a very practical thing to inquire as to the grievances we may have, is there any real cause for them?
R.S.S. I am thankful you have suggested that in connection with relationships.
A.F.M. The word in connection with the wife is "submit" and in the case of children and bondmen "obey"; submission and obedience -- how are these produced?
J.T. I think it is a matter of righteousness for a wife to be submissive. It is not a question of isolated
{226}
cases here, it is a question of the attitude of her mind. If subjection is the attitude of the mind any specific cases arising are easily settled. The exercise should be as to the attitude of the mind, as to whether one is true to the relation in which one is set; and really one's true happiness lies in accepting the obligation involved in the relation in which you are set.
F.L. It is not assumed that the wife always moves and acts under specific instructions, it is the general attitude, but the child and the servant receive definite instructions; therefore it is "obey". There is a distinction.
J.T. There is, because it is not comely that a wife should require instructions or commands. Only she should understand her husband and carry out his mind. She knows it and carries it out as subject.
J.S. Subjection in the wife would pave the way for the truth of headship.
J.T. It does. She gets the good of the wisdom there may be in her husband, and very often there is much more than she may think if she gives him his place.
A.N.W. Should we not read this in the light of chapter 1? We come back from above, so to speak. We come back to our ordinary responsibility from our dignified position.
J.T. In the first chapter Christ is said to be Head over all things to the assembly. That is the relationship between husband and wife. The headship over the household is set in them both, only she is subject and loses nothing by it. Even though she may assume that she has more mental power and ability than her husband, she loses nothing by retaining her subjection and never giving it up.
Ques. Do you think that as the husband is subject to Christ as his Head, the wife will be subject to the husband as her head?
{227}
J.T. It is a question of whether the wife's will is in action. She is said here to be subject to him in *everything*, as the assembly is subject to Christ.
W.B. It is a great help to see that the Lord Himself was subject to His parents. Although He was so immeasurably greater than His parents, He went down with them and was subject to them. The Lord Himself took that place. Although He could puzzle the doctors, yet He was subject to His parents. It has been a great help to me. You often get cases where the wife has more mental power than the husband, or where children have better minds than their parents, but the fact that the Lord having all these qualifications as no other ever had, was subject to His parents, should help us.
F.L. Children are put in subjection to father and mother equally; that is, the wife has part in the headship of the house, she has the charge of bringing up the children in a very large measure, and obedience to the mother comes in as well as to the father, which is an important fact.
R.S.S. It is "your *parents*".
F.L. It says, "honour your father and mother", and "obey your parents in the Lord".
J.T. The apostle does not stop with instructions to the wife; he says, "Husbands love your own wives, even as Christ also loved the assembly and has delivered himself up for it".
F.L. It is good for husbands to bear in mind the part Adam took, because he surrendered his headship.
J.T. The husband is to make the yoke as easy and as light as possible, so as to avoid all possible grievances and bitterness.
F.L. The spirit of this I suppose is set up in the Hebrew servant, "I love my master, my wife and my children" (@Exodus 21:5). The husband's part involves sacrifice. Hence the order in the household is brought about by love, not exactly by commandment.
{228}
T.R. It is not the rule of mount Sinai but of mount Zion.
B.T.F. I think you said once that we are only enabled to carry out the relationships of life as we understand the truth of Christ and the assembly.
J.T. The standard is high in Ephesians. You have no light as to family relationships in Romans, or in Corinthians really; we get it in Colossians and Ephesians. It is the heavenly influence, that is the thing for the household.
F.L. And in Timothy you get a measure of it.
J.T. We do, because it is to support the order of the house of God.
W.B. The household seems to have an important place. Why is so much said of it?
J.T. I think it shows how much God thinks about His own institutions, and the household is an institution that existed before sin came in, and is seen under the Christian influence on an even higher plane than it could have been seen in Adam and Eve.
F.L. So every relationship in which we are set is literally a counterpart of what is established in the divine system; that is, parentage, husband and wife, and a system in which servants render obedience because of one universal Lord and Master. Therefore all these earthly relationships are the reflection of what is already established in the divine system. That gives dignity to them and helps us to carry them out.
J.T. As you were remarking about the parents, obedience refers to both, and I think what one may observe is that the children's qualification for the testimony begins there, for if they are to live long on the earth, as it reads here, "that it may be well with thee, and that thou mayest be long-lived on the earth", it is to be a witness. The child really qualifies as a unit of the tabernacle in beginning to recognise authority in the parents. God has placed authority
{229}
where it ought to be least irksome, namely, in those who love us.
F.L. I would like to suggest in connection with Christ and the assembly, that we all have a certain sense of subjection to God and to the Lord, but we are defective as to the authority of the assembly. I am inclined to think there is the idea in this obedience to father and mother of subjection to the assembly.
J.T. Quite so, and when a child who recognizes this injunction comes into fellowship the difficulty in dealing with him is not great. He has learned obedience already, there is subjection to Christ and to the assembly. It is quite clear that the government of the house of God requires authority in the assembly, as well as in Christ.
T.R. That accounts for many children not coming into fellowship, because they are lacking in this.
A.N.W. I suppose the assembly is the highest court of appeal in the universe.
J.T. It is morally, the spiritual man knows no other really.
T.R. What is the idea of "in the Lord"?
J,T. I suppose it is that the child recognises the authority vested in the parents as from the Lord. It is therefore the authority of the Lord in a way.
A.F.M. The truth of baptism underlies it.
P.H.P. And would it not make allowance for a child's conscience as well? He may have a conscience about a matter.
F.L. It is rather a serious responsibility for parents to let children grow up in insubjection. It disarranges the order of things in the assembly.
W.B. It adds, "for this is just". What do you understand by that?
J.T. It is right. The child should know that subjection to his parents is morally due them.
R.S.S. It is a thing that speaks for itself.
{230}
J.T. Yes. It is very beautiful that in the commandments provision is made for a child. A promise is added, "the first commandment with promise". God graciously encourages the young heart. There must be something in the way of hope for the young heart, so the yoke is not irksome, there is hope in it.
R.S.S. It is the one of the ten commandments that is enjoined today, and I suppose because of the promise.
J.T. Yes, it can be used in the Christian household because of the promise attached to it.
W.B. It is good for a man to bear the yoke in his youth.
Ques. Will you say a word about fathers now?
J.T. "And ye fathers, do not provoke your children to anger, but bring them up in the discipline and admonition of the Lord". That is the obligation of the parent, he is not to provoke. His position would give licence to his will. Those of us who are fathers are quite conscious that the position of a father gives a certain licence to the will, which we are apt to use unfairly.
In closing, the apostle says, "For the rest, brethren;" this corresponds with @Philippians 3:1, and the fact that you have these expressions in both epistles helps you to discern the difference between the two. In Philippians, "For the rest, my brethren", is in the *middle* of the epistle; that is to say, the apostle says as much after it as before it, indicating I think that he was more free in writing to the Philippians. Now in writing to the Ephesians, "For the rest, brethren", is followed only by the question of armour and warfare. I do not think he was quite so free in writing to the Ephesians, the epistle is more official, whereas in Philippians he speaks of things in a more intimate way.
{231}
J.S. Is the addition here to protect all he has said before, in that he had presented the whole light of the heavenly position?
J.T. I think that is it. It is all before you, and now you are to stand.
J.S. You are immediately put on the defensive.
J.T. You are in the centre of everything, so to speak, and are, therefore, to "stand".
P.H.P. The way it opens is characteristic. "Be strong in the Lord". It is "Rejoice in the Lord", in Philippians.
J.T. There was much to be contended for in view of the light contained in this epistle, and it really has a voice for the whole assembly. It is a question of standing for what has been committed to us.
Ques. What would you say the whole armour of God is?
J.T. It is *whole* armour; there must be no part missing. In Romans you have certain features, but in Ephesians you must have it *all*.
T.R. There is no vulnerable point.
J.T. God has come out, as it were, into the conflict, so you are to take *His* armour. You see it is not the idea of what we call "trench warfare", which is modern, nor is it a position in a citadel. It is open field warfare.
A.N.W. The new translation has the word "struggle".
F.L. This is written in the light of the assembly in its completeness. The Thessalonians were a young assembly and so not all the parts of the armour are mentioned. We have only the breast-plate and the helmet there.
J.T. The whole man is to be protected; even the feet are mentioned. The armour is all moral, it refers to what is effected in the believer by the Spirit.
J.S. It shows how the apostle feels the truth of
{232}
all he has presented here, and how he would put us on the defensive for it.
F.L. There is the suggestion that as the assembly began to take form Satan began his attack, and his attack was according to the light that came out. Therefore in Thessalonians we get less, but in Ephesians we get the whole truth, and that is why there is need of having on the whole armour, as the attack might be on any part.
W.B. The apostle says, "Our struggle is not against flesh and blood". What does he mean by that?
J.T. "But against principalities". I think it is an allusion to what the Israelites had to contend with in Canaan. They had to contend with flesh and blood, they had to deal with literal men. We have not to deal with such, our warfare is spiritual.
W.L.P. Satan would be more against the heavenly side of the truth.
B.T.F. What are the enemies and how do they assert their power?
J.T. That is an important thing to find out, what they are and where they are. The Spirit makes it very clear "Against principalities, against authorities, against the universal lords of this darkness, against spiritual power of wickedness in the heavenlies". That is to say, it is not typically the Amalekites, nor Sihon and Og, it is the inhabitants of Canaan. The seven nations in Canaan are the type. They typify wicked spirits in the heavenlies, not isolated units, but principalities and powers. They are organised.
A.F.M. And they affect us on earth.
J.T. They have means of attack here, but the centre is in heaven. Satan himself is there, as we know. It is important to know they are organised, principalities and powers.
B.T.F. How do they exert their power?
{233}
J.T. That is not so easy to define. One thing has to be noted in this epistle, that Satan is the prince of the power of the air. It seems as if the very air is influenced against us. I believe too that men are used, and their teachings, to dislodge us from the heavenly position we are set in.
F.L. I think it is a counterpart of what is secured in the assembly as in the power of the Spirit. You can hardly define how it is worked, but it is a spiritual power in the assembly. Now there is a spiritual power exercised by Satan to divert the saints from their heavenly position.
A.N.W. Would the Lord's temptation in the wilderness serve as a figure?
J.T. Only of course that was the wilderness, but it indicates how the thing is carried on.
Ques. In regard to the different parts of the armour, would the breast-plate indicate that we are reached through our affections, the helmet through the mind?
J.T. I think it is essential that we take the *whole* armour of God. Have your loins girded about with truth; that is the first element presented; that is for the protection of the affections; that is, the loins. We are all very apt to be loose as to what we listen to and what we read, and we get defiled by these things because of not having our affections tucked up. That is really the idea; it is the tucking up, not of the heart, but of the *loins*; they are to be girded about with truth. So that you are protected from listening to and reading and seeing evil things, things that would defile the affections. If your affections become corrupted through these things your heavenly caste is gone, that is how Satan would take it away. And then following on that you would have the breast-plate of righteousness, that is for the conscience; that keeps the conscience right. Satan cannot assail you through the conscience if
{234}
you have the breast-plate on; that is to say, if you are righteous.
W.L.P. You were referring to what we read?
J.T. There are things presented, especially in literature, that corrupt the lower affections of a man. The loins refer to the lower affections of a man.
F.L. In art, pictures, literature, and the like.
J.T. We have to be on our guard against those things, and the point is to have the loins of your mind tucked up. You do not allow them to be straying around loosely, as a garment flowing on the ground.
J.S. They had been previously delivered from these things, as pointed out in the beginning of the reading. They burned the books at Ephesus, and now are to have the affections tucked up.
J.T. But people acquire a lot of new books, a lot of new libraries are built up. Saints give up the library used in unconverted days, but they may have a more select one, which is nevertheless corrupt. Hence you must have your loins girded with truth, you test every book, everything you read, by truth.
Ques. Is there any more direct way in which we are attacked than through these things, through literature.
J.T. I think Satan has a way to attack us directly. You may find it in prayer even, an opposing force you could not very well account for, and you may find it otherwise.
F.L. Satan *hinders*.
P.H.P. "The combat I have for you". That would be combat with spiritual powers.
J.T. And it would be perhaps while in prayer. As it has often been said, there must have been great opposition or there would not have been such great conflict. Paul had great conflict for the Colossians and as many as had not seen his face in the flesh.
{235}
J.S. Does the apostle not allude to his experience at Ephesus? "If to speak after the manner of men, I have fought with beasts at Ephesus" (@1 Corinthians 15:32).
J.T. Yes. And the angel sent to Daniel was hindered for a certain time by the prince of Persia.
A.F.M. With us, is the struggle defensive or aggressive?
J.T. Mainly defensive, because you are seen here as having acquired the territory. You do not contend to get new territory, but to occupy that which you have already secured. It is *standing* here. On being saved from Egypt the people were told to "Go forward", and in the wilderness it was a forward movement, but in the land it is that you stand, you do not let go what you have. We have had a wonderful heritage allotted to us. Now the question is, are we going to let it go or are we going to stand for it? And if it is to be contended for and preserved amongst us we must have the armour on, otherwise we shall be overcome.
F.L. That would be suggested in @2 Corinthians 10:4: "The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling down of strongholds".
J.T. I think that raises another question, namely, that the apostles¬ warfare was an aggressive warfare. They had to go forward and overthrow evil. "For the overthrow", he says, "of strongholds". Everything must be brought down to the obedience of Christ. Now the apostles did that, so far as I understand, just as Joshua overthrew the seven nations; the testimony of the apostles brought down the world-system. I think the narrative as regards Ephesus in the Acts shows that the whole world-system was brought down there by the testimony. The weapons Paul used were not carnal, but they were mighty through God for the overthrow of strongholds. One of the strongholds was typified by Kirjath-sepher, the
{236}
"city of the book", (@Joshua 15:16). That was a very important place, because it is that which holds men's *minds*. Now the superiority of the testimony through Paul at Ephesus brought that down, so that those who owned the books burned them; and they were valuable, they were worth fifty thousand pieces of silver.
J.S. And as a result all that were in Asia heard the word.
J.T. Paul's testimony at Ephesus was such that nothing could stand before it; it was the superiority of the thing -- nothing could stand before it. The Ephesians had to stand in that. They had not to be aggressive, their responsibility was to stand, to maintain the ground.
R.S.S. The armour sets forth what is subjective, it is a question of the work of God in our souls.
J.T. You have salvation, so that you lift up your head; you are not afraid. And then the sword of the Spirit is the word of God; not simply the Bible, but that which in the word to the "young men", "*abideth in you*" (@1 John 2:14).
R.S.S. But would you not say that was aggressive?
J.T. It may be aggressive, but it is necessary for defence. The Lord used it for defence.
Ques. Would you say a word about the feet being shod?
J.T. It is evangelical, your feet shod with the preparation of the glad tidings of peace.
F.L. According to @Isaiah 52:7, "How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that bringeth good tidings".
J.S. You carry Christ with you.
C.H.B. @Jude 3 says, "contend earnestly".
J.S. Has there not been a good deal of warfare in the last hundred years in connection with the recovery of the truth?
J.T. But that is because the truth was given up.
{237}
The position had been lost and had to be regained. Had the saints stood by this there would have been no need for that. Our position now is very much like that at Ephesus, it is a question of our contending for what has been recovered for us. As our brother remarks, "contend earnestly for the faith once delivered". We cannot but see that it has been delivered to us.
A.N.W. Paul was not deterred, he declared the whole counsel of God. Has it all been recovered?
J.T. One does not like to assume too much, but certainly the headship of Christ and the place of the assembly in the counsels of God have been made clear.
W.B. I was thinking about Naboth, he was offered recompense for his inheritance but he declined to give it up.
J.T. That is the thing, we need to be like Naboth.
J.S. The armour would be God's provision for us.
J.T. Yes. It is the armour of God. It is not an armour like Saul's, that you cannot put on, it is an armour that fits you because it really is what you are by virtue of new creation. You do not feel like David when he put on Saul's armour, that it is too big for you or unsuitable to you.
W.B. Afterwards we have prayer and supplication in the Spirit (verse 18).
J.T. You feel how befitting that is, that there should be dependence.
I.N.H. It says, "all saints". How wide is that circle?
F.L. I suppose it takes in all that belong to Christ on earth at the moment. I think that when we get to the Supper and contemplate the loaf and the cup the whole number of the saints comes before us.
J.T. You feel the absent ones, you miss them. So that Ephesians is not simply local, it is universal;
{238}
they had love for all the saints and here they are to pray for all, and especially for those ministering. Paul says, "in order that utterance may be given to me in the opening of my mouth to make known with boldness the mystery of the glad tidings". That is what Satan is against, it needs great power to open it up.
J.S. So that the testimony might have a free course.
J.T. Yes, the mystery. That is what Satan is so especially set against, "the mystery of the glad tidings". As we were remarking the apostle had great conflict for the Colossians that they might know the mystery, and not only for them, but for all who had not seen his face in flesh. He was exercised that *they* might have ability to *know* it, but here that *he* might have ability to *make it known*.
F.L. If we look at the departure from this in @Revelation 2 it is first of all loss of first love, and then it is the corruption of leaven one might say, and then we read of Satan's seat. Terrible results from an opening and loosening of the armour!
A.F.M. Is prayer part of the armour?
J.T. To use a military figure, through it your communicating lines are not cut; they are kept open through prayer. The enemy would cut your lines of communication.
J.S. Tychicus is introduced in that connection, he maintains the connection.
J.T. He was a faithful minister and beloved brother.
Ques. Do you think Stephen had on the whole armour of God?
J.T. Yes. It is well to keep up the lines of communication. You see, no matter how good your armour may be, if you have not supplies there must be surrender sooner or later. There must be supply and the supply is through prayer.
{239}
T.R. The apostle did not want them to starve. They might be well armoured but if they starved it would be all over.
R.S.S. We just touched upon the decline, that Ephesus lost her first love; what do you understand by losing first love?
J.T. They *left* it. It was apostasy in principle; leaving, going back, falling back. The affections that had been originally begotten in this assembly through the presentation of Christ in Paul's ministry had been left. They had not apostatised altogether, but had left their first love, "thou hast left thy first love".
R.S.S. That would be in keeping with all in Asia turning away from Paul. Asia would include Ephesus.
P.H.P. The last verse of the epistle reads, "Grace with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in incorruption". That suggests first love, does it not?
J.T. Yes, they had not been corrupted yet. He had been exercised about the Ephesians that they should not be corrupted as Satan corrupted Eve.
{240}
COMPANIONSHIP
@Hebrews 11:24 - 26; @2 Kings 13:20,21;@Colossians 2:12,13
I have it on my mind to speak about companionship. Christians need companions, and I want to show you that as regards the companions you are to be identified with publicly here on earth, this in a sense is left to your own selection; whereas in regard of the companions you are to have in the future, they are selected for you by God. I hope to be able to make these two remarks clear to you, and to show that companionship in either connection begins with baptism. The question of companionship is one of the most practical that can be brought to our attention, especially for the young. It is of great importance that, as baptised, we should make up our minds as to our companions. Hence I have thought of Moses as a typical believer in this respect. After his baptism, I refer to his being in the river (@Exodus 2:3); in due course he made his selection. It is said: "When he was come to years".
Now one is peculiarly exposed if one has not "come to years"; therefore a junior should be much concerned as to maturing. It is said of the man in @John 9:21, as you will remember, "he is of age". A great many believers are not matured, and hence they are exposed. When Moses was "come to years", he made his selection of the people of God. Now at the outset I want to speak a work to the young as to their selection. One might assume that many of the young at these meetings are here on account of having chosen the people of God. It is for each young person to decide before the Lord as to what it is that has drawn him hither. Of Moses it is said, that "he chose to suffer affliction *with the people of*
{241}
*God*". The people of God are a class of people who have distinctive marks upon them. They are in reproach. They are in affliction. It is for you, young believer, to answer before the Lord as to whether they are *your* people. Have you decided to take your place with the people of God? That was what Moses *did*.
I take the first half of the book of Exodus; that is, up to the end of chapter 14, as covering the outgoing of the believer from the world. He is not to go out from the world privately. It is said of the Israelites that they went out *in the sight of all the Egyptians* (@Numbers 33:3). They went out *publicly*, and they "went out with a high hand"; the hand of God. They went out triumphantly. I wish to see every young believer in the ranks of those who go out publicly. It is said "they went out harnessed". They went out in military order, but the principle of selection of one's companions had preceded their outgoing. Moses was their leader. It was he that had led the way in the *exodus*. How had he led the way? It was as one who, when he was come to years, set the example of finding his companionship with the people of God.
Now it was for him to do that, and it is for *you* to do it. It is an all important question for you to answer as to whether you *have* done it; as to whether you have resolved in your soul to take your place in companionship with the people of God in affliction. In a general way, the companions that you choose will indicate to the spiritual where you are. "Evil communications", says the apostle Paul in @1 Corinthians 15:33, "corrupt good manners". Many a young man began well, and learned good manners in the house of God, but became corrupted by evil companionships. We do not read of Moses after he had made up his mind ever taking up with injurious companions. I would appeal to the young. I feel
{242}
that we have arrived at a time in which the young are very peculiarly exposed, and it is a very remarkable thing that the first twelve chapters of Exodus emphasise the young so much.
The first chapter of Exodus is almost entirely occupied with the endeavour of Pharaoh to destroy all the male young; that is the key, in a way, to the teaching. If the male young were destroyed the national Israel would quickly disappear. Satan knew that. The parents of Moses, as well as the midwives of Israel, were used of God to preserve the males in Israel. That is what the Spirit of God is endeavouring to do. Happy are those who are engaged in the preservation of the seed that is to continue the testimony of God in this world! The names of the midwives are given to us, and, more than that, it is said that God made houses for them. The male young in Israel are represented in Moses; he advanced rapidly, and having come to years, he made a selection. Would to God that every young man here, and every young woman, would make his and her selection, and that their selection might be the people of God!
As I said before, the beginning of our course for God is baptism. And having said so much as to the selection that it is for us to make, which, I may add, involves fellowship, I wish to proceed to the other side of the subject, that baptism, whilst bearing testimony towards this *world* and our position in it, also looks towards heaven. I want to make that clear to you, hence I have read in @2 Kings 13 and in @Colossians 2. Baptism, as I said, has a bearing towards the world in testimony, that is the side presented in the epistle to the Romans. In other words, the baptised person takes "the way". Many of you here will be aware that the expression "the way" in Acts is almost a synonym of Christianity. It had become pronounced as leading out of the world,
{243}
for a way leads somewhere, and *the way* leads out of the world. For a moment I would call attention to an exemplification of that in the gospel of Mark. It is said of blind Bartimaeus that he "sat on the wayside begging", and Jesus of Nazareth passed by. He was on *the wayside*, but Jesus was on *the way*. It was a definite way, that led through Jericho to Jerusalem, and Jesus was on it. Bartimaeus cried out to the Lord and the Lord called him. It was said to him, "he calleth thee". The Lord would call us on to the way. The man came and his need was defined. "Lord", he says, "that I might receive my sight". And the Lord says to him "Go thy way, thy faith hath made thee whole". And then we are told that he "followed Jesus *in the way*" (@Mark 10:46 - 52).
Now I want *you* to get on to that *way*. I want you to become followers in that way. There is only one way. Others were following the Lord, a crowd was following Him, but of Bartimaeus whose eyes were opened, it is said, that "he followed Jesus *in the way*". Now that is what I understand to be fellowship. Are you in it? All other ways are byways, however agreeable, they are crooked, perverse ways. *The way*, the only way, is known to the Spirit; it is spoken evil of by men, but it has to be taken up by faith. Thank God for the many that are in it! One would love to see the number augmented. I believe the Lord would appeal to the young, that they might take up the path of following Jesus in the way.
Well now, as I said, baptism, while it separates from the world, also directs toward heaven. The Red Sea, which is a type of baptism, coalesces with the Jordan. There is no wilderness in Colossians and no wilderness in Ephesians. I want to dwell upon that, and I want to show you that from that point of view *God* gives you your companions. I do
{244}
not suppose for a moment that God would leave it to me to select my companionship in heaven. All the selection in regard to divine counsels is by God himself, it is all on the principle of the counsel of His own will. He takes counsel with no one. He has selected companions for His beloved Son.
The idea really begins in the grave, figuratively speaking. We are "buried with him", says Paul, "in baptism". We do well to consider the Lord's grave. There is no grave like it. To be buried there is an honour, but it is not only that we are buried there, but we are buried *with Him* there. We read in @John 20 that there were those who "went home" after being at the sepulchre. Peter and John went home. Of Mary Magdalene we are told that she arose very early in the morning, before it was day, to go there. She went to the sepulchre, and Peter and John ran to it on receiving her tidings. She ran and they ran, and that other disciple did outrun Peter to the sepulchre of Jesus, and he, "stooping down" and "looking in" saw the linen clothes lying, "yet went he not in". He did not go in as yet, but he *looked in*. It was a wonderful sight. Jesus was not there; the grave clothes were there. Peter came afterwards; he was a slower runner than John, but he arrived, and he went into the sepulchre and he led John into it. John had led him in the running, but Peter led John into the sepulchre. John went in after him, but, beloved friends, it is said that *they both went home after being there*. They did not, as I might say, using a figurative expression, go into the epistle to the Ephesians *out* of the grave. I may remark that Ephesians is the grand terminal of the road that begins with "*the way*".
The apostles got light. It is said of John that "he saw and believed". They had not known the scriptures that He should rise from the dead, but now they believe. It was well that they did believe,
{245}
but in spite of their faith, they went home. What about ourselves, beloved brethren? In spite of our baptism, in spite of our professed identification with Christ in the grave, where do *we* go? The two disciples went away again to their own home, but "Mary stood without at the sepulchre weeping". If I might classify their state, I should say that the two disciples were simply *Roman* Christians. They had gone as far as the epistle to the Romans, but burial with Christ leads on to being *risen* with Him, quickened with Him, and seated in the heavenly places in Him, and that is Colossians and Ephesians. Instead of going on the two disciples went home.
Now I want to put you on your guard in reference to this. "Mary stood without at the sepulchre weeping". It does not say that they wept. They believed. But it says that Mary wept. They represent the intelligent side, Mary the affections. The point in Colossians is to get at the affections. In Colossians it is "the Christ". There is more said in Colossians about the personal dignity of Christ than there is in Ephesians. Why? It is in order to establish Him in His personal dignity and greatness in the affections of the saints. That is Colossians. Hence, as I might classify Mary, she belonged to the affection side. She was prepared to have Christ established in her heart, and she got what she was prepared for. You may be assured that you will get all you want in that respect if you are prepared for it. She remained at the sepulchre, she was thinking of the One who had been there. "Where thou diest", said Ruth, "will I die, and there will I be buried" (@Ruth 1:17). That was her affection and it was Mary's affection.
Now, you are not going to honour the Lord by being buried with Him, but you are honoured by His allowing you into His sepulchre. "Buried with him" is association with Him in His death. I just
{246}
want for a moment to connect the passage I read in @2 Kings 13 with this passage in regard of Mary Magdalene. The whole scene on earth is to be marked by a Man risen from the dead. It is said in @2 Kings 13:20, that the Moabites invaded the land at the beginning of the year. I wonder how you take account of these Moabites? The beginning of the year for Israel, for a true Israelite, was the passover. Moses said, "This month shall be unto you the beginning of months: it shall be the first month of the year to you" (@Exodus 12:2). Now I would ask you, what is to occupy the ground at the beginning of the year in *your* soul? Is it to be Pride? God says, "we have heard of the pride of Moab; he is very proud". They invaded the land, it says, "at the beginning of the year". We have to look out for our beginnings, beloved friends. I quite see that we have to take care of the endings as well, but I believe most Christians make poor progress because of poor beginnings. Pride is not judged. I do not know what it is you are proud of, but there is something. If you are not progressing there is some Moabitish principle at work.
Ruth was a Moabitess, but she was not proud. She invaded the land too, but not as a proud woman. She had been bereft of everything that might make her proud; she was a poor widow. At what time did she invade the land? At the beginning of the barley harvest. That refers to Christ risen from the dead, I believe. She left her pride in Moab and got the good of the barley harvest, and she continued to the wheat harvest too, and became the *companion*, in her marriage, of Boaz. She was a Moabitess minus the pride!
It is said in @2 Kings 13:21, that a band of Moabites; that is, a party, invaded the land. Oh, those parties! You may be assured that if there is a party, pride is at the bottom of it. The party wants to occupy
{247}
the ground, but there is the grave of Elisha! I need not say that it refers to Christ's death. Thank God for such a perfect remedy for our pride! That is where all the pride of man comes down; pride is a deadly evil, and if not judged will come under the severe discipline of God. In verse 21 it says, "they were burying a man". Who is the man? The man that is suffering from a party, for a party will cause suffering. Have you got into a party in connection with the things of God? What is the remedy? *Bury the man*. The flesh in any of us is likely to be aroused by a Moabitish band, and hence the need for *burial*. Mark you, the man was *dead* but he was not *buried*. Burial is an element in the gospel, and a most essential element; we have to be buried. It says "As they were burying a man, that, behold they spied a band of men; and they cast the man into the sepulchre of Elisha". How happy that was! How happy to find such a grave! The grave of Christ is to be the Christian's grave. It is said they let him down. There are those that do that for you. There are those who will let you down, and they are not your worst friends though they may appear to be so, but even an Assyrian is a good friend for us at times, if he helps to bring to nothing the pride of our hearts.
Well, they let him down, and as he went down he touched the bones of Elisha, and as he touched the bones of the prophet he revived; that was the beginning for him. That was the beginning of the year for him. He did not begin with the Moabites, he began with the bones of Elisha. I wonder if we begin there? We were speaking in our readings on Ephesians about the *depth*, "that ye ... may be able to comprehend ... the breadth, and length, and depth, and height" (chapter 3:18). This man discovered something about the depth. What did he find there? Corruption? No, beloved friends, he found *life* in
{248}
the bones of Elisha. We have a type of Christ there. "He that descended is the same also that ascended" (@Ephesians 4:10). We too must have the descending, but oh, how happy for us that it is in association with Christ, and that our life begins in the grave with Christ! Do not misunderstand me, it cannot of course be literal; Christ is no longer in the grave. The epistle to the Colossians was written long after the resurrection of Christ, yet Paul uses that language. He says "Buried with him in baptism wherein also ye are risen with him". It is not said that Elisha was risen at this time, it is only a figure. The man who was let down revived and stood up on his feet. It is good to think of a man like that. How different was such a man from the Moabites!
We were speaking about Paul, that his name means *small*. He was not a Moabite, he had ceased to be Saul, to be a Moabite. He was a risen man, "risen through faith of the working of God". Any mark of the flesh is a reproach there, a risen man is a witness to the power of God. It is not what I have accomplished, but what God has done for me. Now Paul is an example; he had, as it were, touched the bones of Elisha, he had come to realise the import of the death of Christ, he had been buried with Him morally. "Buried with him in baptism; wherein also ye are risen with him through the faith of the operation of God". *With Him*! See what companionship you have as risen! This man that we read of in 2 Kings stood up alone, and what an answer that was to the Moabite bands; a risen man standing upon his feet! But in Christianity it is, "*Risen with him*", that is, *with Christ*. You are not standing up alone, you are standing up with Christ, in companionship with Christ. How blessed indeed is that word *with*! It is used three times in this passage "Buried *with* him", "risen *with* him", and "quickened together *with* him". Now quickened with Christ involves
{249}
that we are made to live in His life. We are with Him in the same bundle of life.
We were speaking this afternoon about @John 11, in which we are told that Lazarus was raised from the dead, and in chapter 12 it is said, that Jesus came to Bethany six days before the Passover. He came to Bethany "where Lazarus was, which had been dead, whom he raised from the dead". Lazarus was a risen man. Then it is said "they made him a supper, and ... Lazarus was one of them that sat at the table with him". There is association. Now "quickened together with Christ" places us with Him in life; as to our affections we are living with Christ. This is on the road to heaven. Colossians is not going out of the world, *it is going into heaven*. The exodus is Romans, Colossians is Joshua going in, "quickened together with Christ". What companionship! You do not go in alone. The companionship is provided for you by the Father. Think of the companionship in which we go into heaven! The Lord Jesus takes us in, in all the dignity of His Person; He takes us in as "quickened together with him".
Well now, just to return for a moment to Mary. I was remarking that she corresponds to the Colossian Christian in this sense, that she remains at the sepulchre. She does not "go home", she remains at the sepulchre, but the sepulchre was in the garden, and hence, Mary was in the garden, and the Lord Jesus appears to her and He calls her by name. He calls her "Mary". Would you not like to hear the Lord's voice calling you by name? Then He says to her: "Touch me not for I am not yet ascended to my Father". That was as much as to say, 'When I go there, you will have part with me then; you will have my companionship then'. Then he says, "Go to my brethren". She is not to remain in the garden, but "Go to *my* brethren",
{250}
He says, not, *the* brethren. *The brethren* are a class of people in this world distinguished by certain marks, they bear the character of Christ according to what He was here in the flesh, and anyone who loves them proves the genuineness of his Christianity. But the Lord here signalises the dignity of the companionship that Mary was to have. He says, "*My* brethren".
I want to make one point clear to you before I close, and that is that companionship provided for you here goes into heaven. The Lord says: "I go to prepare a place for you" (@John 14:2) and He also says: "Father, I will that they also whom thou hast given me be with me where I am" (@John 17:24). Is not that companionship? Yes, beloved friends, it is the companionship that is provided for you in the Father's house. Now that was what I had to say. I hope it is clear to you, and I especially hope it is clear to you that baptism directs toward heaven. You begin by association with Christ in the grave; then we go on to being risen with Him, and then to being raised up together and seated in the heavenlies in Him. So that we shall be with the Lord Jesus there, and with those whom He has selected for His companionship there. He is the first-born among many brethren there.
{251}
Pages 251 - 339 -- "The Spirit of Christ in David, Headship, etc". Belfast and Edinburgh, 1916 (Volume 33).
THE SPIRIT OF CHRIST IN DAVID (1)
@1 Samuel 16
J.T. We are accustomed to refer to David in connection with his prowess as a warrior, as a type of the Lord, but perhaps the *spirit* that marked him is not so often pondered on. The Lord said to Samuel that He would provide a king from among the sons of Jesse the Bethlehemite, and the spirit that marked David from the outset was in keeping with the choice. It tends to verify the principle in the Scriptures that it is the *second* that is usually established; for example, there was the first covenant and the second covenant; the first man and the second Man. "That was not first which is spiritual, but that which is natural; and afterward that which is spiritual" (@1 Corinthians 15:46).
S.M. It evidences the resources of God.
J.T. Yes, He was not shut up to the first man.
W.H. The second is marked by the spirit of Christ.
J.T. Yes, that is what I thought. "That was not first which is spiritual, but that which is natural; and afterward that which is spiritual".
E.M. Do you connect that with the anointing?
J.T. Yes. The man anointed was suited already to be anointed. The whole scene in connection with David's selection and anointing was marked at the outset by natural sensibilities and instincts; the natural test was so very real that even a man like Samuel came short. The scene was marked not by hostility to what was of God, but being governed by natural feelings, the spiritual was wanting. Even Samuel himself was affected.
J.M. Do we not often see that amongst the people of God?
{252}
J.T. The fact that Samuel did not escape it makes it serious for every one of us. "How long wilt thou mourn for Saul", the Lord says to Samuel, "seeing I have rejected him". He was behind in this way. Samuel was not up to the mark, and arriving at Bethlehem, he looks on Eliab, and says, Surely the Lord's anointed is before Him. The eldest son being thus regarded indicates that Samuel, for the moment, was governed by natural principles.
E.M. He looked at the outward appearance.
J.M. Is it not remarkable that David was not on the scene at all?
J.T. That shows that Jesse, and the whole household, in fact, were governed by the natural: they did not make room for divine sovereignty.
J.P.W. David was the eighth son. What is indicated in that?
T.M.G. The resurrection man; one outside the order of the first man.
J.T. Yes, outside the order of nature. How the natural intrudes itself in our calculations?
R.L. The thought of the seventh would point to perfection; if there was anything in the flesh it would be in the seventh.
J.T. Yes; seven were allowed to pass before Samuel. I think this would give the order of nature the fullest possible opportunity if there was anything to be found suitable in it. The Lord says to Samuel, "The Lord seeth not as man seeth; for man looketh on the outward appearance, but the Lord looketh on the heart". That was a very keen rebuke for Samuel. The apostle, in writing to the Corinthians, says, "are ye not carnal, and walk according to man?" (@1 Corinthians 3:3).
R.L. Was David sanctified amongst the sons of Jesse? It is said in verse 5, "he sanctified Jesse and his sons".
J.T. Samuel did not know about him evidently; he was simply left out. Three names are given; and
{253}
then it goes on to say the seven sons of Jesse passed before Samuel, and he says, "The Lord hath not chosen these". It is very remarkable how David was simply left out.
W.H. Would you say the spirit of Christ was not characterising the company, and so they could not discern rightly?
J.T. Quite so; while we are on natural lines we are devoid of light and discernment. However, where there is reality God comes in, as we see here.
Rem. It is Samuel, of course, who writes these things against himself.
J.M. Where there is no will and there is reality, there is room for adjustment, and there is adjustment.
J.T. Yes. There was not any will with Samuel. I think the word he received, "The Lord seeth not as man seeth", pulled him up and set him on right lines. And one makes a very good recovery who has been nurtured as Samuel had been. The Lord graciously sets him on the scent, as it were, and he rejects this one, and this one, and this one, right on to the seventh. He did not say the second time, "Surely the Lord's anointed is before him". I dare-say they were all primed for the occasion; but the scene is pretty much like a meeting as we speak, a season when we come together specially; and the question is whether we come together on natural or spiritual lines. If we come together priding ourselves on what we know, we are on the wrong line; but one often sees in a meeting that the Lord comes in and checks things, and then we get on the right lines. We are made to feel how entirely we are dependent on the Lord in our meetings. There should be subjection; and if we wait on the Spirit He comes in and makes Christ prominent. There may be a good many negatives before you get there, but you are set on the right line.
{254}
W.H. A good deal depends on giving the Lord His place.
J.T. I think Samuel had been accustomed to hear the Lord. He began in that way as a child; so he had a practised ear. It is very searching that even with the experience of a man like Samuel this could occur. He came to the meeting mourning for Saul, and he was at a disadvantage in that way, not that he did not know, because the Lord had told him why he had rejected Saul.
T.M.G. David's occupation at the moment indicated the spirit that marked him; he was keeping his father's sheep.
E.M. It was not official.
J.P.W. Is it verse 11 that you bring in in connection with the meeting: "We will not sit at table until he (David) comes hither"?
J.T. Yes; there is no rest till Christ is brought in. However much may be *said*, there is really a *standing* attitude until Christ has His place.
J.M. That seems to introduce headship in a way.
J.T. Yes, I think so. If Christ has His place you get the good of Him as Head. David was anointed in the midst of his brethren, and the sons of Jesse never looked so well, I am sure, as when David was anointed in their midst; and Eliab had to take his place amongst the rest.
S.M. Do you connect the thought of the meeting with the seven sons?
J.T. The scene as a whole, Samuel and Jesse and the household. It was a special occasion.
S.M. There were seven there ready to fill the position.
J.T. Yes, apparently all were ready; and they were all ennobled now, being the brethren of a man like David.
T.M.G. Until that man was brought in they were not much.
{255}
J.T. Till then it was a negative affair. It was a mercy it *was* negative, or David would never have been brought in. If you see a natural line taken up in a meeting, the exercise should be to check it. The prophet is checked here by a very distinct word from the Lord. "The Lord seeth not as man seeth". David anointed in the midst of his brethren is a very fine scene. Saul was not anointed in the midst of his brethren; it was a very small affair compared with this, although, of course, very wonderful in a way. Saul had been looking for the asses, and had not found them; Samuel sent the servant on before them and took a vial of oil and poured it on Saul's head. It was a private affair, but this is not; the man that is to abide is anointed in the midst of his brethren.
R.L. Were you going to say something about his occupation?
J.T. Well, it was suggested he was keeping sheep; that is a very excellent occupation for a Christian, looking after the Lord's sheep. I have been interested in the difference between the ministry of the leading servants in the New Testament. In their letters you have indicated the features of their ministry. Peter says that the saints had been as sheep going astray, but were now returned unto the Shepherd and Overseer of their souls; indicating that he had answered to the Lord's commission; he was the minister of the circumcision, and his service had been effective; the sheep had returned; he found them going astray, and they had returned. Now, however little one has to do, the thing is to do it effectively. Coming short, in Scripture, is absolute failure: "I have not found thy works complete" is the message to Sardis in @Revelation 3:2. You have another instance of coming short in the foolish virgins of @Matthew 25; they were short of oil. Well, they were just as badly off as if they had never made any
{256}
profession, or indeed worse. It is a serious thing that there should be a shortage.
T.M.G. How do you apply that?
J.T. In our service there is very little completed; as a rule, there is a great want of completeness. The reference in Scripture, however, is to those who are not genuine, who have not the Spirit.
J.M. The gospel by Mark is a contrast to that. In Christ's service how perfect and complete everything was!
T.M.G. "He does all things well" was the testimony.
J.P.W. What is the cure for incompleteness? Is it to make use of what one has?
J.T. Yes; you hold what you have in exercise. "To every one that has shall be given, and he shall be in abundance; but from him that has not, that even which he has shall be taken from him" (@Matthew 25:29). We trifle with things so, that sacred things become almost common. The five foolish virgins had no oil. If you apply it spiritually, it might be said that they had not obtained what was available. The cry, "Behold the Bridegroom; go forth to meet him!" found them without oil.
E.M. You look at the wise virgins as having the Spirit, but were not in the good of it?
J.T. We may have the Spirit, and be without exercise, hence we go to sleep.
J.P.W. Does not the anointing mean that the person anointed is completely and wholly for God?
J.T. God has committed Himself wholly to him. As soon as David arrived the Lord said, "Arise, anoint him, for this is he". There was no delay; Samuel did not have to consider. "Samuel took the horn of oil and anointed him in the midst of his brethren; and the spirit of the Lord came upon David from that day forward".
T.M.G. God claimed him.
{257}
J.T. Yes. And now Samuel virtually says, "I can go home". David is on the scene as having the spirit of the Lord upon him.
W.M. Samuel retires. It reminds one of John the baptist when he said, "He must increase, but I must decrease" (@John 3:30).
J.P.W. Is it a sort of public acknowledgment of David, because before that he had been walking with God, and he had slain the lion and the bear?
J.T. This is the public acknowledgment of him. There is always a long history before that important time comes when a man is honoured publicly. The Lord Himself was 30 years old before He was anointed.
T.M.G. "Him hath God the Father sealed" (@John 6:27).
R.L. Is there any significance in these three eldest sons following Saul in the next chapter and David returning to the sheep?
J.T. I was thinking of that. They quarrel with David when he goes to see how they fare. Eliab says, "I know thy pride and the naughtiness of thy heart; for thou art come down that thou mightest see the battle" (@1 Samuel 17:28). Whereas the cause was really that Jesse had sent him with provisions for them. He was simply doing what came to his hand in subjection to his father; and he was morally perfect in what he was doing. Eliab was thoroughly wanting in his discernment of what was morally perfect.
Ques. Could you give an application of the mission on which Jesse sent David? "Look how thy brethren fare, and take their pledge".
J.T. It seems to be what the Lord would exercise each of us about. How our brethren fare; how they get on. Just as Joseph had been commissioned, as you will remember. It seems as if Jesse had come round to the spiritual side. He saw what David was fitted for.
Rem. "Their pledge" would be the response to what he brought.
{258}
J.T. That there was a sort of receipt given to him, some evidence that they got the benefit of his service.
Rem. An answer; but, as a matter of fact, he did not take their pledge.
J.T. Certainly there was no response to him, except in the way of reproof. They really persecuted him, but the Lord vindicated him. It is very beautiful to see in the word how a man is taken up according to his qualifications; and I think it is evident in chapter 17 that Jesse was brought round to the spiritual; he saw what David was fitted for.
Ques. Has it any application now?
J.T. Well, it comes out in our meetings. You see it where Christ becomes increasingly prominent amongst the saints. David's brethren were never so dignified as when David was anointed in their midst.
E.M. That is to say, we take pleasure as we see Christ in one another.
J.T. Yes, you see Him honoured like Mordecai, who was great amongst the Jews and acceptable to his brethren.
T.M.G. The man whom the king delights to honour.
J.T. "He was great among the Jews and accepted of the multitude of his brethren, seeking the wealth of his people and speaking peace to all his seed" (@Esther 10:3). That is how Christ gets His place, and then great gain follows that. The spirit of David begins to manifest itself when he is summoned to serve Saul, because he was not oblivious to what it meant. He is willing to do anything; his spirit submits to this; and the estimate that the servant had of him is worth noticing. The servant said, "Behold I have seen a son of Jesse the Bethlehemite that is cunning in playing and a mighty valiant man, and a man of war and prudent in matters, and a
{259}
comely person, and the Lord is with him". Whoever that servant was, he had formed a right estimate of David.
J.M. What do you say about the evil spirit that came on Saul?
J.T. It is a very solemn thing that the Lord should deal judicially in this way with a man, but it only brings out, I think, the wonderful character of David's spirit; he thinks nothing of Saul's behaviour, but simply goes and serves, for Saul is still in the place of the anointed.
S.M. An evil spirit from God. Why from God?
J.T. By and by the Lord will send a strong delusion. It is not only that men are ruined as rejecting Christ, but that God shows that their case is hopeless. The spirit of David here is a type of the spirit of the Christians of the early days and shows how, that in spite of the perverseness of the Jews, they went on ministering and manifesting the spirit of Christ to them. It shows the patience of God. I think Saul had a new opportunity here in the spirit of Christ being brought so near to him; and before the spirit of enmity got such a place in his heart, it is said that he loved David. It is the spirit you have that tells upon people; that is the point; and when you have to do with people who are perverse, then you are tested as to what spirit you are of. I think it is wonderful to see how Stephen had the spirit of Christ; at the extreme moment of his persecution he kneels down and prays for his persecutors. I do not know of anything except Gethsemane and the cross that expresses more moral power than is seen in @Acts 7. Think of what that man suffered, and yet how unruffled was his spirit!
J.M. The Old Testament scripture says, "He that is slow to anger is better than the mighty, and he that ruleth his spirit than he that taketh a city" (@Proverbs 16:32).
{260}
THE SPIRIT OF CHRIST IN DAVID (2)
@1 Samuel 17:55 - 58; @1 Samuel 18:1 - 4; @1 Samuel 19:18 - 24; @1 Samuel 20:41,42
J.T. What I am exercised about, as I said before, is to call attention to the spirit of David in his relations with those who had the place of being the Lord's people. It is not in mind to dwell on his prowess as a warrior, nor his attitude towards the enemies of God's people. I think the greatest test comes to us in those who have relation to God as His people; so I think the end of chapter 16 and chapter 17 serve to show how the spirit of Christ manifested itself in David in regard of Saul and in regard of his own brethren after the flesh; and then how it shows itself towards the saints who occupy a false position as is represented in Jonathan. If we take up these scriptures on these lines we might get help as to how we are to move on in relation to each other. What is stated as regards David's spirit towards Eliab and his two brothers is a model for us. He speaks with becoming humility to them as younger than they were, while maintaining what is right in what he said. There was a *cause* for what he was doing, but at the same time he holds to his point, to the right principle, with a becoming spirit. In regard to Saul, at the end of chapter 17 we see pronounced superciliousness in the way in which he refers to David. Although there had been exhibited before his eyes most remarkable prowess on behalf of God's people, yet he refers to David as a "stripling". And when David draws near he addresses him as if he had never known him; a very cutting thing, for he had had good opportunity of knowing him.
T.M.G. "Whose son art thou, young man?" is the way he addresses him.
{261}
J.T. It was unworthy of the occasion, and brings out the moral state in which Saul was. He was marked by self-consciousness and occupation with his personal office, rather than discerning the moral superiority of David, the one who had saved everything. And yet there is not the slightest evidence of complaint or resentment in David's reply. He simply says "I am the son of thy servant Jesse the Bethlehemite". He simply takes the place given to him. And the Spirit of God sets it all before us to call attention to the spirit in Saul and the spirit of Christ in David.
W.H. He is maintained in the spirit of Christ throughout.
J.T. That is the point to observe. These things are skilfully presented by the Holy Spirit to bring out the spirit of Christ in these trying circumstances as a model for us.
W.L. Are you looking at David as typical of Christ personally or more as a man of God?
J.T. As both. Because it is the same spirit whether in Christ or in us. It is the spirit of Christ. It is said, "but if any one has not the Spirit of Christ he is not of him" (@Romans 8:9). David, I think, is both in that way, but in chapters 16 and 17 he is specially a type of Christ, that is, as anointed, and as slaying the giant. The Acts and the epistles, especially the former, show that the same spirit was found in the Lord's followers, especially in Stephen. The thought of God is the continuation of Christ here in the saints through His spirit.
J.P.W. Is it the grace of David's answer to Saul that affects Jonathan?
J.T. I was thinking that, because it goes on to say, "And it came to pass when he had made an end of speaking unto Saul", as if the peculiar grace of his demeanour had affected Jonathan. It was
{262}
"when he had made an end of speaking unto Saul" that Jonathan's soul was knit to David.
T.M.G. The grace that was seen in him affected Jonathan.
J.T. It brings out the genuineness of Jonathan. He was typical of a genuine believer in the so-called denominations, one who holds to the house of Saul, and yet who loves Christ. I think his genuineness is very strikingly illustrated in the opening of chapter 18. He discerned the grace in David's demeanour and speech.
W.L. His heart went beyond his feet.
J.P.W. What was the lack in Jonathan's case? He stripped himself of all, and yet there seems to have been some lack.
J.T. Yes, there was. Although in a right position, one is put to shame sometimes by the godliness and devotedness of those who are not in the right position. I do not say that to justify Jonathan, nor do I say that his false position is seen in this chapter; but that is the line he went on. In this chapter it is the genuineness of his love and appreciation of David that is before us.
J.P.W. The last passage you read was, "He went back into the city".
J.T. Yes. And then, further, he goes home. He was a man who, although typically a true lover of Christ, retains his position in relation to an accredited religion in the world. Accredited religion is a great snare, because as in it you do not require to lose your personal status as a man of the world. So Jonathan went back to the city, and, his last interview with David ended, he went home. He evidently had forsaken the city, but he had not identified himself with David. Jonathan began well. The Spirit skilfully brings before us not only the great military powers of David, but his demeanour and speech in these passages.
{263}
W.L. Would you say that it is one thing to strip ourselves to put off, but that is only the negative side? There has to be the putting *on*. Did not Jonathan stop short of that?
J.T. I think he did. I do not think, speaking typically, that he put on Christ. In @Romans 13:14 it is said, "Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ". *That* Man is to be seen in you, not yourself; and, as you progress, you are to put on the *new man*.
W.L. That would save us from going back.
J.T. Yes.
E.H. Speaking of the spirit, there would seem to be formation, so that the spirit of Christ is characteristic of one.
J.T. Yes; it is more than the mere possession of the Holy Spirit, although no doubt it depends on that; but it is formation in the spirit of that Man.
T.M.G. "If any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of him".
E.H. You first put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and as you progress, you put on the new man.
J.T. Well, Romans is that you put on the Lord Jesus Christ. It is the profession of Christ, known by His full title, "Lord Jesus Christ". The thought in @Romans 13:14 is the *attitude* you take up; you "make no provision for the flesh". It is not yet "*mortify therefore*" (@Colossians 3:5). It is simply "make no provision for the flesh"; as if the Spirit graciously takes account of where we are, and does not put on us more than we are equal to. But in @Colossians 3:10 it is, having "put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge after the image of him that created him".
W.L. Is the point in Romans that we come out here in righteousness, but in Colossians in the character of the heavenly man?
J.T. That is what it is. So that in Romans, as I understand, it is recovery without addition. What
{264}
is lost is recovered; whereas Colossians and Ephesians imply *increase*.
J.M. I suppose Romans would give you the kingdom side, and the other the thought of new creation?
J.T. Colossians and Ephesians give you new creation.
J.M. Romans would give you recovery, and that is connected with the kingdom.
J.T. Colossians is "after the image of him that created him"; that is Christ. Christ there is all and in all; whereas in @Ephesians 4:24 I think it reads "which according to God is created in truthful righteousness and holiness". And that is said to be "as the truth is in Jesus" (verse 21). It is more God and man in Ephesians, the full divine thought. All that we get in Ephesians is complete. Things are presented in their completeness, because it is not so much a question of recovery in Ephesians but the presentation of the full divine thought and purpose in Christ. In Jonathan we have what is simply negative; so far as he himself is concerned, he did not put on Christ.
S.M. What is the thought in recovery?
J.T. That Satan has gained nothing in spite of all his activities. David recovered *all* (@1 Samuel 30:19).
T.M.G. A man suitable for God is secured in Romans.
S.M. Is recovery in view of defeating Satan?
J.T. That is one idea in it. In Romans man is set up before God in righteousness. The righteous requirement of the law is fulfilled in him, and he cries "Abba Father" by the Spirit (chapter 8:15). Whereas Ephesians presents the accomplishment of divine counsels which were before sin.
S.M. Ephesians speaks of what was before the foundation of the world.
{265}
J.P.W. If Jonathan had identified himself with David he would have been preserved.
J.T. Yes; he would have come under David's influence and spirit. See what Jonathan lost! He retained his status in the house of Saul; he never gave that up, hence he never came under the influence and teaching of David, whereas others did. However disreputable David's followers may have been, they all came under his teaching and influence, hence they became mighty men.
T.M.G. They were in the right place.
J.T. Not that they had any more affection, because Jonathan is distinguished for his affection. It is most remarkable that one can have such affection for Christ and yet retain a place in the world.
W.L. And in that place there has to be a second stripping.
J.T. Very solemn; that is mount Gilboa!
E.M. You connect the thought of Jonathan remaining in the house of Saul with people remaining in established religion?
J.T. Yes, that is it. They have true exercise to a point, and have no sympathy with the spirit of opposition to Christ, and yet they are publicly identified with it. Jonathan never gave up his status in the house of Saul, but he defended David as far as he could. Anyone reading this narrative with an unspiritual mind might look upon Jonathan as the most remarkable of David's lovers, and yet the spiritual man would see that Jonathan missed it at the very outset.
W.L. He avoided the outward reproach.
J.T. And what ought to be recognised in regard to our brethren who do not take the place of rejection is that although they lose so much yet they do not escape suffering. They suffer from the existing evil. But in God's scrutinising judgment all that is taken into account; not one bit of vexation of soul that a
{266}
man goes through in a false position is overlooked by God. You see that in the case of Lot. The government of God is most accurate in the credit side of its book as well as in the debit side. Lot is called a righteous man in 2 Peter, a book that treats of God's righteous government; whereas if it were a book that taught discipline in the house of God he would have been said to be out of fellowship, as we speak.
R.L. Jonathan lost the kingdom.
J.T. And lost companionship with David. His thought was to be next unto David, but that is a place that belongs to divine sovereignty, and not to our choice.
E.M. He did not get compensation for the vexation that he went through.
J.T. Because the government of God is true to Himself; he could not possibly get it on account of the place he retained outwardly.
J.B. It speaks in 2 Peter of "brotherly love".
J.T. If Jonathan had typically brotherly love he would have been with the brethren, David's men.
T.M.G. He would have loved his brethren, and so would have been with them.
J.T. Yes. I only thought of the beginning of chapter 8, because it shows the commanding position that David, through his grace, had for such a man as Jonathan.
T.M.G. He had seen how he acted in regard to Saul.
A.D. Is it possible to love Christ and still to remain in worldly associations?
J.T. I think so. I think that is the point here, if not elsewhere. In speaking in this way one may be thought to justify such a course to some extent, but there is no justification for it, and mount Gilboa is a solemn witness to that. Under the government of God such a course cannot but end in disaster.
{267}
The only safe place is with David, as he said to Abiathar, "with me thou shalt be in safeguard". That is the only safe place.
J.M. We could not doubt that in the systems around there are many of the Lord's people who love Christ.
J.T. And the comfort is that *the Lord knows them*, (@2 Timothy 2:19).
J.M. The Lord would exercise us so that we might help them.
J.T. It is really impossible to determine why it is that certain ones remain where they are.
W.H. They have no idea of moving, and yet it is clear when one meets them that they have sympathy with what is of Christ.
J.T. Just as we see in Jonathan here.
J.M. I suppose it would be in identification with David and his company that one would partake of his spirit.
J.T. That is the point. Later on when he is rejected David becomes a centre. That was the test for Jonathan. That is the reason I read the passage in chapter 20. It sets before us the ground which Jonathan took up in regard to David. It was to be marked by *distance*. "Artillery" is not literally the correct word to use, but it conveys pretty much the idea, the bow and arrow implies distance. He is dealing at a distance. That was the parting circumstance between David and Jonathan. It was Jonathan's arrangement; David submitted to it, and that is the reason I read it. It is said that David exceeded Jonathan in his weeping; and moreover, he arose from the earth and bowed himself three times in the presence of Jonathan. Such love and grace expressed in David should have overpowered Jonathan. He felt it deeply; but although he felt it, he went back to the city, like Orpah, who kissed her mother-in-law and went back to Moab.
{268}
W.H. Your thought, then, is that we should seek to be maintained in that spirit of grace in dealing with those who love Christ but still remain in a false position.
J.T. David's conduct before Jonathan was calculated to overpower him, so that he should never leave him. If he left, it was not because of David's spirit.
W.L. In chapter 18, Jonathan's love seems to be the prominent thought, but here in chapter 20 Jonathan's love breaks down, and David's exceeds.
T.M.G. Jonathan's going back was a great trial to David; and it makes one feel what it must be to the Lord when His people go back.
J.T. Note the gentleness of spirit that is seen here in David: there is not the slightest evidence of any complaint, or as if he said, 'Jonathan, you ought to come with me'. Not a word of that.
R.L. That comes out also in chapter 17. David gets no credit for the victory at all, yet he makes no complaint.
S.L. Would you say there are people before whom the Spirit of God would not lead you to put separation truths? David did not say to Jonathan, "Come with me".
J.T. No; I think there are circumstances in which it is better to simply present the grace of Christ, for if anything will touch the heart it is that. The principle of separation appeals more to the conscience: "Come out from among them and be ye separate" (@2 Corinthians 6:17). That is said in connection with the inconsistency of connecting idolatry with the temple of God. The spirit of Christ is that which affects the heart. I think that these things are to show us, as regards Saul and Jonathan, the state they were in, and that it was impossible to affect them, if David did not affect them. There is nothing said as to what regrets David must have had.
{269}
E.M. But he suffered.
J.T. He *must* have suffered. Distance is intolerable to love; and yet Jonathan acquiesced in the distance. David must have felt that.
J.M. It was the spirit of David before Saul that should have affected him; but what is prominent in Jonathan is his love.
J.T. I was referring to chapter 19 to show how David, as rejected and persecuted, instead of forming a party and defending himself, or resorting to human methods, retires to the prophet. He retires under the divine wings, the wings of the Almighty. That is ever the refuge of faith, and the result showed the wisdom of it -- not only the advantage to David for the moment, as in company with Samuel, but even Saul and his messengers come under the influence of the Spirit of God, which was a remarkable triumph!
E.M. And yet though Saul was amongst the prophets, he was naked.
J.T. That showed where he was spiritually; he was exposed; but owing to the overwhelming power that was there, he could do nothing against David.
J.M. I suppose if David had been at all marked by the same spirit he would have set up in opposition to him to try to defend himself.
J.T. Whereas it was with him: "The eternal God is thy refuge" (@Deuteronomy 33:27). Samuel had wisely returned to Ramah when he saw the Spirit of God come upon David, but he continued his ministry; he did not surrender his ministry. He had retired from the government, and having anointed the king, he retires to Ramah and carries on his ministry. The Lord is with him. The word "president" is used in the New Translation in @1 Samuel 19:20; Samuel, it is said, was over the company of prophets as president; that was his office now.
{270}
A.D. Would going to Samuel be like going to the priest?
J.T. Samuel was scarcely a priest; he had officiated as priest; but he was really a Levite. His position is rather that of a prophet. The priest represents what man is Godward, but the prophet is what God is to man; how God comes in, and this David recognises; he recognised that God was there.
J.M. That God would be with Samuel, and that was a very important thing for David.
J.T. So that instead of going to this brother and that brother to support you to get through things, you retire to where God is: "The eternal God is thy refuge". That saves the situation; it leaves things in the hands of God, who is unerring in His judgment.
S.B. That would mean you have no will in the matter.
J.T. It was as if David said, 'God through Samuel anointed me; it was not my choice; I had no will in the matter'. He retires to that point. It is for God to undertake, and God does undertake for him, and undertakes for him in a most remarkable way. Instead of Saul being destroyed, he comes under the influence of the spirit of prophecy.
J.M. It is very marked as the spirit of Christ, what is seen in David there; he retires to God, as it were.
J.T. Quite so; and he *dwelt* there. "He and Samuel went and dwelt in Naioth". What a retreat from the scene of strife in the house of Saul, to dwell with Samuel at Naioth!
W.H. It is still open in principle for us.
J.T. That is the point in it: you are to *dwell there*, and He keeps you safely in His pavilion.
W.H. You do not strive; you retire in the spirit of Christ.
J.T. Yes; you leave the issue with God.
T.M.G. "He that dwelleth in the secret place of
{271}
the Most High shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty" (@Psalm 91:1).
E.M. So the Almighty will see after you.
W.L. Would you say that is the way God vindicates one who puts his trust in Him now?
J.T. You would rather see a brother who opposes you remain in fellowship than that he should be forced out by discipline. That is very much happier! And I believe it is brought about by retiring under the wings of the Almighty.
E.M. Was not that very manifest, too, in the apostle Paul? He looked for the recovery of those who opposed him.
J.T. I think that was the ground on which he wrote his first epistle to the Corinthians. He wanted to recover them without the rod. The second epistle is the flowing out of grace.
W.H. The word to Timothy is; "the servant of the Lord must not strive; but be gentle" (2 Timothy 2:24).
J.T. We see how David is qualifying himself here for the kingdom. He could rule his own spirit.
J.M. It is the spirit of suffering.
J.T. Yes. "Lord remember David and all his afflictions".
E.M. "If we suffer, we shall also reign with him" (@2 Timothy 2:12).
J.M. It is remarkable that all this is in connection with one another. We get plenty of opportunity to manifest the spirit of Christ. It is not what we are in the world here; it is what we are with one another.
{272}
THE SPIRIT OF CHRIST IN DAVID (3)
@1 Samuel 24; @1 Samuel 26; @1 Samuel 30
J.T. In mentioning chapters 24 and 26, I thought it would be well to note the spirit of David towards Saul, as having him in his power in the cave; that is, he had it in his power to slay his adversary, but instead of taking advantage of his opportunity he spared his life; and in doing so he exhibits such a spirit that even Saul himself is affected; so much so that Saul weeps and recognises that David should be king. It is said that "Saul went home". For the moment he is so affected by the spirit of Christ in David that his enmity to David is dislodged, and instead of returning to the city to renew his position, he went home. I think that is worthy of note, because it frequently happens that in difficulties we are placed in similar positions, and we are tested as to whether we take advantage of an opportunity to damage one who opposes, or to exhibit the spirit of Christ, and overwhelm him with grace.
J.M. A very real victory that!
J.T. It was a very remarkable triumph; it was the first real victory that David achieved in regard of Saul personally. He had not been able to impress him, or rather, hitherto Saul was unimpressionable.
R.L. Would the Lord's way with Saul of Tarsus illustrate it "Why persecutest thou me?" (@Acts 9:4).
J.T. It was the same spirit.
R.L. The same spirit marked the Lord in resurrection as was manifest in the days of His flesh.
J.T. In chapter 26 Saul had renewed his hostility, and a similar circumstance occurs, the result of which is that Saul says to David, "thou shalt do great things". He not only acknowledged that he had sinned against him, but that David should prevail and do great things. It seems to me that these two
{273}
chapters furnish a wonderful opportunity to Saul to recover himself, if recovery were possible. You feel that in dealing with the brethren you want to recover them if recovery is possible, and if it is impossible such exhibitions of grace to them will soon bring this to light.
W.H. David may have had his own judgment as to Saul, but he acted towards him in the spirit of grace.
J.T. Quite so, so that his hand should not be upon Saul. As far as David was concerned, it was overcoming evil with good, and that is the greatest moral victory.
W.L. He recognised that Saul was the Lord's anointed.
J.T. And in that regard it is of great importance that we should all have respect to what God has recognised, whether it be in a brother, or in anything that God regards in this world, whether it be government or dignitaries, or whatever it be. It is not David's spirit towards the Philistine powers that we have here; he was actuated by another spirit towards them. Saul had been anointed, and David respected that.
Rem. Like the apostle Paul in his attitude to the high priest in @Acts 23.
J.T. Exactly. "I wist not, brethren, that he was the high priest" (verse 5). The apostle piously regards Jerusalem and the priesthood as still outwardly owned by God. It is a very wholesome lesson in countries like this where the radical spirit is apt to manifest itself; the radical spirit is very objectionable to the mind of God. The order of God in government is that there should be dignitaries. There are those having authority, those having positions for good, and positions that are owned of God, and the godly man respects them.
{274}
W.H. "Render to all their dues" (@Romans 13:7).
J.T. Yes; the epistle to the Romans teaches recovery, and one great element in a recovered man is that he has regard for everything that God has instituted; he takes things as God has set them here, and has respect for them; whereas in Colossians and Ephesians government is all under Christ. In Romans "the powers that be are ordained of God" (chapter 13:1).
S.M. That would help many who take up an extreme attitude and say that it is either heavenly or not of God at all, and disregard government in that way. There are many on that line.
J.T. Well, it is a line God abominates.
E.M. As the spirit of Christ forms us we will give everything its true place. I was thinking of the verse in @2 Timothy 1:7: "God has not given us the spirit of fear, but of power and of love and of a sound mind".
J.B. Is it on that line that Michael is introduced in Jude?
J.T. Yes; when disputing with Satan he did not bring a railing accusation against him, although the dispute was over the body of Moses. He said: "The Lord rebuke thee" (verse 9). So it was with David as to Saul he says, "The Lord shall smite him", or "he will go down to battle and be slain". "The Lord forbid that I should stretch forth my hand against the Lord's anointed".
S.M. It is a helpful line, because it recognises the lordship of Christ, and brings Him in in that way, instead of putting oneself forward.
J.T. Yes, it makes room for God. If God sets up a man, or a thing, it is not for you to set it aside; but what is to be noticed in these two chapters is, that David's spirit triumphs.
J.M. It seems to me that is the important point. The spirit which David manifests in connection with those things, and that requires spiritual power.
{275}
E.H. If it would not be out of place, will you give it an application for us as to how we look upon each other as saints?
J.T. Well, the saints are all anointed; they have the divine stamp upon them; "he who has anointed us is God". Hence in a general way, we should have regard to the saints in that light, so that if there be *will* in any one of them, as is possible, the lesson is here that the superabundance of the spirit of Christ in those that are walking in that spirit brings about repentance in the failing one, if such is possible. In Saul's case repentance was transitory. It seems to me that he had been given space to repent and failed to do so in the true sense, as Thyatira in @Revelation 2. Thyatira is the fourth assembly addressed and represents that phase of the assembly in responsibility that had the place of the candlestick. The Lord, before removing the candlestick, gives her space to repent, "and she will not repent" (verse 21). So with Saul here; he had a great opportunity to recover himself in the presence of the true king. Instead of David using arbitrary authority in dealing with him when he had him in his power, he acts in grace towards him. When David had finished speaking, Saul says, "Is this thy voice my son David". The power in which David spoke touched him, and broke him down for the moment. He had thus proved the power of David's spirit. If it were possible for Saul to repent and recover himself in a spiritual way, he would have done so. Now if this be the case of one amongst us whom the Lord has signally used, the necessity for this spirit in us is all the more evident.
W.L. Would the possibility of repentance you were speaking of, or otherwise, depend upon the moral foundation laid in the soul? Some people seem more capable of self-judgment and repentance than others.
{276}
J.T. It depends, as you say, on the foundation that is already in the soul. In any instance in which a brother has a place amongst God's people it is almost a certainty that at some time he has deserved it. As a rule, the judgment of the saints is correct. They *may* be deceived for a moment, but generally speaking, the Spirit of God has a place amongst them, and so everyone finds his level. Therefore, if any brother has a place accorded to him, I do not mean an official place, but what is merited, it is sure that it *has been* duly merited, and although he may fail there is special need that he should be treated with respect and regard; so that it is "the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ" as Paul says in @Philippians 1:19, that is always needed; and that is always available; the supply is infinite.
W.L. So that in dealing with one another we should never lose sight of the anointing.
J.T. That is the thought, that you should not regard the saints as common.
J.M. It seems to me that even with Saul's second failure to be recovered David's spirit is not affected by it; he does not judge him. That is what is wanting with us; we may get tried with each other and fail to persevere in grace.
J.T. So that as space is given for repentance we should see that the space is filled with grace. Thyatira had abundant opportunity to repent, to recover herself; but it is said, "she will not repent". That was definite. Therefore, the Lord casts her into a bed. There was no hope of recovery.
J.M. One feels that is where we are tested.
J.T. I think so; it is in the ability to keep one's spirit right and to make room for God to act.
A.D. David gained a great victory.
J.T. It is a great moral victory, if one is able to rule one's own spirit in meeting opposition, as Paul says, "If thine enemy hunger, feed him; ... for in so
{277}
doing thou shalt heap coals of fire upon his head" (@Romans 12:20). *Coals of fire*. It seems as if nothing would bring a brother down quicker than that.
S.M. It is a good thing to get well converted.
J.T. It is a good thing to get a good start, because if you do not you are liable to be deformed spiritually. The more a deformed child grows the more the deformity appears, if it is not rectified.
S.M. David must have had a great sense of forgiveness in his heart.
W.H. What David says seems to set forth what he was.
J.T. Yes, it is the spirit of the man. So with Stephen, "they were not able to resist the wisdom and the Spirit with which he spoke" (@Acts 6:10). They might have been greatly interested in the mastery he had of the Old Testament Scriptures, but it was the spirit and the wisdom in which he spoke that affected those who heard.
J.T. In chapter 30 we have David in a new circumstance. It is not Jonathan or Saul now. A great calamity has befallen David, a calamity such as was calculated to overpower the man; and, added to that, the people spoke of stoning him. What is he going to do now? It seems to me that David is brought into these circumstances to be an example for us. "He encouraged himself in the Lord his God". Not that he did not feel the calamity, "he wept until he had no more power to weep"; and, added to that, there was the distress because of the people being disposed to stone him. Perhaps the keenest pang of all was, that as he reflected on the previous year, he would have to own that he had in a sense turned aside; he had been about to go off with the Philistines against the people of God, to fight against the people of God. A group of things centre in that one circumstance sufficient to overwhelm any man who did not have divine support.
{278}
E.H. How did he get into these circumstances?
J.T. I think he got into them by neglect. Ziklag had been given to him; it had been, so to say, his own garden which he had not kept. Now the Amalekites succeeded in capturing all and burning the city, it was a terrific catastrophe.
E.H. Was it the want of separation?
J.T. I think so. He should not have been with the Philistines in their attack on Israel; it was not his place. I only refer to that as one of the elements of the sorrow, an element which David well knew and felt.
W.H. He might have reflected that if he had been faithful all would have been preserved.
J.T. Quite so. Now the true man is seen in these new circumstances. He has been victorious in other circumstances; how is he going to be in this? He finds resource in God; "*he encouraged himself in the Lord his God*". That is the resource for us when calamities befall us; when bereavement and distress from other causes come upon us, we know where to turn.
E.M. The people wanted to stone him. Was it in consequence of his neglect?
J.T. Very likely. But it only shows how the saints generally are apt to regard things. It was not that there was *will*, it was the overpowering influence of the situation. On a previous occasion he had repaired to Ramah, to the prophet, but now he goes direct to God. It is his knowledge of God that is his stand-by here.
R.L. He did not lose confidence in God.
T.M.G. I have often thought of the apostle in the prison and how he writes to the Philippians, in reflecting on his past history. He had a good deal to depress and discourage him and to cast him upon himself, but he was cast upon the Lord.
E.M. And so, too, in Jerusalem when he had
{279}
been cast into prison, the Lord stood by him (@Acts 23:11).
J.T. He said later, "The Lord stood by me and strengthened me, and I was delivered from the lion's mouth". I think that Philippians is a remarkable epistle as the outflow of a heart which knows God in pressure. It is the Christian's psalm book. The Psalms give us David's experiences in pressure; Philippians is like that; it is the outgoing of a heart in pressure, and anyone comparing Philippians with the Psalms would see the difference between the Old Testament saint and the New. Paul is set before us as a model. He says in @Philippians 3:17, "you have us for a model". A man's psalm expresses himself. If you can get a man's psalm you can tell just what the man's measure is. A hymn is more a celebration of *God*. A psalm is an expression of what you have gone through with God.
J.M. What is a spiritual song?
J.T. It is not a sentimental song; it is composed by a spiritual man.
J.M. How would you distinguish between them?
J.T. A hymn is an ascription of praise to God. The Lord Himself joined in one; it says, "they sung an hymn". It is an ascription to God, not exactly on account of what He has done, but of what He is. I think a hymn is very closely allied to worship. We are told in @1 Samuel 30 "and David encouraged himself in the Lord his God". I think that is rather expressive of his knowledge of God. It is not as yet God's intervention that is encouraging him; it is rather the confidence which flowed from his knowledge of God. But then immediately he asks the priest to bring the ephod, and he inquires. God is inquired of by him. A very beautiful picture! He is a subject man.
J.M. It is only a heart that knows God that stands in a difficulty.
{280}
J.T. You will find that a good many of David's psalms are dated, showing the circumstances with which they tally. If you get the psalm that tallies with a circumstance like this you get the attitude of the man's soul Godward, and God has His portion in that psalm.
J.M. In that way you see the movement of David's soul?
J.T. Quite so. Well now, having settled the matter as it were with God, all that follows is detail. When one encourages one's self in God and receives an answer to one's prayer the difficulty is morally settled. But another element arises which had not been touched on earlier, namely, the sons of Belial in David's company; that is a new element to be reckoned with. They would deprive the weak one of the gain of the victory. That would never do for a man like David.
J.M. Will you apply that?
J.T. The saints must get the benefit. We are to support the weak. "Him that is weak in the faith receive ye" (@Romans 14:1). He is to be received, but not to the settling of doubtful questions; he is a *brother*, and a brother for whom Christ died; that gives him a value, however weak he may be.
S.M. There is nothing official about David.
J.T. Well, he was an official, of course, but he is greater in his spirit that in his office. The first psalm is greater than the second. The first psalm is the godly man; the second the official man. I think we get the godly man here in David, the man who has the right spirit.
R.L. How do you account for the sons of Belial getting into company with David and his men?
J.T. Even in the Lord's own company there was one who had a devil; it is very remarkable that the Lord goes on with him. He gives Judas the sop at
{281}
the end. Judas¬ heart should have been broken in seeing how the Lord acted in such grace.
R.L. I was wondering if it would have any reference to what we get in Jude and Peter?
J.T. Yes, but only for the moment. They are not able to show their hand yet; they are simply beginning to move. David has power over them yet; in fact he calls them his brethren.
R.L. Would they be reckoned amongst the six hundred?
J.T. They were, as far as I see. It is the grace side with David. David did not put Joab to death. There were many who deserved death, but he left it with Solomon to execute. At this juncture David made a *statute*. I think it is the first statute that David made, and it is a very fine one. It ought to be written in letters of gold amongst us, that he that abides behind is to share alike with him who goes into the conflict.
T.M.G. How do you apply that?
J.T. Christ has died for everyone of the brethren, weak and strong. So that if there are those who cannot go out into the conflict they are not to be deprived of the spiritual gain of it. That is the statute in Israel. The idea of a statute is that it is fixed; it is permanent, and it was not a local bye-law; from that moment it was permanent and fixed in the ways of God. There is a moral reason for it. There are things that hinder souls from going into the conflict, such as what we get in @Romans 14, the weak brother; he is not to be burdened with certain things, but then you are to be careful of him and look after him.
W.L. Is your thought that one section of the meeting is not to isolate itself from the other, but there is to be a moving together?
{282}
J.T. Quite so, so that if there are those that have to take up the care it is not to be exclusive; it is not to be on the ground that all the saints have not part in it, because they *have* part in it. The angel of the assembly is the abstract idea of responsibility. Hence every saint in the meeting, in some sense, should have part in everything.
J.M. I was thinking if the Lord gives gift to any individual it belongs to all; and there will be light for us if this is recognised. Here the hearts of those who remained behind were with David, but they were not able to go.
J.T. Quite so; we get the contrast to this in @Judges 5, where certain ones held back and did not go into the conflict; they had power and did not go; but this in Samuel is a case of weakness.
A.A. These sons of Belial seem to be selfish; selfishness marks them.
J.T. Yes, that *marks* them. Their case is hopeless in that way. They are "sons of Belial"; they were governed by another influence than that of David.
S.M. What you have called attention to should help us greatly as to two things that we suffer from; one from those who are not exercised to contribute, and who *should* be exercised; and others who think that everything falls upon them.
J.T. That is exactly what brings about the clerical principle.
T.M.G. The laity and the clergy.
J.T. I think the failure of the assembly at the beginning was that there were those who were content to hand over their responsibility to others. "So thou also hast those who hold the doctrine of the Nicolaitanes" (@Revelation 2:15). It is likely that the Lord is there attending
{283}
to clerical tenets; the principle of the clergy and the laity became established early amongst the saints.
E.M. In the case here of those who fainted, their hearts were set on the conflict, but they were not able for it; so that if we face our responsibility, though we may not be strong enough to take it up, yet the spiritual gain is distributed to ALL.
J.T. That is the "statute" that is made here for all times.
{284}
HOW DAVID WAS ACTUATED IN REGARD TO CHRIST AS SEEN IN THE ARK
@2 Samuel 6:12 - 23
J.T. This book opens with David at Ziklag. We are told in chapter 1:1 that "David had abode two days in Ziklag". I refer to that because it indicates a certain progress made. He had recovered everything at Ziklag, and then remained there two days, which suggests the establishing of the soul in the truth of recovery before moving on. The two books of Samuel, taken together in that way, help us, as showing how we move on in our souls. There are stations, so to say, by the wayside, Jerusalem being the final point reached. There are certain stations by the way in which we consolidate ourselves in the light so far acquired. You see what I mean; abiding two days in a place is a period in which a thing is tested.
T.M.G. You test the light received before going on.
J.T. Yes; if you do not consolidate yourself, to use a military expression, in acquired ground, you are likely to lose it.
T.M.G. There is the moving on, but you have to make good the ground as you proceed.
R.L. Is there any significance in David waiting two days for guidance from the Lord?
J.T. Well that comes out in chapter 2. On the third day tidings came to him regarding what took place at Gilboa, tidings of what had befallen Saul and Jonathan, and the fine spirit that David manifests indicates how much he was in accord with Ziklag; because Ziklag is, I think, typically, the epistle to the Romans.
J.McF. It would answer to what we have in
{285}
@Romans 8:37. "We are more than conquerors, through him that loved us".
J.T. I think that is a very apt scripture. And one can readily read into the situation here what communications and conversations must have passed during those two days between David and his followers. It would be a remarkable time; typically a time, I should say, of soul triumph.
W.H. After recovery there is a little time for consolidation, and for the assurance to the soul of the ground gained.
J.T. Yes that is what I thought exactly. It is a matter that ought to be looked into as to whether we have consolidated the ground acquired in the way of light. The fact that you have reached a point mentally does not prove that you have got possession of it. We have to take possession of things.
Here we have David engaged with Saul and Jonathan; his spirit is very noble; he is even speaking of them in poetical language; and these were no vain sentiments, they were real. They are like what we find in @Romans 12, showing the spirit of the conqueror overcoming evil with good. In @Romans 8 we are more than conquerors through Him that loved us, whatever the elements of opposition, but in chapter 12 you overcome an enemy, but you overcome him in order to recover him. It is not proving yourself more able in argument, but overcoming evil in him with good.
J.M. One feels the necessity of our souls being established in what Romans teaches in that way, before we can take care of the ark of God.
J.T. Well that was what I thought in suggesting it. So in the beginning of @2 Samuel 2 David seeks guidance of the Lord as to whether he is to go up. "Shall I go up", he says, "into any of the cities of Judah?" We find the kind of man that goes up
{286}
described in the Psalms. "Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord?" "He that hath clean hands, and a pure heart; who hath not lifted up his soul unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully" (@Psalm 24:3). That is a man who is adjusted as to evil, the man who goes up.
T.M.G. That is the man of Romans; the adjusted man.
J.M. It is not simply that you are justified and an overcomer of evil, but you overcome evil with good. Many are contented to be justified with God, which is an immense thing, but then Romans also adjusts us in connection with everything that is here in regard to God.
J.T. There are certain things here ordained of God; they may be provisional things, and so passing away; but whatever they are we are to have respect to them.
T.M.G. "The powers that be are ordained of God"(@Romans 13:1).
J.T. Really it is that you are so fortified in righteousness that the enemy cannot touch you in any of your circumstances as a man here upon earth; he may attack you in another way, as in @Ephesians 6:12, but that is another matter. So now David says, "Shall I go up"; he is the dependent man, but his exercises are upward. I touch upon those points because they show the course the soul takes. David had no family in Ziklag, that is another point to be noticed; he had wives, but no family.
J.M. What is your thought as to that?
J.T. The increase is of the heavenly man. When you get to Colossians you are elevated. It is not that you are in the heavenly places, but you are on the road to them; your *mind* is there. It is the heavenly man that is increased and multiplies now. In chapter 3 we get the names of David's sons born in Hebron.
{287}
J.McF. What does Hebron answer to?
J.T. I think Colossians answers to it. Colossians suggests that which was before the world's existence. Christ is the beginning in Colossians. The idea of beginning is not in recovery as in Romans; the latter is recovery from a past state of sin; but the beginning is in Colossians. Hebron is said to have been built before Zoan in Egypt; (@Numbers 13:22). It had typically a divine origin; it was before man's world.
J.M. As set forth in Egypt.
J.T. Yes.
J.M. I think the distinction you make between Romans and Colossians is important, because you get the increase in Colossians.
Ques. What was recovered?
J.T. God's thought in man. He had His own thought as regards man, and Satan had robbed Him of that. Just as Ziklag had been destroyed and all carried away, so Satan had robbed God of man through sin, but now in Christ all is secured. David's triumph at Ziklag is a type of this.
T.M.G. In @Proverbs 8 we get indicated what God was to have in man.
J.T. Yes.
J.McF. Do we find the same kind of spirit in Ziklag, Hebron, and Zion.
J.T. I think so; only in chapter 6 David is thinking of the ark. This corresponds with Ephesians, where the apostle is labouring that Christ should have His place in the hearts of the saints; "that Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith" (chapter 3:17).
J.M. It is only those who have the gain of what is set forth in Romans that can be led into that.
J.T. One is not fit for the structure unless he is in the good of Romans. Romans provides material for the structure. "Quit yourselves like men", the apostle says (@1 Corinthians 16:13). The *men* are supplied by Romans.
{288}
E.M. You are freed from cowardice through Romans.
J.T. Yes, we are more than conquerors. Think of an *army* like that!
R.L. Does that come out in @2 Samuel 3:1? We read, "David waxed stronger and stronger, and the house of Saul waxed weaker and weaker".
J.T. Yes, only the waxing "stronger and stronger" is Colossians, I think. The full testimony to David's strength was at Jerusalem; that was where David had taken the head of the giant.
R.L. Is the head of the giant being brought up to Jerusalem a figure of resurrection?
J.T. But the giant's head taken to Jerusalem represents more than resurrection. Jerusalem I believe answers to Ephesians. Jerusalem is the centre of light and rule; for us this is heaven. According to Ephesians Christ is said to have gone above all the heavens, and to have led captivity captive and given gifts to men. One would like all to get hold of the new beginning in Colossians. The soul begins to see that things did not start in Eden; they began in Christ. He is the beginning.
T.M.G. God had ever Christ before Him.
W.H. Outside the responsible man in the flesh.
J.T. Yes; you get to see that things began before Eden; that is Colossians; whereas in Romans it is recovery that God has brought about. The moral thought of Christ being the beginning is what we need to understand. He is before all things and by Him all things consist.
T.M.G. You refer to Colossians?
J.T. Yes. In Colossians the Father has translated us into the kingdom of His dear Son. The heart is attracted at the outset in Colossians. The Son of the Father's love is introduced undoubtedly to attract our hearts.
{289}
W.H. You mean that Colossians is to produce in our souls the appreciation of Christ as the "beginning".
J.T. Yes. There is a good deal said in the word about the beginning, especially by John. David remains a long time at Hebron; seven years and six months.
J.M. What would be the moral force of that?
J.T. I think it takes us a long time, as a rule, to get into the idea of Christ as the beginning.
J.M. And that would be I suppose because we are not sufficiently established in what precedes, the truth of Romans.
J.T. I think so. David, being a spiritual man, would not be ignorant of the fact that Hebron was built before Zoan, and that fact would impress itself on him. If you go into a city you see different styles of architecture, and an architect can distinguish between them; he knows the different styles. Well David would say of a structure in Hebron, 'This is not an Egyptian design'. Typically, the designs in Hebron were after Christ.
T.M.G. The designs there were before Egypt.
J.T. Yes. In keeping with this, David himself had architectural designs. After this he gave to Solomon the pattern of the temple. He had it "by the Spirit", (@1 Chronicles 28:12). There was nothing in that pattern at all borrowed from the heathen nations around. In 1 Chronicles David is seen as head. One would like to see the saints exercised about Christ being the beginning.
E.M. The apostle, in writing the Colossian epistle, refers to the saints having faith in Christ Jesus and having love to all the saints; was that something like the necessary moral preparation?
J.T. Faith in Christ Jesus is not simply the faith that justifies, as in @Romans 3. Faith in Christ Jesus is faith in Him as the anointed Man. And
{290}
then they have love for all the saints; that means they are not partial or local, their love for the saints is general.
J.M. That would follow as the result of Christ being known in the soul as Head.
T.M.G. Having God's Man before the soul.
J.M. "Who is the beginning". Every question is settled and every difficulty overcome as He is held in faith in our souls.
T.M.G. Do we not get that coming out in @Colossians 3?
J.T. Christ is said there to be "everything, and in all" (verse 11). You see Romans leaves things here as they are. It is not to overturn the world, that is not the idea in Romans. In that epistle the Christian is justified, adjusted, as we have been saying; but Colossians means the ultimate overturning of the world as it is; that is to say, all power is in the hands of Christ and He must give character to everything. So that the headship of Christ implies for faith the overturning of everything that is in this world.
W.H. You say the Head must give character to everything.
J.T. Yes; you could not think for a moment of Christ taking a pattern of anything from any nation. He is Head; He would not borrow anything from anyone.
R.L. Behold *I* make all things new.
J.M. So that the saints in the good of the truth of Colossians would take things up from Christ. They would not borrow from what is around.
J.T. No; that is the great aim of the apostle in the epistle, that there should not be anything added to Christ. The thought was that philosophy could be added to Christianity.
T.M.G. Colossians leads us outside the world altogether; our minds are to be on things above.
{291}
R.L. Risen with Christ.
J.M. It is an order of things outside the world. Romans shows that we are justified and fulfil every obligation according to God, but Colossians brings us into a sphere where Christ is everything.
J.T. It is *illegal* to introduce anything of the world there; and that settles the question as to whether modern inventions and devices will have a place in the millennium. They are not needed. "In him dwelleth *all* the fulness of the Godhead bodily, and ye are complete in him which is the head of all principality and power" (@Colossians 2:9,10).
W.H. "In him" is a new and distinct order of things.
J.T. I wish we could get a hold of it, because the principles that should govern the saints now are the principles that will govern in the future; and if worldly principles will not be admissible then they should not be admitted now.
J.McF. God's great thought is that Christ should have the prominence in all things, and that puts everything else out of court.
J.T. If the Lord were here who would think of going to any legislature in the world for law? You would not think of it. Well, I think that is the lesson we learn at Hebron, and it is a good place to stop at, provided we have Jerusalem in view all the time.
J.McF. It would be worth while to stay the seven and half years at Hebron.
J.T. I think so, provided you keep your mind on Jerusalem.
R.L. It has lately been much before me how the Lord simply passed through this world; He never touched the world's system.
J.T. You see the Lord's attitude in relation to the world in @Luke 20:21 - 26. Looking at the penny He says, "Whose image and superscription hath it? They answered and said, Caesar's". Well, He leaves
{292}
it there. But on the mountain in @Matthew 5, He had a law to formulate, and it is a law that is to govern the world in the future. I think Colossians and Ephesians are pretty much like the latter; whereas Romans teaches us the import of the former.
Now in @2 Samuel 5:1 it is said: "Then came all the tribes of Israel to David unto Hebron, and spake saying: Behold we are thy bone and thy flesh". You see that is a truth that has come into the soul now concerning the One who is the beginning; the *idea* is there at least, that we are Christ's.
T.M. We are of that order of man.
J.T. Quite so. And then the tribes say, "in time past, when Saul was king over us, thou wast he that leadest out and broughtest in Israel: and the Lord said to thee; Thou shalt feed my people Israel, and thou shalt be captain over Israel ... and they anointed David king over Israel". There is a full acknowledgement of the supremacy of Christ, presented typically in David at Hebron; and the groundwork is there for the truth typically of the body; that we are "his bone and his flesh".
T.M.G. The headship of Christ is fully owned there.
J.T. Yes. And then there is the passage in chapter 6, where we see how David was engaged with the ark, which I think takes us to @Ephesians 3:17 "that the Christ may dwell, through faith, in your hearts, being rooted and founded in love". There it is that Paul tells us that he knelt down: "I bow my knees", he says, "to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ" (verse 14). That was the great end of his exercise. In @Colossians 1:27 the mystery is "Christ in you the hope of glory"; but the exercise in Ephesians is, "that the Christ may dwell, through faith, in your hearts".
E.M. There is to be intelligent response to the great light afforded in the epistle.
{293}
J.T. Yes. And you look at *the Christ* now, the One who accomplishes things for God. He dwells in your heart. The ark here is symbolical of Christ as the person by whom God effects things.
J.McF. Does the Christ dwelling in your hearts through faith take in the whole sphere of His glory?
J.T. I think it does. You are strengthened by the Father's Spirit in the inner man "that the Christ may dwell through faith in your hearts, being rooted and founded in love, in order that ye may be fully able to apprehend with all the saints what is the breadth and length and depth and height; and to know the love of the Christ which surpasses knowledge; that ye might be filled even to all the fulness of God", (@Ephesians 3:17 - 19). The One who is dwelling in our hearts will accomplish everything for God.
J.M. So you are let into the secret of God in that way; you have the One by whom everything will be brought about.
J.T. Yes; it is "*the* Christ".
R.G. Did you say that was the end of all exercise?
J.T. It is the object of all exercise. I do not mean that exercise stops there. I think @Ephesians 3 is the greatest expression of exercise you have. Paul's concern corresponds with the Lord Himself. We do not find in the Acts that they knelt down; but the expression here is: "I bow my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ". Paul was like David; he wanted the ark to have its own proper place, and that was in the hearts of the saints, that was the dwelling place. David speaks of his *afflictions* in this connection.
T.M.G. They correspond with the exercise of the apostle.
J.T. The ark was in the house of Obed-Edom for the space of three months. The ark had a place, but it was a provisional place, a place by the way.
J.M. What would answer to that?
{294}
J.T. The Lord will come into any heart. You may get a lodging for a night if you are on a journey, but that would not be a dwelling-place. The house of Obed-Edom was only a temporary dwelling for the ark. The Lord will take a place wherever it is accorded to Him. @Ephesians 3 is collective. It presents the full divine thought.
J.M. The presence of the ark brings blessing wherever it is.
J.T. Yes; the Lord blessed the house of Obed-Edom.
J.McF. When they that bare the ark of the Lord had gone six paces David sacrificed oxen and fatlings.
J.T. That was a very fine scene. The idea is that Christ is progressing in the hearts of the saints. The ark is not stationary. He is going on to the final place. I think the epistle to the Colossians is to lead on to completeness. They were not to stop. The danger is in not going to the full divine thought. The apostle rejoiced in their order and the steadfastness of their faith in Christ. That was like David dancing before the ark. It is a very great encouragement in any locality where the Lord's people are, to see Christ acquiring a greater place with them; the spirit of Christ in our souls will rejoice in that even though it is only a small advance.
J.M. I suppose we can see in David's wife here how Christ is really refused by the natural heart.
J.T. Yes. It is the daughter of the man after the flesh. It is not the ordinary flesh here, as we speak. Michal represents another royal line. It is the flesh seen as in its dignity perhaps, as in its religious character. But it is very encouraging to see that that line becomes extinct, there is no increase on that line; there is increase on the divine line, but not on that.
{295}
J.McF. Will you say a word about the offering of the oxen and the fatlings after the ark had gone six paces?
J.T. I think it is the great expression of what was in David's heart, of his appreciation of the Lord.
E.M. They are not counted.
J.T. No; it is the *kind* of offerings; an ox is a very big offering, and a fatted beast would speak of what is of intrinsic worth.
Rem. When the ark reached Jerusalem David offered burnt offerings and peace offerings. These are increased.
J.McF. It marked his increasing apprehension of the value of the ark.
{296}
HEADSHIP (1)
@Luke 24:13 - 53
J.T. I suggested this scripture because it furnishes us with an example of how the Lord leads His people into the apprehension of Himself as Head. He acted in that capacity in the house in Emmaus, conveying a suggestion of headship in what He did, then immediately vanishes out of sight, with the result that the effect intended was produced. The suggestion proves effective with the two, so that they at once leave for Jerusalem. In dwelling on the passage, we shall find that which helps to adjust us in regard to the headship of Christ.
C.A.P. What is the prominent thought in headship?
J.T. Wisdom is the great feature. The headship of Christ involves that those who recognise it are never at a loss, never baffled, there is always a way before them, a way OUT and a way IN. That side of it that relates to extrication is largely negative. The vanishing of the Lord implied that Emmaus was not the sphere in which headship was to be enjoyed. Otherwise He would have remained. It is in a spiritual sphere that you see headship in its fulness. It is of a spiritual nature; hence the epistle to the Colossians, being the great epistle for headship, gives us the desire of the apostle that the saints should have spiritual understanding.
C.A.P. Had these two disciples ever known the Lord as Head before?
J.T. Well, they had had opportunity to know Him as such in a way. They had doubtless seen Him break bread before, and seen Him in circumstances in which wisdom shone, but until the way out had been made by His death the thought of headship could not be operative. The question of righteousness
{297}
must be settled before a way can be made out of the world. The two already had light in their souls. All they do and say shows that they were quite conversant with the things that had come to pass, and in measure they were affected by them. "Did not our heart burn within us", they say afterwards, so that they had an intuitive sense that there was that which they had been in contact with which caused their hearts to burn.
R.G. What character did the Lord assume in following them?
J.T. He was the Shepherd. There is no idea of headship until you reach the house sphere. His thought was to send them back to the sphere to which headship applies. When one has strayed one has to be pursued. The sheep was on the mountains and the Shepherd sought it. These two were not unconverted, as we speak, they were saints whose home had a pull on them, a stronger pull on them than the assembly.
R.G. Does the Lord assume that they should have known where the centre was?
J.T. All He had said in @John 13 and parallel passages was to the effect that they were to keep together, not to isolate themselves, not to go home; it was no time to go home. The epistle to Corinthians recognises the home, it has a place there, it is there you eat and drink; but this was no time for going home; all is uncertain as to the interests of Christ, and we should keep together. The Lord saw the line they were on. Things on which they had built great hopes had collapsed; they had centred great hopes on Christ, and these seemed to have failed. But the Lord said they were "slow of heart to believe all that the prophets had spoken. Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his glory?"
C.A.P. What had they not believed?
{298}
J.T. Evidently they had mistaken the spirit of Scripture or neglected it. "Ought not Christ to have suffered these things", the Lord says.
C.A.P. They had not received the truth of resurrection.
J.T. The nail in a sure place involves Christ in resurrection.
R.G. The Jew had continually the glory of the kingdom before him.
P.L. They say, "we *trusted* that it had been he which should have redeemed Israel". Were they to lose those thoughts now for the mind of the Head?
J.T. Yes, evidently.
G.N. Shepherding was to lead to a point where Christ would be recognised as Head.
J.T. Yes. In a sense the *sheep* character was to give place to that spiritual intelligence which was to make them capable of discerning the Head. Spiritual understanding would mark them. While the Lord "*went with*" the two disciples, headship was not seen. "Jesus himself (not another) drew near and went with them". That was not headship. It showed shepherd care. Then He is "constrained" to enter the house, and there takes His place as *house-father*. He reckons on their spiritual intelligence; it was there and had to be touched, had to be appealed to; and in taking His place as *house-father*, and giving thanks, He touched this. The spiritual understanding comes into evidence in the sequel.
P.L. Affections are quickened by the Head, so that we are not "slow of heart".
J.T. No, not slow of heart or foot. They rose up at the same hour of the night. At the present moment there is a good deal of comment made in the world as to the position that divine principles have led saints into. The secret of people being puzzled is because there is no spiritual understanding. They can observe certain outward things which command
{299}
their attention, but the secret is hidden. The assembly position involves spiritual understanding; headship involves it too. That is the explanation of it all. "The locusts have no king, yet go they forth all of them by bands" (@Proverbs 30:27). The saints have spiritual understanding, and can discern the movements of Christ.
G.N. When they were in the house, a spiritual trait was manifested in Christ, which they, on their part, spiritually discerned.
J.T. Yes. In breaking the bread He had in mind not to eat thereof, but to convey a spiritual thought.
A.N. Do you mean that the service of Christ to them was in order to lead them to come into the sphere of headship?
J.T. Exactly.
A.N. How does this apply to us; has His service to us this character?
J.T. Yes, and in that sphere you get the unfolding of the manifold wisdom of God. In Emmaus it was a mere suggestion, but sufficient to set them going. "They rose up that same hour", showing how quickly the thing acts on us when we are genuine.
A.N. If we have light it becomes a key to the situation, and shows how the Lord meets us.
J.T. The Lord may graciously come into a man's house as He did here, but not to stay there. He is Head in His own sphere.
A.N. Does headship apply in an individual way?
J.T. It is in order to draw an individual to the centre. You want to see it in its own sphere; to see Christ in His own sphere.
P.L. Is that where He "enters into his glory"?
J.T. "*Ought* not Christ to have suffered those things and to enter into his glory". It is that now really. He has that which answers to Himself in the assembly. The idea of the manifold wisdom of God is very wonderful to see. It is remarkable how the
{300}
evangelists, especially John, call attention to believers going to their own homes. When you go to your own home, so much comes to mind, your business, money, family; all these come to mind in connection with one's home; whereas in connection with the assembly, a man has Christ and his brethren before him; *they* enter into the mind.
W.H. Do we touch it in the Supper?
J.T. Yes, we touch one feature of it. The emphasis lay on "the breaking of bread", *that* left the impression on the hearts of the two. What you speak of most is what affects you most.
C.A.P. What was the point of contact?
J.T. I think it was a reminder of what they had seen Him do before He died. The features of Christ were there. There was a peculiar familiarity about the action that only those who had previous experience of Christ could have discerned. A stranger would have noticed nothing. It was sufficient to remind them of Himself, but, more than that, it reminded them that He had a sphere. If Christ obtains a footing in the heart, a lot of other things come into the mind, hence they thought of Him and of the eleven. They went to the eleven and those with them; they were reminded of the sphere of Christ's interests. It is wonderful when the thought arises in the heart for the first time, that the Lord Jesus whom I love has a sphere of His own. It is then, that you want to reach it.
C.A.P. What is the character of those who form that sphere?
J.T. This chapter does not contemplate that side. The Lord's intent was to bring about normal conditions among the saints. They were not really adjusted. For the marks which characterised them, however, we must go elsewhere. They get no message from Christ here, not even one sent to the company, whereas in @John 20 Mary receives a message and is
{301}
sent to the saints with it. The point here is to show how adjustment takes place. If the Lord gives you a little light, what effect is it to produce? Your heart refers to the circle in which it is to be known fully.
C.A.P. Outside of that, there is no spiritual understanding.
J.T. No, I think not; and more, what marks everything outside is shortage. Now, a shortage in spiritual things is fatal; shortage in natural things may be made up, but not in spiritual things. The principle of what is spiritual is, "for to every one that has shall be given ... but from him that has not, that even which he has shall be taken from him" (@Matthew 25:29). The five virgins found themselves short of oil and they could get no supplies.
J.S. Shortage means not going on to the full thing.
J.T. Coming short is equivalent to nothing; it is worse than nothing. Incompleteness is what marks Antichrist. It began with Sardis. "I have not found thy works complete" (@Revelation 3:2).
G.N. The two here were in danger of being incomplete.
J.T. I was thinking rather of systematised religion, and that is more serious. In systematised religion there is incompleteness as regards works and shortage as regards supply. It is fatal, there is no reparation for that.
R.D. What is your thought in regard to Sardis?
J.T. We get there the suggestion of Antichrist. He is incomplete. Six means incompleteness as regards spiritual things from God's point of view.
R.D. Sardis did not go on to headship; the movement that resulted in that did not.
J.T. It just amounts to that. Protestantism never went back to "Jerusalem", as the two who returned from Emmaus. An arrangement was made
{302}
by which professing Christianity would have a recognised place in the world. It is utterly inconsistent with the headship of Christ. For that you must go out of the world.
G.N. "All seek their own" (@Philippians 2:21). The shepherding referred to preserves us from that.
J.T. The Lord's care is needed when we are prosperous or advancing. The government of God is marked by fairness, and righteousness, but the shepherding of Christ runs along with that, so that these things shall not damage us. These two had no doubt more light than any one in Emmaus, and the Lord saw to it that they did not settle down, not even for a *night*. It would have been more difficult to get them away next night.
R.G. They get more of Himself when they respond.
D.D. You alluded to Colossians?
J.T. Colossians gives the collective thought. The apostle there shows that headship is to be apprehended and held in the soul; some were "not holding the head", the apostle says.
D.D. What about Paul's prayer "that their hearts might be comforted ... unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding" (@Colossians 2:2)?
J.T. In Corinthians Christ is said to be made unto us wisdom. It is objective. All wisdom is in Christ. Paul's prayer in Colossians is that the saints should have it subjectively. We are to be children of wisdom, so that we are not baffled. In the circle of the brethren you see the working out of it. You get impressions of Christ at meetings that you do not get elsewhere. One has known what it is to go to the meeting uncertain as to things, but in the recognition of Christ in the assembly one finds these things become as clear as noonday. One should always hold the Head as an individual; it is the secret of your certainty as to divine things.
{303}
H.H. There would be no shortage if we were in the good of the truth of Colossians. We should be filled with wisdom.
J.T. Influences were at work to bring in a shortage, to bring in something additional to Christ which would work to the shutting out of Christ.
Rem. The two at Emmaus discerned that Christ was the same Person as before He died.
J.T. "Jesus *himself* drew near". At Jerusalem He comes into the company and impresses on them, that it is "I myself".
A.N. Can you give us a little more help as to headship? If it is not confined to the assembly or to our being together, how would it work out practically when we are not together?
J.T. I think, in the way you look at everything. You may sit in your room, but you think of Christ and of the brethren; you always have them in your mind, and you are affected according to the measure in which they are in your heart. Thus, in looking at Christ, and the saints in relation to Him, you are open for light.
A.N. Has this any connection with fellowship, and the way one acts in relation to fellowship?
J.T. You always think of the saints in that connection. Holding the Head means that you have Christ in your heart and the saints in relation to Him. I would not limit it to the saints as together, it is the attitude of your mind.
Ques. Where was Asaph in @Psalm 73? Did he see the Head?
J.T. When he went into the sanctuary he got spiritual understanding. Nothing was said to him, but there was a suggestion as to the order of man God had before Him. Strife and murder are going on outside, but before God is an order of man pleasing to Him. The Psalmist came to see that, and says, "then understood I their end". The end of the man
{304}
outside appears to him now. All might *seem* as if it were to continue, but the Psalmist sees it is not so. That is not exactly headship, but the end of things is seen, and that affords great comfort, if one is disturbed by conditions here. The apostle says, "we see Jesus" (@Hebrews 2:9), though we do not yet see all things put under Him.
G.N. Why were such pains taken to establish the fact that it was a real Man in resurrection?
J.T. It is essential to know that our Head is a Man. The two at Emmaus returned to the eleven; it does not say to the company, the eleven were recognised.
R.D. Why was this?
J.T. They had respect for the authority of Christ. The eleven are singled out and made prominent. They represent His authority, they were trustees of His interests, so to speak. Then it adds, "and those that were with them".
R.D. As owning Christ as Head I would be prepared always for control.
A.N. What is the essential difference between *Head* and *Lord*?
J.T. *Lord* simply stands for authority. If your will is active it has to be subdued. I should not go so far as to say the two disciples needed to be subdued, but I think it is a nice touch that they are shown to us as respecting the eleven. Young Christians never get on if they disregard authority. Authority is necessary as a safeguard. The eleven represent divinely appointed authority.
R.W. Authority is seen in the remark, "I say to this one, ... Do this, and he does it" (@Luke 7:8).
J.T. It is a mark of God's work in the soul where divinely appointed authority is recognised. The two here would contribute to the company. They had light, and like bees, they bring what they have gained to the hive; "they found the eleven". Some
{305}
people do not seem to succeed in finding the eleven! "They found the eleven gathered together and them that were with them, saying, The Lord is risen indeed and has appeared unto Simon". The company was talking about resurrection and the Lord appearing to Simon, showing that the Lord was signalising Simon as the leading apostle. The company was on right lines, and now the two contribute *their* quota. "They told what things were done in the way, and how he was known of them in breaking of bread". That was an additional thought, *that* was not made known to Peter in the same way, but to them; it was additional light.
P.L. The principle of mutual contribution in the assembly is based upon holding the Head.
J.T. Yes, each one holding the Head.
R.W. Why is the distance, 60 furlongs, alluded to?
J.T. The Lord knows how far you have gone or how far you mean to go. When a brother or sister turns back, they have a definite end in view, that is usual; they have a place before them. Here, the Lord made as though He would have gone further. The Lord knows the distance, and He would go *any* distance to get you back.
C.A.P. The result of the Lord's activities is that He puts everyone in his right place.
J.T. On the adjustment side, this is a remarkable chapter. The Lord knows just how far you mean to go. He knows how far you have already gone and you may mean to go further; and you *will*, if He does not overtake you.
G.N. We see how this prepares for @John 20.
J.T. Luke does prepare for John. Light comes to us in abnormal circumstances, whereas John presents things from the normal side. In John the disciples are not terrified. John represents the saints as having to look after themselves. This precedes
{306}
@John 20. You cannot get the benefit of what is brought out in that chapter unless you find the centre. The disciples spoke of resurrection, yet they were terrified by the Lord's presence.
R.W. As a result of the Lord's activities, the company is prepared to receive Mary's message.
J.T. You see here the shepherd spirit of Christ in following the sheep.
P.L. Why does the Lord refer to Moses and the prophets in addressing the two; and later, in the company He includes the Psalms?
J.T. Moses and the prophets refer to testimony; you might say they represent the Old Testament as a witness.
P.L. Is it that we get the *Man* in the Psalms, His sensibilities and affections?
J.T. Moses and the prophets would bear adequate testimony to the glory of Christ. The Psalms present an additional witness. The Psalms, as you say, give the Man.
P.L. And they suppose that headship has produced discrimination.
J.T. In the first reference to the Scriptures, the point is, that they are a witness, an adequate witness; in the second, the teaching is the point. "Thus it behoved Christ to suffer", is more teaching.
P.L. First, the authority of Scripture to recover us; and then the unfolding of Christ for the heart's delight.
Ques. What is the difference between wisdom and spiritual understanding?
J.T. The latter has reference to power to take things in; but having wisdom, you know how to apply things, like Bezaleel. One enables us to understand; the other to apply.
P.L. You embrace the ideal and act upon it.
J.T. Yes; you act upon it. In the manifold wisdom of God there is variety in the assembly.
{307}
R.D. And there it is seen in operation.
J.T. Christ is light to the soul; there is no eventide now. Like the seventh day, it knows no evening. There is no eventide in *this* circle. The Lord followed the two disciples. He sought them in His shepherd care. He is not insensible to *our* eventide. @Ephesians 5:14 gives the day. "Wake up, thou that sleepest ... and the Christ shall shine upon thee".
G.N. In verse 50, Bethany is associated with His being carried up to heaven instead of Jerusalem.
J.T. Bethany is connected with the remnant. We get a dispensational thought in Bethany. It is the place where the Lord found human sympathy. The mount of Olives suggests the retreat He found with the Father.
R.D. The result of all the Lord's care is that we make a Bethany for Him in our affections.
{308}
HEADSHIP (2)
@John 20
G.N. Your thought was to connect this chapter with @Luke 24?
J.T. Yes; it gives the other side, the normal side. In it we have the headship of Christ more positively presented, as connected with the heavenly position and Christ's ascension. It presents to us light, and guidance from Christ ascended. I suggested that we should read the earlier part of the chapter, as it furnishes us with degrees of appreciation of Christ, in order to bring into greater relief the excess of affection in Mary, showing how she exceeded all the others. It is to be remembered that although we may not be far away in our souls, yet, whilst having light and believing, we may miss the gain of headship. Peter and John are examples of this: they loved the Lord, and ran to the sepulchre, but they were content with seeing an empty sepulchre, and did not go beyond that; they *went home* from the grave of Christ. We ought to go beyond the grave of Christ. It is wonderful that we should be privileged to look into His grave, or to enter it; the two disciples did both, but they returned home afterwards, and thus missed the gain of Christ risen, and the light He was prepared to give. Mary corresponds with the Ephesian side of the truth. She loved the Lord, and would not be content with less than the Lord Himself. It was said in @Luke 24:24, "him they saw not". We often go away like that from meetings; there may be a good deal of light and edification, but Him we "see not". In missing that we miss the gain of His headship.
G.N. Affection is never satisfied till one is in touch with the Person.
{309}
R.D. Mary recognised the Lord and the company in the upper room.
J.T. Yes she recognised the Lord when He called her by name.
J.F. What do you mean by saying that souls are content with an *open* sepulchre?
J.T. Peter and John "saw and believed", but "him they saw not". They believed He was risen, but they missed Himself. It illustrates how things are pretty much amongst the Lord's people. They have the light of resurrection and all that goes with that. Paul in @Romans 4:25 teaches us that Christ was "raised again for our justification". We shall be raised too, but we have to go to Colossians for the thought of "with him". You do get *with* in Romans as regards baptism, but if you stop there you do not get "risen with Christ". Peter and John were in association with Christ so far, as in the sepulchre, but they did not reach Him in resurrection, for they went home. The moral thought is that you are "buried with him"; the principle of association *begins* in the grave, but it goes on to resurrection, risen with Him, and then *quickened* with Him.
G.N. Is that the way baptism is presented in Romans and in Colossians?
J.T. Colossians gives the full thought. Romans simply takes you out of Egypt into the wilderness, buried, but not risen; whereas Colossians overlooks the wilderness, and goes on to say, "in which ye have been also raised with him" (chapter 2:12). The Red Sea and the Jordan coalesce in Colossians. It is out of Egypt into Canaan in Colossians; but the moral thought is *with*, "*with Christ*". Now Peter and John necessarily missed that, for the reason that they did not see Him; He was not there; whereas Mary lingered at the spot, and *saw Him*. In her mind the idea of *with* was in the garden, but the
{310}
Lord would not have it there. He says, "Touch me not". The idea of *with* goes on to heaven.
W.S. Would *going into* the grave be different from *looking in*?
J.T. I think there is a difference. In going in you disappear altogether. Baptism is burial. The idea of it is, the man disappears, he goes out of sight. In @2 Kings 13:20, it is said, that the Moabites invaded the land at the beginning of the year, and the people were in the act of burying a man. Elisha had died, but they were not burying him; they were burying a man; it does not say who it was, but as they were doing it, a band of men came and "they cast the man into the sepulchre of Elisha; and when the man was let down and touched the bones of Elisha, he revived and stood upon his feet". Now, it seems to me that that is a crucial point in our histories, the *burial* of the man. A party arises, a band of Moabites; they are proud people, and invade the land. We often see such invasions. What meets that is that saints are in the attitude of burying the man. You do not meet a party *by* a party; the man that is in the way has to be buried. There is a man in the way, and that is *yourself*.
A.N. How do we bury the man?
J.T. Of course one cannot bury oneself, but there is one exercise that corresponds to it. Mortifying your members which are on the earth is the answering responsibility of being buried and risen with Christ. In Paul's ministry to the Corinthians he insists that he had announced the gospel to them, that "Christ died for our sins, ... and that he was *buried*; and that he was raised the third day" (@1 Corinthians 15:3,4). "*He was buried"*; there is a moral thought in that. Burial must take place; not only death, but burial. One has the sense that one would rather disappear wholly from view. What met the band of men in 2 Kings, you might say, was a risen man; he "stood on his feet".
{311}
A.N. Paul says, "the weapons of our warfare are not carnal" (@2 Corinthians 10:4). Would this answer to it? All the principles by which a fleshly conflict could be carried on were put aside.
J.T. Yes. "Risen with him through the faith of the operation of God, who hath raised him from the dead" (@Colossians 2:12). That is not the arm of flesh. The man stands on his feet. The Moabites have to contend with him. If you want to experience life-giving virtue it is through the grave of the prophet. Of course I speak of all this as typical, typically it is the grave of Christ.
A.N. If you want to go on to the sphere of headship, it is only by leaving the man (yourself) behind.
J.T. Mary may be regarded as having reached "risen with Christ". She is first seen as seeking Him. She would gladly have shared His tomb, like Ruth who said "Where thou diest will I die, and there will I be buried" (@Ruth 1:17). But instead of sharing His tomb, Mary is to share His company among the saints, to know Him risen. But that was not in the *garden*. She takes Him to be the gardener, a great mistake! He *was* the gardener in one sense, and will yet be, but not *then*. He says, "Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my Father".
J.S. Does ascension go beyond the garden? What is the thought of the garden?
J.T. It might be England, or any spot specially favoured by God in His government. Christ is not in any garden now. Faith in Christ Jesus and love to *all* the saints takes one out of any such garden now.
J.S. The tendency would be to bring in Christ here to make things better.
J.T. Yes; especially connecting Him with things here. In the future Israel will be the garden of God.
P.L. "In the garden was a *sepulchre*"; the death of Christ changed everything.
{312}
J.T. The garden alludes to any special spot on earth. It began with Eden. A garden with a sepulchre is incongruous. Adam was driven out of the garden; he did not die in it. It is a terrible reflection that all that is left now, for Christ sent Mary out of it, and He Himself left it. He is ascending to the Father, so the thought is not tilling a garden now; but He is supreme in the universe. He is Head over all things to the assembly. And however little Mary may have understood it, she was to have her part in it.
Rem. Israel's part will yet be with the Lord in the garden, but the assembly will have part with Him in His place as supreme over the universe.
J.T. Yes. How @John 20 would deliver us, if we accept it, from nationalism!
J.S. There is a danger of corruption setting in, in anything short of full assembly position.
C.A.P. The sepulchre was empty.
J.T. The sepulchre of Christ was there, and that desolates everything for the Christian.
R.D. Does that produce an orphan spirit?
J.T. Yes. "He is not there". All is desolate in the garden now.
R.D. What we see in Mary would answer to that.
J.T. She represents the desolation, and the Lord reveals Himself to her, but there is no association there. "Touch me not". The renewal of their links with Him would be in the company.
C.A.P. The message to Mary would give the thought of a new position and new relationship.
G.M. Is the woman brought in to show that spiritual state is necessary?
J.T. The feminine side usually indicates the subjective side of things. Peter and John represent the male side. I doubt not they had more light than Mary, but it did not hold them. Her affection held
{313}
her, hence the importance of affection. It secures us though we may be deficient in intelligence.
A.N. The way to the sphere of headship is where the affections go after Christ.
R.D. Has @Luke 24 more to do with the mind than with the affections? Is it mind there and affection here?
J.T. Yes. Love capacitates us for the message. Mary is sent out of the garden to the company. It is all designed by the Spirit to emphasise, on the one hand, the great importance of love for Christ, and on the other, the greatness of His brethren to Him. They are a class, and have to be distinguished from "my brethren" in @Matthew 12, @Mark 3 and @Luke 8. In @1 John 3:14 we get the expression, "because we love the brethren"; there is only one class of brethren really, and the article indicates that there is only one "*the* brethren". In Matthew what marks them is, that they do the will of God. In @Mark 3:34, they are sitting in a circle around Christ. The Lord is discoursing, and they are sitting around Him, and it is said, "he looked around in a circuit". It is the best expression to describe a circle. They are quietly listening to Christ, and He says, "Behold my mother and my brethren". Luke's view is that they "hear the word of God and *do* it" (chapter 8:31). They *do* the word. Luke does not point them out; Matthew does, and Mark does. Luke speaks in the abstract: "*these* which hear the word of God and do it". But the divine thought holds good in Luke. It is a question of our coming up to the divine thought. In Mark we get hearing, but the point of doing does not come in, as they are simply listening.
C.A.P. How do you distinguish between those three gospels and @John 20?
J.T. In John they are *believers*; they took in all the light available. A believer in John's gospel does
{314}
not take in a partial measure of light; he takes in all the light presented. It is said, "they saw and believed". It evidenced the fact that they believed Christ was risen; that was the utmost limit of the light they had at that moment.
G.N. Believing, in John's gospel, is characteristic.
C.A.P. How do you understand verse 9, "as yet they knew not the Scripture that he must rise from the dead"? The previous verse says "they saw and believed".
J.T. Up to this time they had not understood that Scripture, I think; but now they did. They had looked into the sepulchre. The sepulchre afforded light for them. They took account of all the circumstances in connection with the tomb.
P.L. *One* cannot take that light home exactly. That light is for the assembly.
J.T. That is where the two disciples missed it.
R.D. How do you distinguish between "*the* brethren" and "*My* brethren"?
J.T. "*The* brethren" refers to the same class as "*My* brethren", but the former expression indicates their character, what they were as formed by the influence and teaching of Christ. The designation is based on certain traits in the other gospels; whereas "my brethren" in @John 20 gives their dignity. It suggests to us the counsels of the Father and the Son.
T.R.D. I thought so, and it anticipates the new relationship.
J.T. It gives them a status, and qualifies them for the new position. The Lord sent the message so that they might be ennobled, as it were, qualified to receive Him from on high, for the message conveys that He was ascending.
Ques. Would it cover Ephesian ground?
J.T. Yes, it corresponds with Ephesians.
C.A.P. The Lord had not actually ascended.
{315}
J.T. No, but He says, "I ascend". The question of time does not come in. The ascending One sends the message.
G.N. Why is the message communicated to a woman?
J.T. It is characteristic of John. He makes a point of passing by the official class, as if to show that if it were not available the Lord could proceed with His work without it. Chapter 4 illustrates this. The disciples had gone to buy bread and the Lord is left alone at the well; but though they were absent the Lord's work proceeds. In @John 20 the woman takes the message to the assembly, and in chapter 4 the woman goes to the city with testimony of Christ. In both cases the Lord honours the woman.
G.N. Love is the only thing of account in the assembly.
J.T. Yes, it is love that the Lord honours.
A.N. A new situation had arisen, as Christ was no longer where He had been, and the question is, Are there any prepared to adjust themselves in relation to the new position? Light comes in for such as are prepared. It is not a question of what Christ has done merely, but of affection for Christ. You adjust your position in relation to Him, and light follows.
J.T. Mary was in keeping with the light. She was at the sepulchre. She had no light, beyond that, but she was there. So if we go on these lines, we shall get light. A manifestation involves a fresh feature of Christ. Compare Mary's contribution with that of the two who went to Emmaus. They *did* bring a contribution to the company, but Mary's was much greater, enormously greater.
J.F. "The Lord is risen indeed!"
J.T. The company said that. The two related what had taken place by the way, but that was not
{316}
new. It was wonderful to have the unfolding, but it was not new. The Lord had been made known to them in the breaking of bread but Mary brings in the heavenly light, the light of the heavenly position. That was a marvellous contribution to the company.
R.D. It illustrates the range of all that comes in under Christ as head.
J.T. Yes, the message indicates that.
R.G. Any gain communicated to an individual is for the company.
J.T. Yes, and you would like to be a good contributor. The Lord says, "Go to my brethren and say unto them, I ascend to my Father and your Father". We see the position He is taking up. In Ephesians He is represented as having passed beyond all heavens; that is, Ephesians shows the *extent* of the elevation. Here it is rather the *Person* to whom He has ascended, indicating relationship; and from that point He influences all creation. The word *ascend* is of importance in this chapter. In chapter 13 it is *go*, but here it is *ascend*, pointing to elevation. It is significant.
G.N. Is it more the thought of association than relationship?
R.G. Is it sonship?
J.T. That is inferred, though John does not use the word, except once in the book of Revelation.
R.G. It gives the highest character of relationship with Christ, "*my brethren*".
J.T. That is the point emphasised here.
R.G. Is it the idea of dignity?
J.T. Yes, that is the thought. It is not so much what we are to God, but what we are to Christ.
P.L. That leaves room for headship.
J.T. "Thine they were, and thou gayest them me" (@John 17:6). It is what the company was to Him.
P.L. *He* takes us to the Father.
J.T. *Paul's* thought is to bring in man for God;
{317}
man presented to God, and glory thus secured for God eternally. *John* is engaged in bringing God to man, but he gives us here what is unique, a company great enough to be Christ's associates. After the message is delivered, the Lord proceeds to visit them, and breathes on them. It signifies not merely the gift of the Spirit, but the Spirit of the heavenly Man, so that the company is to be marked by what is heavenly. *In principle* the Lord came in from heaven so that the One who breathes on them is the heavenly Man, imbued with a heavenly Spirit. That is the spirit in which we are to go out into the world. "As the Father hath sent me, even so send I you:" it is the heavenly spirit on earth.
A.N. You draw a distinction between the Lord *going* to the Father in @John 13 and here where He says, "I ascend". The thought of ascension is elevation, is it not? You go to a new place.
J.T. Yes; and He breathes into them the Spirit of that place. It is significant. The assembly is heavenly and comes out of heaven.
C.A.P. This is not the same as anointing.
J.T. The anointing was for the head. It is *upon* you, it is external; you are not anointed inside, it is outside; but think of the Lord breathing into the company! The assembly is heavenly, though here on earth in testimony; that is simply provisional. She is an exotic at all times, in a foreign land; she does not grow here, so to speak; she receives her supplies from heaven, and will return there.
P.L. "Rooted and grounded in love" (@Ephesians 3:17).
W.S. Exponents of a heavenly sphere before we go there.
J.T. Not only do we enjoy the privileges of this new sphere, but all is to come out in the way of testimony on earth, so it says after He breathed on them, "Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted
{318}
unto them; whose soever sins ye retain they are retained".
G.N. Thomas did not share in the breathing in this way. It would show that the spirit of the heavenly Man was unique to the assembly.
Ques. Does headship go beyond "my brethren"?
J.T. The brethren get the gain of the wisdom of the Head. In receiving of His Spirit there is a means of communication.
Ques. Do we get in this chapter what is suggestive of both Colossians and Ephesians?
J.T. Yes. Colossians, of course, is a corrective epistle; the point being, that Christ should be in the hearts, that the *saints should not admit anything additional to Christ*. Colossians shows that you need nothing outside of Christ. The Lord came into the circle in @John 20. If you had introduced a philosopher at that moment, what place would there have been for him? None. He would have been regarded as an intruder, as *utterly* unable to contribute anything to that company. Christ was sufficient; He was able to supply all that was needed.
J.S. The message was not only that they should be His brethren, but that they were to stand in His relationship to His Father.
J.T. They were never addressed in that way before.
P.L. They had answered to Colossians, the door was shut for fear of the Jews.
J.S. The grain of wheat brings to light the brethren. Does this not go beyond the main subject matter of John's gospel?
J.T. Yes, but it is essential in order to complete the subject. John's ministry was to the circumcision in a way, and many expressions in his writings refer to the Jews, but believing Jews. This chapter is
{319}
essential to his subject, as it gives the heavenly position and relationship of the assembly, qualifying us to come out for Christ on earth.
J.S. It gives you the *things* rather than their names.
J.T. Yes, it is more important to get the thing than the name.
A.N. We get in this chapter the sphere He leads them to, and their coming out bearing the influence of that sphere.
J.T. He breathes on them to imbue them with that Spirit.
P.L. In Revelation, the city comes out in the dignity and liberty of the heavenly position.
W.S. This is the way of true Christian testimony.
J.T. Like the sheet in @Acts 10, which came down and went up thrice. Not only is man's need met, but what is heavenly is far in excess of the need, and thus Ephesians is suggested. Ephesians always indicates excess far beyond the need being met -- it gives the infiniteness of supply. Heaven is pre-eminent not in an arbitrary way, but on account of its excellence.
R.D. So it provides a full answer to the shortage here.
G.N. The Lord says, "Blessed are they that have not seen and yet have believed".
J.T. That is an encouragement for ourselves. Our faith is based on the testimony. There is a peculiar blessedness attached to the faith of the saints now, in contrast to the Jews in the future, who believe only when they *see*.
{320}
CHRIST AS OVERSEER AND HEAD
@1 Peter 2:25; @Ephesians 4:14 - 16
My exercise is to pursue the thought we have already had as to Christ, for one feels the intense need of the saints coming, first of all, to recognise that He is Head, and, secondly, to hold Him as such. I refer to Peter, not that the Spirit of God uses him to bring out this truth; he travelled the same road as Paul up to a point, but it is Paul who leads the saints into headship, and what I would remark about Peter is that he is true to the impression received from the Lord after He rose from the dead. We know from @Acts 1 what was the Lord's charge to the apostles, and that it was in the power of the Spirit. He charged them, He placed them under obligations, entrusting them with the ordering and the government of the assembly. He singled out Peter in revealing Himself specially to him after He rose from the dead; and then afterwards the Lord probes Peter.
When Peter and his associates in the fishing expedition as recorded in @John 21, return and discern Christ, John said "It is the Lord", Then "Peter girt his fisher's coat unto him, for he was naked, and did cast himself into the sea", and he reached the Lord in that way. The Lord had food prepared for them. There was a "fire of coals, and fish laid thereon and bread"; then He gave them the invitation to "come and dine". It is said of David, "he fed them according to the integrity of his heart". How true that is of Christ! And then it is added "he guided them by the skilfulness of his hands". That is wisdom; integrity in *feeding*, and wisdom in *leading*. So Peter dines, and then he is probed by the Lord; and after that the Lord says to him "Feed my sheep -- feed my lambs -- shepherd my sheep". That was the impression that the
{321}
Lord made upon Peter; he was to feed and he was to shepherd the sheep of Christ. The Lord further impresses upon him that he is to be a *follower*. Peter looked round and saw John following, and he said, "Lord, and what shall this man do?"
Now John was following; and John, I think, says more about following than any of the gospel writers. He begins his narrative by calling attention to the fact that a certain two of the Baptist's disciples heard him speak and followed Jesus; (@John 1:35). John himself was following, and the one who follows can speak about following, and needs not that any one should criticise. Peter had said. "What shall this man do?" The point is: What *is* he doing? He was *following*; that was sufficient. What are *you* doing, beloved? How happy it is for God to hear the Lord say a word for you! He says of John, "If I will that he tarry till I come!" These are the last words of Christ to Peter, according to John's narrative; and Peter's epistle shows how unmistakably the Lord had impressed him. He had not only given him a commission, but He had impressed him; and I would say in that connection that Christianity largely consists in that. I am not belittling doctrine, but if you take away the impression of Christ, of what value is the doctrine? Christianity is the continuation of what is set forth in Christ. That is simple, but in what way? Through impressions gained by the follower of the Lord.
Peter was impressed, and his epistle shows that the impression lasted. Time failed to efface it. See his last letter? He says, "I think it meet, as long as I am in this tabernacle, to stir you up by putting you in remembrance" (@2 Peter 1:13). Remembrance of what? Of that which had been from the beginning. He says, "we have not followed cunningly devised fables when we made known unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were eye-witnesses of
{322}
his majesty. For he received from God the Father honour and glory". *What* an impression Peter had received! He says "when we were with him on the holy mount", and "there came such a voice from the excellent glory". Excellent glory! How impressed he was! Then he goes on; "we have also a more sure word of prophecy" (@2 Peter 1:16,17,19). It was a certainty to him.
Well, the gist of Peter's letter is really in @1 Peter 2:25: "Ye were as sheep going astray; but are now returned unto the Shepherd and Bishop of your souls". The believers of the circumcision were as "sheep going astray". Note, it is not that they were simply astray, but they were "*going* astray". Like the two we read of in @Luke 24, they were going the wrong way. I wonder how it is with us. It is not only *has gone* astray; it is "*going* astray". There is progress in either one direction or another. But now he says: "Ye are now returned unto the Shepherd and Bishop of your souls". He does not say that he has brought them back, but the passage would show that his ministry had been effective: it had not been in vain. The sheep had returned, and returned to the Shepherd and Bishop of their souls. It is a remarkable statement. One has to measure oneself by a statement like that, as to whether one has really returned to the Shepherd. We have each been far enough away. We were speaking this afternoon about the distance from Jerusalem to Emmaus, 60 furlongs. The Lord has measured the distance that each one of us has travelled in going astray. How He watches over our souls when we reach the turning point! How happy when we return, "the same hour of the night", for it *is* night when you are astray, but the morning comes as soon as you return. Returning to the Shepherd, you come to the great light; there is no night there. Peter says, "Ye have returned to the Shepherd and Bishop of your souls".
{323}
Now that is Peter's ministry. The sheep are viewed as having returned to Christ the Shepherd, and as having returned to the Shepherd they have also come to the "Bishop of their souls". Note, it is the Bishop of *your souls*; it is not the Bishop of London, or of Canterbury, or York; there is no such idea in Scripture as the bishop of a locality. We get such an idea as a bishop *in* a locality, but not *of* a locality. When we get the thought of the bishop *of* a place, it means that Christianity has become in people's eyes a settled thing in the world, part of the world; the expression involves that idea, It is one thing to be *in* a locality, another thing to be *of* it. The Lord Jesus is the Bishop of souls; His people's souls are His diocese. The apostle did not ordain men to be bishops *of* cities, but *in* cities. "Ordain elders in every city", the Word says (@Titus 1:5). And what is the area of the Lord's bishopric? *Souls*! You have a soul -- well, there is a Bishop of that, thank God! There may be under-bishops, too. You can discern them not by their cloth, but by *the interest they have in your soul*. The Lord has an interest in your soul, that is His diocese. He is an Overseer of souls.
Well, one can understand Peter's service to the saints being accomplished. He sees the sheep having returned to the Shepherd and then he says, "and to the Bishop of your souls". The Lord Jesus is the Overseer of every soul on earth; every believer belongs to that diocese. He is the Bishop of our souls. How comforting to know that whether you wake or sleep He is overseeing your soul perpetually. I do not deny that He looks after your body, as the body is His too; but the soul is the great centre of need, and the Lord is Bishop of that.
Now, Peter first indicates his ministry and the impression he had received from the great Shepherd and great Bishop. I believe in overseers. I believe the Lord calls men for that. It is not difficult to
{324}
discern who they are, and it is well to take account of them. There were several at Ephesus, but we get no such idea as one bishop of one locality. Paul called the elders at Ephesus to him, and he charged them as to the flock over which the Holy Spirit had made them overseers. Finally he said, "Remember the words of the Lord Jesus". What were the words? "It is more blessed to give than to receive". Then he warns them, "also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things to draw away disciples after them". That was a terrible contemplation for a heart like Paul's. To be a leader of a party was abominated in his mind; he strove against it, but he insists that the flock, the assembly of God, should be fed; the assembly which God has "purchased with the blood of his own". What a charge it is! Well, Peter leaves us with the Overseer. The very idea contemplates the saints here in the world needing oversight. It is not headship.
Now, in turning to Ephesians, we find the full gist of Paul's ministry. One might say much on that: there is, indeed, far more than one could say, and at best one can only touch this wonderful letter addressed to those saints at Ephesus. You will remember Paul had traversed the upper regions in going to Ephesus; it was an elevated territory morally. We are not much accustomed to the "hill country". Ephesians stands in relation to the upper district or region. We have to accustom ourselves to this elevation. The low land scarcely requires the same exercise. The apostle comes to the full result of his ministry in @Ephesians 4. His thought is to leave the saints, as it were, self-supporting. I do not wish to use a misleading word, but that is a very good word, as I hope to show you. John uses it in certain features of his writings. Indeed, it is a mark of his gospel and epistle that those who come under the influence of Christ, and who benefit by that
{325}
influence, can take care of themselves. They *can*! Have you learned to take care of yourself when the brethren do not see you? Are you able to take care of yourself? Luke, so to speak, provides care, as in chapter 10. But John contemplates an era in church history when there is not that care; he contemplates possible isolation. What would you do now if you were left alone? John brings forward certain persons who were left to themselves, and who proved by their conduct that they could take care of themselves.
Look at the woman in @John 4. The Lord gave her no direction as to what to do. He *said* a great deal to her. He spoke of living water, of worship, and He told her that He was the Christ. Then "she left her waterpot". He did not tell her to leave it, but she did, and there is spiritual significance in that. She then went into the city, and went to the men in the city, and said, "Come see a man which told me all things that ever I did: is not this the Christ?" That is the conclusion arrived at in her soul. She received no direction as to what to do, but we are told what she did, and what she did showed that she could take care of herself, so to speak. She could tell the men about Christ, and they believed on account of *her* word. That is a bit of Christ's handiwork, according to John. One would desire to be like that, to be able to take care of oneself, and to take care of others, and at the same time to take care of the testimony. The leading feature in that connection is seen especially in Lazarus in @John 11. The Lord said, "Loose him and *let him go*"; he would take care of himself.
Well, @1 John 5:18 presents the individual as taking care of himself, as it says, "He that is begotten of God keepeth himself, and that wicked one toucheth him not". We need this in these days. Everyone should see to it that he takes care of himself, and in doing so that he may be able to take
{326}
care of others, and of the testimony. We cannot look for *collective* self-support today. I do not look for it, but what the present moment requires is what John's ministry supplies; namely, those who can look after themselves, and who can look after others, and the testimony. I am not casting any doubt upon the collective side, but it is well to have the truth of John's writings, and they are calculated to set up individuals. Look at chapter 14:21 of his gospel. "He that hath my commandments and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me", he is the one, "and I will love him and will manifest myself to him". Do not misunderstand my word *self-supporting*. I am not overlooking the Lord as overseeing, or the Spirit indwelling; I am speaking of the effect of the Lord's work in our souls. What a company we should have if each one of the Lord's people in this city were self-supporting! That is what John aims at.
Now, Paul aims at collective self-support, and in this chapter he shows us Christ ascended far above all heavens that He might fill all things. What a victory! He has led captivity captive, and has gone far above all heavens. For faith the whole world system is led captive. I look at it in that way. In Romans you get the powers that be, ordained of God; you respect them, but in Ephesians all power is in the hands of Christ. He has led captivity captive; not simply overcome, but led captive. What power can prevail? None. Then He "has given gifts to men" (@Ephesians 4:8); and now, to faith, the whole area is under His control. We were speaking this morning of the spirit of the living creatures in Ezekiel being in the wheels; so here the spirit of Christ is seen as pervading all below. Gift is exercised in the power of the Spirit. In Ezekiel, in the amber spot above all the array of power, is a Man. Jesus has gone above all heavens, and carries on His work outside all systematised religion and error. All that
{327}
is utterly refused, and the work of God goes on outside of it.
Then we get the gifts enumerated. Firstly, apostles to enforce His authority; secondly, prophets to bring *God* in; and then evangelists to bring *man* in; last of all, pastors and teachers. In the pastor we touch Peter's line. Then it goes on "for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ". That is the situation, "till we all come in the unity of the faith" (verses 12,13). Mark the word "*faith*"; it is not the unity of the Spirit, as in the earlier part of the chapter, but the unity of the faith; by this means we come unto a perfect man. That is a collective thought. "Unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ". What a marvellous aim! Well, that is Paul's ministry.
Now he says "that we be no more babes"; *that* is a word for our souls. The state of babes is a most dangerous one to remain in. In @1 John 2 the saints are classified as fathers, young men and babes; and a good deal more is said to the babes than to the "fathers" or to the "young men". You will observe also no charge is committed to the babes. Their great danger was Antichrist. Not that Antichrist had yet come, though John says he is coming; but he adds, "Even now are there many antichrists". How are they to be known? "They went out from us, but they were not of us"; and the babes were in danger from them. So we are today; we are in danger from the influence of men. The babes are greatly exposed to the influence of men, those who would be leaders in the world. Now, the apostle Paul says, Let us be no longer babes; "that ye be no more babes tossed to and fro by every wind of that teaching, which is in the sleight of men in unprincipled cunning with a view to systematised error". *Systematised error*; that is Christendom. Ministry now is very largely taken up with exposure
{328}
of evil; it is not happy work, but it is essential. The apostle saw Christendom as systematised error. Note, it is *systematised*. It may be very plausible, carefully constructed and built up, but it is deceptive, and the babes are caught by it. Hence the need of ministry. The object of ministry is to prevent the babe state continuing, and to lead us on to growth, to "perfection", so that we should be "no longer babes". Let us see to it, for in the babe state we are exposed to "systematised error". Look at the words, "the sleight of men and cunning craftiness". How essential to be on our guard in respect of such things!
Then the apostle goes on to the positive side; "speaking the truth in love". What a happy employ that is! "They that feared the Lord spake often one to another"; we are not told what they said, but it was not distasteful to the Lord's ear, you may be sure, for He "hearkened and heard it" (@Malachi 3:16). The Lord has a perfect ear. Joshua said on the occasion of the golden calf: "There is a noise of war in the camp" (@Exodus 32:17). His ear was deceived. Moses said: 'No, it is not war'. Idolatry was at work. The Lord hearkened, and heard those who spoke together of His things, and what He heard, as I said, was not distasteful to Him. How searching as to what we talk about when together! So the apostle says, "Speaking the truth in love", "*in love*", that is what will be to His glory. "Speaking in love", not to show how much we know, but speaking the truth for the truth's sake. If you read John's second and third epistles you see what he says about the truth. Love of the truth should mark every one of us, and loving it leads us to speak of it; and we do not dissociate it from the brethren.
Then further, "that we may grow up into him in all things, which is the head, even Christ". See how the apostle leads us on. Growth is necessary
{329}
for apprehending headship; growth in Christ, "that we may grow up to him in all things who is the head". In speaking the truth in love together we acquire divine sensibilities, such sensibilities as discern the movements of the Head. Then he goes on, "from whom the whole body fitted together, and connected by every joint of supply". It is from Christ that all the nourishment flows in this connection, but every joint has its own contribution to make to the whole, for the growth is "according to the working in its measure of each one part"; not one excepted.
Now, I repeat, this is Paul's ministry, the great end of it, that the saints should be set together in those holy bonds growing up to Christ as the Head, and getting all the nourishment which comes from Him, working out through all the members, so that there is increase. Romans does not give increase, but the man there is just recovered, without any children, so to speak, like David at Ziklag; it says he recovered all. Then he goes to Hebron and gets children, and at Jerusalem he gets more; a further increase. So Colossians and Ephesians give increase. The Man from heaven increases through the body, so that there is a presentation of Christ down here. Thus Paul closes the passage with this "making increase of the body unto the edifying of itself in love". It is self-edifying, or building up in love. The apostle sets the assembly up here as self-supporting, and thus there is increase, and self-building up in love. Whilst we cannot look for the collective idea now, it is our privilege to have it as light. We can look on to the "latter glory"; but the New Testament writers insist on what was "from the beginning". We do not look for development, but for what was from the beginning and for what is coming out in the future. What was at the beginning is to take Christ's place during His absence and that is the testimony for us right on to the end.
{330}
BLIND MEN MADE TO SEE
@Mark 8:22 - 26; @Mark 10:46 - 52
One has always peculiar delight in turning to Mark, because he presents the Lord as engaged in gospel work. The other evangelists do also, but Mark in a special way presents Him thus; and he takes particular interest and pleasure in working out the details in each instance, of the Lord's service, to show that not only was need relieved, but relieved with the greatest possible skill. The Lord undertakes to relieve and to make whole, and He accomplishes this result with the least possible suffering to the patient. It is not temporary, it is final. Souls need final relief, and in a spiritual sense that must be by being made whole.
Now, the Lord after bringing in the relief, tests what has been accomplished. Those who are Christians here will bear witness to this. The Lord puts His work to the test in order to bring out the perfection of it. Hence, in the first instance in chapter 8, you will observe the man is drawn attention to, as seeing everything clearly; he requires no glasses, he sees everything clearly. That is the effect of the Lord's work. Ofttimes, alas! the Lord's work is greatly hindered by others, quacks, so to speak, interfering. Christians in that way begin their spiritual history under great disadvantage. Whereas, what you get in @Mark 7:37 is: "He hath done all things well". It is very interesting for a workman to note the skill of another, especially if he be a master hand. Mark presents a Master hand, and he tells us that the Lord "hath done all things well".
Coming to this man in chapter 8, we find he made no request from Christ. Fortunately for him, others requested on his behalf; whereas the man spoken of in chapter 10 has no one to make request for him,
{331}
but does so himself. How many a young man has received blessing through the influence and prayers of others! how many are blessed through kind friends taking them to the meeting! Mark loves to present cases like these. You read of a paralytic *borne by four*. It is not that he was too heavy to be carried by two, but the four show that the man was surrounded by sympathetic interest. Friends and neighbours were interested in him. You may thank God for any interest evidenced in you by relatives or neighbours. That interest is of God, and placed in those friends for you by God. And if the Spirit of God relates the history of your conversion, He will not fail to tell of those kind sympathetic friends who thought of your need, even before you did so yourself. The Christian knows your need because he knows his own; yours is similar. So we are told in @Mark 2, that the man was borne of four, and that "they uncovered the roof where He (Jesus) was ... and let down the bed". The man, as I said, was fortunate. He could not have reached the roof himself, it was an utter impossibility, physically. So with many a young man. If left to himself he would *never* turn aside to hear about Christ, but "borne of four" he is brought into His presence. Happy for that man who is let down in the presence of Christ! The Person who upholds the universe of God was sitting there in that house in Capernaum, and the paralytic man was let down into His presence.
This is how Mark presents things, so here in chapter 8 the people besought the Lord for the blind man. Nothing is said of the exercises of the man himself; what is said refers to the exercises of those who asked the Lord for him, but the man got the benefit. You have come to the meeting tonight, and our prayer is that you may get the benefit. The Lord takes account of those who brought you. He omits nothing. He oversees the work, He also
{332}
oversees the workmen and the workwomen; nothing done for Him goes without reward. But the concern we all have for the moment is your soul's salvation, that your eyes might be opened. The necessity is great, for if unconverted you see nothing spiritually. There are very few even among the Lord's people who accustom themselves to look at things through spiritual eyes, how much more is this true in regard of the unconverted man or woman! This man was living in a village, but *blind*, blind in relation to all that is of God, or of Christ. You see the Lord's people reading the Word, you know *nothing* of what is beneath it all; not only can you not see afar off, you cannot see *at all*. Others know and are concerned about you, if you are not concerned about yourself. The Lord Jesus is concerned about you. He has charged Himself with the blessing of mankind. He is a Man, with the feelings of a Man, with the heart of a Man, and He loves your soul, and died for you before you knew it. The Lord is interested in you. Were He here in my stead, He would make you feel it, but at this moment He would endeavour to make you hear of His interest through me, and through the prayers and sympathies of His people. He has a way of making His power felt down here, there is the hem of His garment to be touched. He is sympathetic.
Well, they brought this man to Jesus, and besought Him to touch him. The prayer on behalf of the blind man was an intelligent prayer; those who appealed to Christ for the man knew Christ, and the power of His touch, and so does every Christian. We have all been touched by Christ if touched at all; how wonderful is the touch of Christ! But note! these who brought the man do not specify as to how, when or where he should be touched; all that comes in as the prerogative of Christ. *No* Christian can dictate to the Lord, for He knows better than any
{333}
Christian as to how, when or where to touch a soul. So the Lord is very particular as to where the man is to be touched. He takes him by the hand to lead him out of the town. The town represents that in which evil is concentrated. Young people love towns; more experienced people prefer woods, fields, rivers, lakes; God's creation. Towns are built up by men. They are not intended for Christians. No town in the world has been built up in view of Christ; on the other hand, no river, nor wood, nor lake exists, but has Christ in view. All is God's handiwork, and is for Christ. The first town that was built was built by a murderer. Was it built for Christ? No. It is difficult for Christians even to get a meeting room in a town; no town is designed for Christians. Plenty of room is found for theatres and all that shuts out Christ in the cities of this world. I do not deny that cities are recognised by God, for elders were appointed by Paul in cities to take care of the testimony, for God ever pursues men. But the town influence is terrible, and *most* detrimental to a person who is to be relieved. Many a young man is held in the meshes of theatres, picture houses and other similar resorts. I am not here to run these down, I simply want to show the things by which Satan would hold you. Are you prepared to go out of the town? The Lord leads this man out and spits on his eyes. It is a real Man dealing with men, though He is the Son of God. It is real humanity, the spittle shows that. As a real Man, Christ sympathises with you; He has a heart capable of being touched with the "feeling of our infirmities" (@Hebrews 4:15), and as a real Man He died. "It is Christ that died" (@Romans 8:34), the Word says, and again, "For there is one God and one Mediator between God and men, the *man Christ Jesus*; who gave himself a ransom for all" (@1 Timothy 2:5). He is, as I say, a real Man. God has in mind that man should be justified and to this end He had effected
{334}
redemption, because, aside from this, there is no possible relief for your soul. "Without shedding of blood, there is no remission". Remission of sins is utterly impossible, aside from the shed blood of the Lord Jesus Christ.
Here, in @Mark 8, the Lord Jesus spits on the man's eyes, and now the Lord asks if he saw anything. I should like to ask *you* that question. You who have heard the Word from your infancy. Your feet are perchance found in the by-paths of this world, seeking its pleasures and finding them all vexation and vanity. I would ask again, What do you see? This man saw men as trees walking. *Many* a preacher would have numbered him among his converts, and sent him off, but the Lord does not send him away. Seeing men as trees walking does not prove perfect sight. Men are not as tall as trees! Things were all out of proportion. We see in this man what marks one partially enlightened and partially dark. The men he thus sees will soon act upon him, those tall men. Renowned men in the world, leaders of art and science, are very tall. The Philistines were tall men, and David destroyed them. If that giant of Gath were alive now with his six fingers and toes, he would be regarded as a man of great value, a wonder! David destroyed that man; moreover, David and his men extirpated the whole race of giants. They are most dangerous men, those tall men. The defect here is that the man did not see rightly, and the Lord is not satisfied. He loves that we should see things in their right proportions. Do not esteem a brother too highly. Esteem him according to his measure; remember there are others. A Christian with eyes like this man is apt to become partisan. A brother is to be rightly regarded, but to what extent? "Be ye followers of me", the apostle says, but adds, "even as I also am of Christ" (@1 Corinthians 11:1). Now, you see a taller Man, so to speak, *much* taller.
{335}
So you are not deceived, for no Christian can eclipse Christ. "Thou art the Christ" (@Matthew 16:16), Peter says. This is the Man towering above all the apostles, even Peter, James, and John. Christ towers above them all, and he who sees rightly sees this, and is not deceived.
Then it goes on to say, "after that he put his hands again upon his eyes". You will note the Lord puts His two hands upon him; it is complete committal on the part of Christ to that man; it is in figure, the gift of the Spirit. The Lord commits Himself completely to the believer in the gift of the Spirit. Now the Lord again makes the man look up, and it says, "he was restored, and saw every man clearly". He is now viewed as having the Holy Spirit. God gives His Spirit to those who obey Him. Paul put the question to the saints in Ephesus, "Have *ye* received the Holy Ghost since ye believed?" and they replied, "We have not so much as heard whether there be any Holy Ghost" (@Acts 19:2). There are thousands of professing Christians who think of the Spirit of God merely as an influence. He *is* a mighty influence, it is true, but He is a divine Person. So the apostle says, the spiritual discerneth all things; that is to say, one who has God's Spirit and recognises and gives place to Him, sees all things clearly. Indeed, he is not discerned by *any* one. His true glory is hidden for the moment, he does not want it displayed. He discerns all, but who discerns him? No one.
Then the Lord says to the man, "Neither go into the town nor tell it to any in the town". Why is he not to go into the town? Is he not to be evangelical? It is for God to send His servants into the village or town; He knows whom to send. It is for you to be subject to Christ; hence the Lord directs this man where to go. Do not be found running hither and thither until the Lord sends you. @Isaiah 6:8 says, "Here am I, *send me*". It was where there was a need. So the Lord sends this man to his house;
{336}
that was the place for *him*. There was some good influence in his house already, no doubt, and one must be right at home. If you are doing violence to parental authority, the Lord would remind you that you must be right at home. He warns the man about the village, and so would *I* warn you, Be careful, be on your guard.
In @Mark 10 we find no sympathisers. The blind man is sitting by the highway-side begging, and his name is given, and his father's name. This is of special note according to Mark. There are those who stand out in the administration of grace, who stand out prominently as monuments of it. So Mark says, as it were, I want you to take special note of this man. He was a blind beggar, and he sat on the Jerusalem side of Jericho as the Lord went out. To his credit, be it said, he was on that side. Doubtless he was exercised, for I do not at all question that he had spiritual thoughts. Unlike the man in chapter 8, he has exercises of his own; as to that man others had exercises about him. It is happy to preach to those who are exercised. I trust that you are here tonight on account of your own exercises. You are *much* more interesting, if so, and you are sitting on the Jerusalem side of Jericho. How you got there it might be hard to say; but if there, you have spiritual thoughts and spiritual associations. It is said he heard that Jesus of Nazareth passed by. "Jesus of Nazareth", that was the humble, lowly, despised Man, *He* passed by. This man, you will notice, did not call Him Jesus of Nazareth, for He had spiritual thoughts. We are apt to dissociate spiritual thoughts from persons who have them. It is spiritual to repent, and undoubtedly Bartimaeus had spiritual thoughts.
Well, he heard that Jesus of Nazareth passed by, and he cries out, "Jesus, thou Son of David, have mercy on me". That was a spiritual expression.
{337}
Who but one with spiritual thoughts would recognise the spiritual dignity of that Man who passed by. It is always a good sign if a man is marked by reverence, and if he refers to Christ according to His divine dignity. "Jesus, thou Son of David". It was a great thought to a true Israelite that one should be the son of David. He was recognised as the Messiah, but here it is the Son of David. "Have mercy on me", the man says. It is an immense thing to have an audience of those who are sympathetic with the gospel, those who are sympathetic with the souls of men. The Lord stands still and calls him. I would say to those who are prepared to come, the Lord is calling you. "And they call the blind man, saying unto him: Be of good comfort, rise he calleth thee". How one would re-echo that now! The Lord is calling you. So the man arose. The word says, "casting away his garment, he rose and came to Jesus". Whatever his garments were he cast them away. Usually the garments denote distinction; his might hardly be that, but whatever thou were, he cast them aside.
Now the Lord asks what his need was. It is very fine when one can just tell, whether it is conscience trouble or heart trouble, to make it known. No one knew better than the man, for he was exercised, and an exercised man is much more urgent for relief, than those exercised about him, for he is the sufferer. "Lord, that I might receive my sight", and the Lord responds, "Go; thy faith hath made thee whole". "*Thy* faith". Would you believe it? It is *your* faith. The Lord does not say, "Faith hath made you whole", though perfectly true, as justification is on this principle, but what He tells this man is, that the faith *he* had makes him whole. It is essential to say that, because the faith I have will not make you whole. The Lord credits this man with much; He knew the man, and He says: Thy
{338}
faith hath made thee whole. Wonderful word for the heart! It is all a question just of that, as the apostle reasons, on the principle of faith, *to* faith. I am standing here to present the truth to you on that principle. It is the only principle on which preaching can be carried on now, the principle of faith. But it is *to* faith. The faith must be in you, and if so, it is divinely begotten. Others can tell it has its own distinctive marks which experienced Christians can recognise. There were distinctive indications that this man had faith, so that the Lord says, "Thy faith". Then it adds, "And immediately he received his sight, and followed Jesus in the way".
Now, the man in chapter 8 did not do that. Do not talk of following the Lord till you are right at home. The epistle to the Romans qualifies a man for following; one is adjusted in regard of God, and in regard of all that He owns on earth. The man in chapter 8 was sent home, but this man is allowed to follow the Lord in the way. "The way" is a synonym for Christianity in Acts. Christianity is alluded to as "the way"; it is the only way there is. Christianity was never intended to adjust things in the world; any effort in that direction meets with failure. It was intended to lead a soul out of the world. It was not necessary for this man to go through Jericho to follow Christ; he was on the Jerusalem side, and followed Jesus in the way. And that way in which Jesus led would end in death; it would lead to Calvary and to the cross, however little this man understood it. Possibly he had the Holy Spirit, and was in the assembly when Mark wrote it. It is looking backwards at what happened. The man came into fellowship in following in the way; that is what it means. A soul is not really "landed" until in fellowship, till he joins the Lord "in the way".
There was no hankering after Jericho with this poor man; he chose "the way". Many are in the
{339}
same "way" now; it is fellowship. So if you are exercised like this man, and your eyes are wholly opened, it is simply to follow Christ, and to follow Him in the way, that distinct way which is marked out in fellowship. The Word says of those who believed, that "they continued stedfastly in the apostles¬ doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of bread and in prayers" (@Acts 2:42). That is how they began, and it says this of all those converted at this time, not simply of the hundred and twenty, but the three thousand. Those all continued in the apostles¬ doctrine. That is the way, and if your eyes are really opened by the gospel to see Christ as this man did, you will thus join Him and His people, like Moses when he came to years, and this expression has a spiritual meaning, he refused the finest position after the flesh that a man could desire, and chose to suffer affliction with the people of God. Mark that it is *with* the people of God. It was no path full of roses; it is for faith, a path, as Scripture says, of affliction, but at the same time a path of blessing and privilege. The man in @Luke 9:57,58 said to the Lord, "I will follow thee whithersoever thou goest". The Lord replies, "Foxes have holes, and birds of the air have nests, but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head". But you will have a place to lay your head, if you follow Him; like John, you will find a place on the bosom of Jesus. May the Lord grant it!
{340}
Pages 340 - 448 -- "The Anointed Pillar and the Worshipper", Indianapolis, January, 1916 (Volume 34).
THE NEW COVENANT
@2 Corinthians 3
J.T. I have often thought that with many Christians there is not a sense of ease in the presence of God. Although sin may be dealt with and judged, there is not ease in the presence of God, for the reason that, while God is apprehended as against sin and in His dealing with it in the death of Christ, He is not apprehended in what He is *toward the believer*; and I think, therefore, this second letter is to set the saints at ease before God and in relation to each other; to set the saints at ease in the light, and in an order of things in which there is transparency.
R.S.S. Where do you get the thought of transparency?
J.T. In this chapter and the next one Paul labours much to establish the fact, that as a minister, he was transparent; by manifestation of the truth he commended himself to the conscience of every man in the sight of God.
H.G. Do you get transformation before transparency?
J.T. Yes, I think so. By looking at the glory there is transformation into similarity. Beholding the glory of the Lord, we are transformed into the *same* image.
J.D. Do you look at Paul as setting that forth?
J.T. Yes, he is in full keeping with his ministry.
W.C.R. How does presenting himself to every man's conscience work out practically?
J.T. By manifestation of the truth. The feast of unleavened bread is a great help to transparency, because it is described to be "sincerity and truth". It tends to reduction as to what we may be in this
{341}
world; it reduces us. Anything that gives us a place in the world, or largeness in the world, is not according to truth. If the truth is fully admitted and fully owned it brings us to nothing.
R.S.S. Yes, because I suppose the truth is largely that which makes known the mind of God, and when you are in the light of that you will not be very important in connection with this world.
A.F.M. Does not the ministry of the covenant give you liberty to behold the glory of the Lord?
J.T. In having to do with each other it is a great thing to keep always in mind that grace is the prominent feature of the divine economy. "Grace and truth subsists through Jesus Christ" (@John 1:17). Grace comes first. That is the first governing principle in our relations with one another. You do not give up truth, but grace is the great governing principle. "Of his fulness we all have received, and grace upon grace" (@John 1:16).
W.B. In @Hebrews 10 you get the new covenant before drawing near is spoken of. That corresponds with what you have been saying. The believer is established as to the love of God toward him before he has confidence to approach Him.
J.T. That exactly explains it. We must have God coming out, making known the place we have in His heart, before we can go in. @Exodus 19 to 21 really prepare for the dwelling. Coming through the Red Sea, and all God did for the people, bearing them on eagles¬ wings and bringing them to Himself, betokened His *power*, but then it did not imply what *He is*. Relationships were to be formed with God in the light. Viewing the three chapters referred to, typically, God was to be in the light, and the people were to be in the light. We are to walk in the light as He is in it.
H.G. You distinguish between what He is for
{342}
us in grace and what He is in affection, and this is more the latter.
J.T. So the second epistle to the Corinthians is very much like the towel that the Lord used in @John 13. It sets the soul at ease before God. Now in Exodus the relations were to be in the light. That is to say, they were to be according to the place the people had in God's heart. They were to be in the light, but then where was the man to walk in that light?
B.T.F. You were speaking of unleavened bread; is that the *commencement* of it?
J.T. I think it is as regards what we are by nature. The feast of unleavened bread, beginning in Egypt, was the beginning of months from *our* side, because we have not only to judge Egypt, but we have to judge *ourselves*, and this means reduction. The feast of unleavened bread implies reduction; it is the opposite of inflation; leaven inflates, but unleavened bread reduces. Therefore, it brings one down as regards this world and correspondingly renders one transparent, because really you have nothing to hide now. The maintenance of a place here brings about darkness in a man. In wanting to keep up appearances and all that, we are not just transparent. The positive side is that God is in the light; God is not hidden. In @Exodus 19 He has come out, typically, disclosing that He wishes to enter into a covenant with the people. Typically it is the opening up of His heart in Christ. But I think chapter 21 gives us the other side; that is, it gives us reconciliation -- the "Hebrew servant". In @1 Corinthians 13 the apostle does not speak of a *man* that loves; he speaks of love itself. Reconciliation is seen in men who love God and each other. "If any one love God, *he* is known of him" (@1 Corinthians 8:3). The Hebrew servant loved his master, his wife and his children. That was the great governing principle in
{343}
that man. *That is what God is pleased with, and He retains him*. He sets before us the idea of reconciliation. The new covenant is what God is; reconciliation is what man is before God.
R.S.S. Could you help us a little as to the difference between the old and new covenant in the way in which you are speaking of the latter now?
J.T. In this chapter it is the second giving of the law that is alluded to, but taking it strictly it is Moses coming down from the mount the first time that we must consider in order to get a right idea of the first covenant. His face did not shine when he came down the first time. It was simply a ministry of death.
R.S.S. Why did his face shine the second time?
J.T. Because, I think, God had proclaimed His name. He was "merciful and gracious, long-suffering and abundant in goodness and truth" (@Exodus 34:6). He would be gracious to whom He would be gracious, and show mercy to whom He would show mercy. There was an inkling of the new thing in it. The apostle says it was introduced with glory; but that glory is utterly eclipsed in Christianity on account of the surpassing glory, connected with the ministry of the Spirit, and the ministry of righteousness.
R.S.S. Have you any thought as to God having altered His attitude in some respects in the second giving of the law?
J.T. I think He implied that it would be fruitless to attempt to go on with the people under pure law. I think @Exodus 32 sets out fully the consequences of man in the flesh being placed under law. The renewal of the thing was on the ground of intercession. There was in a measure, reconciliation in Moses.
R.S.S. He said he would go up and "peradventure I shall make an atonement for your sin" (verse 30).
J.T. Yes, and he asked to be blotted out of God's book for the people. Therefore it was on the ground
{344}
of intercession, it was mediatorship. The first was "ordained by angels in the hand of a mediator". That was law, pure and simple; there was no special glory attached to it. Moses broke the tables outside the camp and came in and used the sword, but he had already interceded for the people, and God had accepted him. In the renewal of the law there was careful provision made that the ark should be prepared so that the tables should not be broken again. That is, Christ was to be there in principle to take the thing into His heart, so the second giving of the law was a foreshadowing of the new covenant.
A.F.M. Is the first epistle to the Corinthians a law -- "the commandments of the Lord"?
J.T. There is a correspondence between the first giving of the law and the first epistle, only that instead of coming into the camp Paul stayed away. If he had come he would have had to use a rod, judgment; so, showing the superiority of Christianity, instead of the Corinthian assembly being judged, the apostle stayed away, and there was recovery. In the second epistle he can express himself freely to them.
H.G. This chapter suggests that there was moral material in Corinth, answering to the ark of wood. I mean that Moses was told the second time to make an ark of wood and put the tables therein. I thought that in opening up the covenant here the apostle intimates there was material in Corinth suitable for the ark.
J.T. That is very interesting, especially in that they were an epistle of Christ, showing Christ had been written on their hearts.
W.B. In regard to what was written, the tables of stone would infer there would be no response whatever, while in the fleshy tables of the heart there would be response.
J.T. Yes, the heart is impressionable, and it
{345}
receives an impression of Christ. That is what the fleshy table is capable of.
J.D. What is the outstanding feature of the new covenant?
J.T. Here the great outstanding feature of what Paul presents is the ministry of righteousness accompanied by glory, but as to its application to men, I suppose it is the forgiveness of sins and the gift of the Spirit.
J.D. He speaks of the ministry of the Spirit subsisting in glory, then of the ministry of righteousness. What is the difference?
J.T. Well, the ministry of the Spirit is in contrast to the letter. In verse 17 the Lord is said to be that Spirit, so that it is life. The letter kills, but the Spirit gives life, so that the ministry of the Spirit in that way is life-giving, whereas righteousness, I think, means a status as before God. The ministry of righteousness sets one up before God in one's conscience. That is, one is in the presence of the glory without a tremor, but you need to live, and it is Christ as the Spirit of the covenant that engages the affections. Thus there is liberty.
A.F.M. Would you say a little about the two sets of tables? The first set, it appears, God provided; the second set Moses provided.
J.T. It all, I think, goes on the same line; the second set is based on intercession, and Moses is, as it were, honoured in that way, that he should provide such tables as God could use.
A.F.M. In application to us, does the true Moses prepare our hearts?
J.T. That is just it. He is the writer, too, according to @John 8.
A.F.M. Do you think Christ is the writer or God?
J.T. Being manifestly Christ's epistle here, I think He is the writer through Paul. "Written ...
{346}
with the Spirit of the living God". I think Christ is the writer. Of course, the first was by the finger of God; even so, while it was the finger of God writing on Belshazzar's wall, the writing was by the hand of a man. Inasmuch as it is an epistle, it is characteristically Christ's writing here.
J.B. He writes with the Spirit of the living God; the material on which He writes being our hearts.
J.T. The apostle says here "Ye are our letter, written in our hearts", showing that he was quite in keeping with the truth. They had a place in his heart, as they had a place in God's heart, and it was open. It was "known and read of all men". It was not concealed nor held back in any way. But then he passes on to another thought, that, "Being manifested", he says, "to be Christ's epistle ministered by us, written, not with ink, but the Spirit of the living God; not on stone tables but on fleshy tables of the heart". I take it that he is now referring to what was true in Corinth, and that was Christ's epistle. They were his epistle of commendation, because he had them in *his* heart. He did not need another to speak well of the Lord's people. To bring in again the illustration of the Hebrew servant, he had plainly said, "I love my master, my wife and my children" (@Exodus 21:5), and so Paul plainly said that he loved the Corinthians; it was known and read of all men. While it may not have been so plain at Corinth, still it was there. The writing was there.
W.B. In this double ministry here in regard to the new covenant and reconciliation, the apostle seems to break off in his letter to the Corinthians. He had his heart bound up in their recovery, and he breaks off and this parenthesis continues to the end of chapter 6; then in the beginning of chapter 7 he goes back to the case of the man that was restored;
{347}
but in this parenthesis he takes up the new covenant and reconciliation.
J.T. He appeals to them in the end of chapter 6 to be enlarged, but this parenthesis is to bring about the enlargement. They had been reigning as kings without him. The unleavened bread was intended to bring about reduction; self-judgment would lead them to give up their kingly position in this world, and become the filth of the world, and the offscouring of all things, as he was, but the second epistle is for enlargement in connection with God and the new order of things, so he says, "Our mouth is opened to you, Corinthians; our heart is expanded". On account of their state his heart could not go out to them freely before, but now he says, "for an answering recompense, let your heart also expand itself". As much as to say, Be large enough at least to take me in. You have shut me out of your hearts.
E.H.T. Why did the Corinthians shut him out?
J.T. They had really shut out Christ by shutting out Paul. Satan attacked the Lord at Corinth by shutting Paul out, so he is compelled in these epistles not only to refer to his official position, but, as a minister, he is competent and in keeping with his ministry. The best proof to them, at any rate, was that *he had them in his heart*.
B.T.F. Would you say that they were his epistle on the ground of the fact that he had been used to them in a spiritual way, and not exactly because of their spiritual state?
J.T. There had been a writing there. The apostle had not laboured eighteen months for nothing. Although the enemy had come in and damaged them, the coming of Titus had brought to light that the rubbish had been removed. Titus had brought glad tidings to the apostle. In the second chapter, beginning at verse 13, he says: "I had no rest in my spirit at not finding Titus, my brother". And
{348}
again in chapter 7 he says, "But he who encourages those that are brought low, even God, encouraged us by the coming of Titus; and not by his coming only, but also through the encouragement with which he was encouraged as to you; relating to us your ardent desire, your mourning, your zeal for me". He was coming into their hearts again, and so he says, "so that I the more rejoiced". The whole chapter shows the effect of the first letter, so that the writing was becoming legible, as you might say, because they thought of Paul and began to renew their affection for him.
E.H.T. Would you say that being at ease before God is the effect of the covenant?
J.T. Yes. The effect of it is that there is love to God and the brethren; ascending love, and horizontal love.
H.G. Is the horizontal love because of the place that you learn the saints have in the same affection, or is it the fruit of that affection in your heart?
J.T. It is both. The effect of the glory, as you said at the beginning, is transformation; but it is transformation into similarity. You hear of loving the saints because God loves them; but they are worthy of love because of what they are in themselves, and, therefore, the Hebrew servant is a representative man. He not only loved his master, but his wife and children.
H.G. So with Saul when he met the Lord on the road to Damascus, before the Lord expressed His own personal love to him He let Saul see what He thought of His people down here. Saul got an impression.
G.W.H. But until the covenant is known there is more or less deception on the part of the believer.
J.T. Often the keeping up of appearances. Many are really living on borrowed capital.
G.W.H. He said to Abraham, "I will establish
{349}
my covenant ... to be a God unto thee" (@Genesis 17:7). That is, He wants to journey with us in every circumstance of life. Is that the thought?
G.A.T. What do you mean by living on borrowed capital?
J.T. You have no spiritual income of your own. We often see what appears to be a flourishing, prosperous business, but if you examine the books you will find it is all done on borrowed capital. You may be living on the spiritual income of others. They are willing to let you have it, but that describes the state of many.
W.B. What is the reason for that?
J.T. Well, we do not seem to be able to get at the real source of wealth.
J.D. What bearing would the death of Christ have on this?
J.T. I think the bearing of the death of Christ is that it sets forth the love of God. But what I was referring to is a little before this. There seems to be great difficulty in getting at the source of spiritual wealth. There is plenty of it. It is in abundance, but the difficulty really is the keeping up of appearances and living on borrowed capital.
H.G. We need healing of the dropsy, like the man in @Luke 14. He was inflated.
W.C.R. The woman who gave a place to the prophet had plenty of capital to live on.
J.T. Yes, although she did not know how to use it.
G.A.T. Do you have to buy it?
J.T. It means reduction. "Unless ye are converted, and become as little children, ye will not at all enter into the kingdom of the heavens" (@Matthew 18:3). The rich young man had an abundance of riches in this world, but none as regards God, and the Lord says, "A rich man shall with difficulty enter into the kingdom of the heavens"; and again He says: "It is
{350}
easier for a camel to enter a needle's eye than a rich man into the kingdom of God". Then the disciples ask, "Who then can be saved"? and the Lord says: "With God all things are possible" (@Matthew 19:23 - 26). But they are possible in this way, not that a camel cannot go through, but that he has to be reduced to go through, and the reduction principle is the feast of unleavened bread.
B.T.F. Is your thought that leaven goes with borrowed capital?
J.T. If anyone is maintaining a place in this world and is wanting to be spiritual at the same time, he is really living on borrowed capital, because you cannot get spiritual wealth by maintaining a place in this world. One has to be reduced to a little child before getting a place with God.
A.P. Do we get what we have by the reading and hearing of ministry?
J.T. That is right so far as it goes, but then you want to draw water in your own buckets. You want to get the water yourself.
W.L.P. Ministry becomes light in one's soul.
J.T. But it is only light as far as it goes. It refreshes you for the time, but if it does not reduce you, you do not get any good out of it. There will be no need of ministry nor light in heaven. The light comes in to dispel the darkness, and the darkness is what maintains you here in conspicuousness; that has to disappear.
J.S. Unleavened bread brings in transparency.
Ques. What do you mean by the feast of unleavened bread?
J.T. Sincerity and truth. All your actions, motives and words are governed by sincerity and truth, and that makes you very little in the eyes of the world.
J.B. Maintenance of that would be on our side.
J.T. You have to supply the bread. God supplies
{351}
the Lamb, "for also our passover, Christ, has been sacrificed; so that let us celebrate the feast, not with old leaven nor with leaven of malice and wickedness, but with unleavened bread of sincerity and truth" (@1 Corinthians 5:7,8).
A.F.M. Does this prepare a way for beholding the glory of the Lord? Titus brought word of the effect of the first letter, there was repentance on the part of the Corinthians, and now they are in a position for this new ministry.
J.T. That is it. I think he is going to lead them on, now that there has been repentance. Chapter 7 enlarges on it, and now he can lead them on, and he begins by bringing out what God is. But it is to be noted that it is all in connection with what he was personally, and he had not altered. His first ministry among them was in accordance with this, and so they had the thing presented, not only formally and doctrinally, but it had been set forth there in him. Paul's labours, his ministry and all that he was among them was according to what was presented in the Lord. It is an immense advantage to have a man minister among the saints who is what he ministers.
J.D. You were speaking of reading ministry and hearing ministry. Sometimes after you read and hear, that is the end of it, but true light brings you to prayer.
J.T. One often thinks in regard to these meetings, we enjoy the readings and ministry, whatever it may be, but we pass on, and when we go home, very often the whole thing is effaced by the conversation that ensues; so, as you say, if light enters a soul it leads to prayer. You want to get the benefit of that light. There is a word that has become very common lately, and that is the word "consolidate" in a military sense. That is a very good word. You not only get the ground and take possession of it, but you want to keep it; you want to be consolidated
{352}
in it, and the consolidation comes in afterwards in prayer. You stand in the light through prayer. God is able to make you stand.
J.B. The true light would be the knowledge of the Lord Himself as the Spirit of the new covenant -- coming in personal touch in that way.
A.A.T. Lot had unleavened bread, but he also had quite a prominent place in the gates.
J.T. The presence of the angels reminded him of the need of unleavened bread. It was really the beginning of his deliverance. We have no record that he used it before. That is the beginning of a man's deliverance. The visit of the angels reminded him of what was befitting a saint of God, and he *was* a saint of God. The New Testament tells us in regard to Lot that he "vexed his righteous soul from day to day" (@2 Peter 2:8).
J.L.J. It says he baked unleavened bread.
J.T. But he did not have it until he recognised the need for it in the presence of the angels. It is a good thing when a brother suggests the necessity for unleavened bread in the presence of another brother.
R.S.S. You mean in the presence of a godly brother one is apt not to feel very comfortable if going on with the world.
J.T. But if a man speaks about business and enlarging it, and about social status and all that, the idea of unleavened bread does not enter in. I fear such a man would relish leavened bread.
J.D. Do you think it becomes a characteristic of one to feed upon unleavened bread?
J.T. Yes, it is to be partaken of every day, and one would covet having that sort of suggestion about one; not only that one ate it oneself and lived on it, but that one should suggest the necessity for it wherever one went. Such an one suggests the necessity of it to other people that he meets with.
{353}
The suggestion is with him like the angels¬ presence with Lot.
W.B. And he is capable of producing exercise in those he meets. I wish you would say more about this poverty-stricken state.
J.T. I am sure the secret of it is the keeping up of appearances.
W.B. Coming to the meetings?
J.T. Yes. There is not the surrender of our outward status in the world, and that is carried on parallel with a position in the assembly. There is the keeping up of appearances among the saints without the income. If you want to get the income spiritually you must surrender the outward position.
E.H.T. Do you judge a person as to his spirituality by the unleavened bread he has been eating?
J.T. The part he takes in the meeting usually denotes where he is. The assembly is where your true measure is seen. That is where you manifest whether the feast of unleavened bread is kept.
B.T.F. In that connection it is most important that what is linked with the feast of unleavened bread should ever be in our souls. That is to guard us against the allowance of evil. "Christ, our passover, is sacrificed for us".
J.T. That is the standard of the feast. He has undergone the judgment of God against the things you are brought in contact with every moment of the day; so the feast of unleavened bread is to maintain you in consistency with that: "for also our passover, Christ, has been sacrificed; so that let us celebrate the feast, not with old leaven, nor with leaven of malice and wickedness, but with unleavened bread of sincerity and truth". Unleavened bread maintains you in consistency with the death of the Lord.
B.T.F. But does not the thought of Christ, our
{354}
passover, being sacrificed for us, make us exceedingly sensitive to leaven?
J.T. Yes, and therefore you are exercised always to have the bread. You do not want anything in your circumstances nor in your family that interferes; that is the line you are on, though there may be something in spite of you.
H.G. It is not called the fast of unleavened bread. It is a feast, because it really leads you into liberty. As Mr. Stoney used to say: "If I myself deny, where I could gratify, I suffer bitterly, but sweet is liberty".
J.T. It is the feast that immediately precedes the feast of Pentecost. Now the feast of Pentecost is not governed by time at all. You remember that there is no limit as to days. It is called the "feast of weeks", which means the number of weeks that should elapse between the feast of unleavened bread until the feast of Pentecost should arrive, but there is no limit to the duration of that feast. We enter into what is unlimited. Christianity is really unlimited. It connects us with heaven and with eternity; that is where you get expansion.
J.D. What bearing has the meat-offering on the feast of unleavened bread?
J.T. Some of us were speaking the other day about the difference between the feast of unleavened bread and the manna. Now the manna brings you into correspondence with the meat-offering. The meat-offering is what Christ was here under the eye of God. Everything was perfectly even; no irregularity in any sense; all was delightful to God from beginning to end. How am I to be brought into correspondence with that? The unleavened bread reduces me, but the manna brings about correspondence to Christ as He was here, so that the manna comes in suitably as food for the soul in connection with the unleavened bread, because you do not
{355}
want to be negative. You want to be positive, and the positive is that you are like Christ where Christ was. That is the meat offering.
A.A.T. Do the "babes" in @Matthew 11 represent the first step?
J.T. Yes; inflation was touched on by the Lord in that chapter. Capernaum had been lifted up; it had become inflated in its privilege. But then the Lord turns to the Father and says: "I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes. Even so, Father; for so it seemed good in thy sight" (verse 25). There is the company that God can use, and all the vastness of the system that He has in His mind is to be inaugurated in that company. It is as we remain little and weak outwardly that we become enlarged.
H.G. Saul learned this when he met the Lord. Afterwards he was led as a little child; then he is seen praying; and the next thing is, he is a baptised man in Damascus, where he preaches Christ as the Son of God.
J.T. He went out of Jerusalem as *Saul*; he went out of Damascus as *Paul*. Paul is *little*. That is the meaning of the word: "who also is called Paul" (@Acts 13:9). Simon in @Acts 8:9 gave out that he was "some great one". Paul's name seems to indicate that he was regarded as little in his own estimation. These are the kind of men that form the house of God.
W.B. It is significant that this feast was introduced in Egypt. Does this correspond with @Romans 6?
J.T. Pretty much. Baptism is more positional, but the unleavened bread denotes what should be the state of those baptised.
J.B. The manna is food from heaven, and so it is what builds one up spiritually.
J.T. It brings about *correspondence to Christ down here*. The old corn brings about correspondence to
{356}
Christ *in heaven*, but you want to be like Him here, and I think the manna is what enables us to be like Christ in every-day life. It is sometimes said that we are so many naughts, and that Christ is the One at the left hand, but that is not the idea of Christianity. Paul was little in his own account, but he says, "By the grace of God I am *what I am*" (@1 Corinthians 15:10); and what that something was is opened up in this epistle.
H.G. So a letter of commendation does not commend a man who only makes a profession, but is supposed to commend something substantial.
J.T. We would not commend anything but what is of Christ.
H.G. "I commend unto you Phoebe, our sister, who is a servant of the church which is at Cenchrea" (@Romans 16:1).
R.S.S. What is exactly the thought of covenant?
J.T. Well, it implies a bond formed. The marriage bond is sometimes used to represent it in Scripture. It was really that with God and Israel. The allusion to it in @Romans 7:4 is the marriage bond: "that ye should be married to another, even to him who is raised from the dead, that we should bring forth fruit unto God". God looked for fruit as a result of the relation He proposed to enter into with the people. If you read @Exodus 19 you will find it is a carefully worded contract between God and the people. God sends His message; He makes His overture through Moses, and then the people send their reply through Moses. There is a formal contract made between God and the people.
G.W.H. So the covenant is all that Christ was to God in His thirty three years here.
J.T. Yes, that He gave up *that* life. God gave up *that* life. The covenant is really in the blood. The cup represents what God is; the bread represents what Christ is. The one, I think, is the covenant, the other reconciliation. The one is what God is; what He gave up for us on account of His love;
{357}
the other is the order of man that came under His eye.
G.W.H. God surrendered that precious life to establish the covenant.
J.T. Yes, that is the idea of it, and H would have us according to what the bread presents; carrying out His will; men that carry out His will down here.
Ques. Before we get away from the feast of unleavened bread, I would like to ask a question as to the difference between it and those feasts kept at Jerusalem. After the Israelites sacrificed the passover, they were to go to their tents, and there eat unleavened bread; and then in the institution of it, it says that in all their habitations they were to eat unleavened bread. Is there any significance in that?
J.T. A great deal, because it is in your house that the leaven is apt to be found. All is to be sincere and true there; everything in one's circumstances is to be according to truth. And then you come to the feast of Pentecost (@Deuteronomy 16). If you are right personally in your relations and associations you are now prepared for the opening up of things by the Spirit, and these are unlimited.
L.M. You would say that unless the feast of unleavened bread, of sincerity and truth, is kept every day, there would be no feast for God?
J.T. Nothing for God, but as one is in accord with the death of Christ, the Holy Spirit opens to him the deep things of God. Enlargement is in that connection.
W.L.P. Is the feast of unleavened bread negative, and the manna positive?
J.T. The manna is what Christ was for God here.
W.L.P. I wanted to know if they go together.
J.T. Yes, you must feed on Christ to be like Him. You want to know how He would act in these circumstances
{358}
that are so trying to you. Wherever they were in the desert there the manna was provided, and so you cannot find yourself in any circumstance in which the Lord Jesus has not been. The appropriation of this is food for one's soul.
Rem. You are in position for the manna as keeping the feast of unleavened bread.
J.T. Similarity to Christ brings about reproach. People might not *say* anything, but they have an attitude very adverse to you, which comes out in so many ways, and that is what is so testing. It is painful at times, but your comfort is that the Lord has been in it.
W.C.R. And you have His sympathy.
Ques. What leads to the thought of keeping up appearances?
J.T. You want to be something socially and spiritually at the same time. It is quite right to desire to be something spiritually; God intends that. He has a pattern, and He brings you to that pattern, but you cannot be that and something socially too. The two things cannot go on together.
A.F.M. Many have taken a high seat at the beginning, and do not like to come down.
J.T. Many come into fellowship, and they do not come as "little children"; and they therefore must keep up appearances, instead of growing up in the thing according to God.
A.F.M. Are there not three passovers, one in Egypt, one in the wilderness, and one in the land?
J.T. Yes. The passover is connected with our exit from Egypt, our relationship to the testimony in the wilderness, and our entrance into Canaan but in each case it is to disallow the flesh, which always tends to inflation.
J.D. It is not a good thing to have a reputation. Every man is in bondage if he has one.
J.T. It is just as well to leave it with the Lord.
{359}
As sure as you bring in one the Lord will bring in something that will blast it.
R.S.S. In connection with the old covenant there was a bond between God and the people. It is simple in regard to the old covenant, but what is man's side in the new covenant? In the new covenant it is what God is for us.
J.T. From our side what corresponds is reconciliation. You ought to be in accord with that. It is said of Enoch that he "walked with God, and he was not; for God took him" (@Genesis 5:24), but before he was taken he had a testimony that he pleased God. It is as if God were to say, that He wanted Enoch for ever, he had pleased Him so well; and I think we ought to please God. God has come into the light; He has opened up all that is in His heart. Now, what are you going to make of that? When Samson opened up all that was in his heart to Delilah, she betrayed him. Had she been a true wife she would not have betrayed him. She ought to have treasured that, and so with us, if God has opened up all His heart, what use are you going to make of it? Are you going to barter it?
G.W.H. You joy in God.
J.T. Yes, you treasure what He has opened up and what is in His heart. He has a place there for me. He loves me, and I delight to be in relationship with a God like that. But the form it takes in Christianity is that we are married to Christ, to Him that is raised from the dead, that we might bring forth fruit unto God (@Romans 7).
R.S.S. And we do that by being brought into similarity to Christ. "But we all, looking on the glory of the Lord with unveiled face, are transformed according to the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Lord the Spirit". I remember Mr. Pellatt illustrating the new covenant and reconciliation by suggesting, that in @Luke 10, the *Good Samaritan*,
{360}
you have a beautiful illustration of the new covenant. It is what God was for man. In @Luke 15, however, the *prodigal son*, now brought home and clothed with the best robe, is an illustration of what man is now for God, reconciliation.
A.F.M. You might say a word as to the glory of the Lord which we behold.
J.T. I think it is that He has brought in the glad tidings and made it effective. God is in His heart. Later on in the epistle, those who carried the bounty of the saints to Jerusalem were said to be "Christ's glory" (chapter 8:23). That which they brought was the testimony to what He had brought about in the hearts of the saints. The Lord is the Mediator of the covenant. He has made it effective. He has brought in here as a Man the light of what God's heart is. What moral glory there is attached to all that! It is the glory of the Lord, and He was so entirely out of sight in His ministry, so entirely self-surrendered, that God was seen. He has brought God in, and that was His glory, but then God glorifies Him, and reconciliation is on that line. What a *man* is. If Christ speaks of God, God speaks of Him. There is nothing veiled, "not as Moses", the apostle says. And now Paul says, as it were, I am according to all that. Christ was the Spirit of the covenant, and Paul was according to that. His ministry was in the Spirit, and it was in transparency, all was in the light. "By manifestation of the truth", he says, "commending ourselves to every conscience of men before God" (@2 Corinthians 4:2). So the whole of chapter 4 is to show how the vessel of such a treasure was wholly transparent. Paul was entirely subservient to the treasure; and he bore about in his body the dying of Jesus, that the life of Jesus might be manifested in his body.
A.F.M. The effect of beholding the Lord would produce reconciliation subjectively.
J.T. You have transformation into similarity.
{361}
"Transformed according to the same image from glory to glory". We all become alike, but it is according to the "same image", which is the glory of the Lord.
A.F.M. It is brought about by beholding the glory of the Lord.
J.T. He was entirely free from selfish considerations, and He made God known.
R.S.S. And that is the glory of the Lord. God is known, and we see that in Christ's face.
J.T. We look at it there without a veil.
W.L.P. And being transformed from glory to glory is like steps.
J.T. Yes, it is just going from one glory to another. There is no end to it, it seems.
{362}
RECONCILIATION
@2 Corinthians 5
J.T. I think it is well to keep in mind that reconciliation involves the order of man that is before God for His pleasure.
R.S.S. I was struck with that when reading the chapter, and we were remarking this morning, that we should be for His pleasure. "We are zealous whether present or absent to be agreeable to him". And then it goes on to say in the same chapter, "And that he died for all, that they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them and rose again".
J.T. Paul gives a lead in the thing in his own manner of life, and in his ministry; so that you have it concretely in a man, in one of like passions as ourselves. I think the principle of a lead is of considerable importance. In this connection the book of Judges helps. We have in Gideon the idea of one who gives a lead; indeed the allusion is to him in @2 Corinthians 4:7.
R.S.S. "For we have this treasure in earthen vessels". Gideon's pitchers, you mean?
J.T. Yes. Gideon had directed that they were to look on him, and I believe that these epistles are largely on that line. You have the truth presented practically in the man who ministers, so that you have a lead given to the saints. It is very striking how constantly he alludes to the way he looked on things himself and to his manner of life. We have what his manner of life was enlarged upon in the next chapter; (@2 Corinthians 6).
W.B. In the gospels we have what the Lord was, but in the epistles men of like passions as ourselves.
J.T. I think it is brought nearer to us, inasmuch as it is in one who is of like passions as ourselves;
{363}
so that no one can say it is not feasible. You have in @1 Samuel 13 the idea of a lead given in Jonathan. Saul was in the official place, but Jonathan acted in faith without a word of command. In fact, it was unknown to Saul and the camp that he was acting, but he acted from faith, and his armour-bearer, we are told, was fully with him. What he did, his armour-bearer did. That is, he gave a lead and the armour-bearer, it says, "slew after him" (chapter 14:13). That is the idea, I think, that we get in this epistle, the idea of a lead given, so that the thing becomes feasible, inasmuch as it is presented to us in one such as we are ourselves.
W.C.R. If you see it worked out in one man, you say it is possible to have it worked out in others.
J.T. Yes, if it is possible in you, it is possible in me; and I believe that works out in our meetings and in those who minister.
A.F.M. The idea of a leader is quite right. "Remember your leaders", and "Obey your leaders", as Hebrews 13:7 and 17 puts it.
J.T. Yes, they are alluded to three times in that chapter.
H.G. Paul says in @2 Corinthians 4:6, "for God, who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, hath shined in our hearts to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ". What he himself learned in Christ really came out in him; first, in regard to the covenant, and then in connection with reconciliation? As to the latter, his labour was, whether present or absent, to be acceptable to the Lord.
J.T. That is it. He says, God "has reconciled us", and then afterwards He has "given to us the ministry of that reconciliation", as though he were rendered competent for the ministry in virtue of the fact that he was reconciled; evidently the thing
{364}
was presented in his own person as well as in his ministry.
J.B. In that way both would be presented, reconciliation and the covenant as well.
J.T. I think as we were saying this morning, what was in accord with the covenant here was God-like. In order to be a minister of the covenant, one would have to be God-like. But the ministry of reconciliation requires one to be according to the order of man presented in Christ. Therefore, Paul presents himself here as one of those who had been reconciled, and hence had received the ministry of that reconciliation. I think the idea of giving a lead is of considerable importance in Christianity, because Christianity is an order of things established on the ground of precedent rather than on the ground of precept. Although precept is fully maintained, the thing is presented concretely in the gospels in Christ, and then in the epistles in the apostles. You want a thing *shown*.
J.B. Not merely *told*.
A.F.M. Would you say that @Exodus 21 suggested reconciliation?
J.T. Yes, I think so, but that was not Moses, you know. That was a "Hebrew servant". I was saying that at Corinth the apostle evidently could not single out a man to whom he could refer as the expression of love. He has to speak of it in the abstract in chapter 13, but in this epistle he is presenting things concretely, but he appeals to himself largely. He is glad to recognise the information that Titus brought, but in the main, he has to appeal to himself.
J.D. Does God give one the consciousness of a lead today?
J.T. It is God's way. Christianity continues on the principle of a lead being given. The armour-bearer
{365}
follows; he does not take the initiative. If Jonathan slays, the armour-bearer slays; he "*slew after him*".
G.W.H. Jonathan's guide was from within.
J.T. Well, he had faith.
G.W.H. The armour-bearer followed him, but Jonathan had the faith to lead.
J.T. He could take the initiative. There are so very few that can do that. The armour-bearer says to Jonathan: "Do all that is in thy heart" (@1 Samuel 14:7). He was with him in all that Jonathan would do. There was intelligent sympathy with Jonathan, and I think this letter sets before us a lead as to what is presented.
J.D. Is your point that we are influenced by a *life* rather than by what is spoken?
J.T. I am sure of that, and no one can lead a brother beyond where he is himself.
W.C.R. I was going to say the lead had already been given in the apostle, and he expects us to follow. He says: "Be my imitators even as I also am of Christ" (@1 Corinthians 11:1).
J.T. And one who gives a lead is very exercised about having children, because he has no one like-minded except a child; no one who understands him fully. It is a child that understands you fully. So Paul had Timothy, as his beloved child, to whom he could commit the thing in which he had given the lead. Timothy was to see to it that it was taken care of.
J.D. The child has "genuine feeling", is that the point?
J.T. Yes, "how ye get on", he says. "I have no one like-minded" (@Philippians 2:20). Timothy had the same mind as himself.
A.F.M. As a child he was the product of Paul's ministry.
J.T. That is the idea. Paul had begotten him in the gospel. It is not only the idea in Scripture
{366}
that one is converted. Your convert should become your child.
A.F.M. Should be formed.
J.T. Yes. That is, he is really your child and takes character from what you have presented.
J.B. He would serve with him in the gospel, too.
J.T. Yes, and he was a ready help in Corinth. He could send him to the Corinthians on that very account, because he was like himself (@1 Corinthians 4:17).
A.A.T. Then as a general principle you would not accept a man's ministry whose life was not consistent with it?
J.T. As a general principle, the author of what you read as spiritual ministry should be accredited.
A.F.M. In regard to being "God-like", is that the testimony before *men*; and is "Christ-like" being something for God?
J.T. That is what I was thinking exactly. What is presented to man is God. Hence in the gospels you will find the Lord makes the point that God was there; that was what He was concerned about, and indeed the testimony in "Emmanuel" was that God was with His people; God had come out. It was the presentation of God in Christ, but the other side is that man is to be for God. The revelation of God gives to us more than relationship. I mean it is more than that God is revealed as Father to Christ. The Lord says, "He that hath seen me hath seen the Father" (@John 14:9). That is, the *character* of the Father was there. That is one side of the truth, and the other side is that there was a new order of Man, in whom God was well pleased. God announced that at the outset of the Lord's ministry. Now it is that the apostle has in his mind in this chapter. The tenor of the chapter is that there should be that which is for God's pleasure.
A.B. "What ye have both learned, and received and heard, and seen in me, these things do; and the
{367}
God of peace shall be with you" (@Philippians 4:9). Is that what you have referred to?
J.T. Yes, quite.
W.L.P. That is in connection with leadership.
J.T. Yes, it is what they saw in him.
W.L.P. Is it necessary to be a teacher or something in that line to be a leader, or can a simple believer in his spirit be a leader?
J.T. That is a very good point to raise. A leader is one who leads somebody. One could not put it more simply than that. It is not one who leads in teaching only. It is one who leads after Christ. And how did the Lord lead? He is the great Leader; the Leader of our salvation, of our faith. @Hebrews 12:2 reads "Looking steadfastly *on* Jesus". A leader in any sense is one who follows in His path, and it leads through death. That is where it leads. A leader has the greatest proportion of suffering. Those who follow do, too, but the leader has the greatest portion of suffering and hardships. Hence the apostle puts before Timothy in his second epistle what he would have to endure. He committed the thing to him. The apostle is retiring, and he committed the thing to Timothy, and pointed out what he should have to endure, and exhorted him to endure it as a good soldier.
A.F.M. The same is found in chapter 6 of this epistle. The apostle records what he passed through -- the sufferings connected with the ministry of reconciliation.
J.T. That is the idea of leadership, and, as we were saying, in chapter 4:7 - 12 he alludes to Gideon. He says "But we have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the surpassingness of the power may be of God, and not from us; every way afflicted, but not straitened; seeing no apparent issue, but our way not entirely shut up; persecuted, but not abandoned; cast down, but not destroyed; always bearing about
{368}
in the body the dying of Jesus, that the life also of Jesus may be manifested in our body; for we who live are always delivered unto death on account of Jesus, that the life also of Jesus may be manifested in our mortal flesh; so that death works in us, but life in you". That is what I think comes out in leadership.
H.G. And it is marked by transparency.
J.T. Yes, and it would be manifesting the life of Jesus. It would not be Paul, but Jesus.
H.G. Would it be right to say, that in the way God makes Himself known to Saul it was God's attitude, but in a Man? He approached man in a Man, in order that man's heart might be affected by that Man. Saul of Tarsus was greatly affected by Jesus, by the way the Lord spoke to him. It was God, but in that Man, and in that way Saul says, as it were, I wish to be like that Man; and the Lord virtually says, Well, I will make you like Me. He gave him His Spirit, and the result of that is reconciliation. But the affecting thing was that God spoke to him in that Man.
J.T. That is what I understand exactly. The light shone, and then the voice, "It is hard for thee to kick against the pricks" (@Acts 26:14). Well, that was the kindness of God, really spoken through the lips of the Lord Jesus, and then Saul says, "Who art thou, Lord"? I suppose that would be the recognition of the authority of God vested in that Man. Then the Lord says, "I am Jesus". That is the order of Man.
W.C.R. The *suffering* Man.
J.T. Yes, quite so. "I am Jesus whom thou persecutest". So you have the two things there combined at the outset of his career.
W.C.R. So when the Lord gives him his commission He tells him of the great things he must *suffer*.
A.F.M. I would like to raise a practical question. Are we reconciled?
{369}
J.T. The apostle here says that he and those who were with him were, as I understand it. But at the same time one would be guarded in that, and what I would say is that it is important to take up the truth abstractly. What I mean by that is to look at it by itself, without necessarily occupying your mind with persons, to see that God has reached an idea in some one as He has in Christ. He has reached every thought of His in Christ, and therefore we may all say, as believers, that we are reconciled. God has taken us up in Christ. It says in @Romans 5:11, without any special reference to a spiritual state "through whom we have now received the reconciliation". Clearly it is presented there as an objective truth received by faith. That chapter says also, if reconciled to God by the death of His Son, we should be saved in the power of His life. It seems to be presented as an objective truth in the gospel, but then the thought is, that the believer is to be for God's pleasure; and I should say without hesitation that anyone who is of "the faith of Jesus", as it is put in @Romans 3:26, is reconciled.
A.F.M. Why does the apostle at the end of the chapter beseech the Corinthians to be reconciled?
J.T. I believe it is abstract.
R.S.S. "Now then we are ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us; we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God". "*You*" is in italics and is better left out.
J.T. It was the manner of his ministry.
A.F.M. Would it not suggest that they were not in the good of reconciliation?
J.T. I quite admit, that it may imply that, but what he did beseech directly is in chapter 6:1, where he says: "We also beseech that ye receive not the grace of God in vain".
J.D. The character of the ministry was: "Be reconciled to God".
{370}
A.F.M. Is the ministry of reconciliation worldwide or saint-wide?
J.T. It is what God has in mind for all men. "God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself". The gospels clearly set that forth, and there can be no doubt that the same holds good now. It is the object that God has in presenting Christ in the glad tidings. You have in @Romans 3:26: "that he should be just and justify him that is of the faith of Jesus". There, I think, it is the *Man*; light in your soul as to that order of Man. That would bring in reconciliation, and it is world-wide. God has no other thought than that every man should be brought into accord with Jesus.
A.F.M. My difficulty was that reconciliation involves a different order of man.
J.T. So it does, and Jesus is the Leader in that. "Looking steadfastly on Jesus" (@Hebrews 12:2). He is the Leader of the race. We have all to learn from Him, but there has to be a beginning of it in the soul, and so He is presented. You will find that where things are effected for us it is by Jesus Christ. Where they are presented as effected and positioned it is Christ Jesus; but Jesus is the order of man, and where it is presented in that way I think God has in His mind reconciliation; that all men should learn reconciliation; in that Man.
A.F.M. I thought we had several ministries in Scripture; the ministry of the gospel, ministry of the new covenant, ministry of reconciliation, and the ministry of the church. Do you not distinguish between those four? You could not go into the world with even the first three, could you?
J.T. The ministry of the gospel covers the covenant and reconciliation. Look at @Colossians 1:21 - 23 for a moment: "And you, who once were alienated and enemies in mind by wicked works, yet now has it reconciled in the body of his flesh through death;
{371}
to present you holy and unblamable and irreproachable before it, if indeed ye abide in the faith founded and firm, and not moved away from the hope of the glad tidings, which ye have heard, which have been proclaimed in the whole creation which is under heaven, of which I Paul became minister". You see his thought runs on from reconciliation to the gospel of which he was minister. They were not to be moved away from the hope of the glad tidings. So clearly, in his mind the glad tidings embraced reconciliation. In fact it was from a state to which the gospel applied that they were reconciled; from a state of enmity against God, and how can you understand what is stated here otherwise; "that God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing trespasses"? Trespasses were there, but He did not impute them.
J.D. Christ as Man is God's point of departure. He left the temple and took up His residence in a Man.
J.S. I suppose reconciliation links us with a past history, but in new birth there is no past history, although they run together.
J.T. Yes, reconciliation according to Colossians is from a state of alienation by wicked works into a state of agreeableness to God.
A.F.M. How is it we are so slow in getting into this?
J.T. I think it begins by having appreciation of that Man. You gradually get an appreciation of that Man and you begin to prefer Him to yourself. Young people as a rule like themselves; they have a great estimate of themselves, but gradually it dawns on them that the order of man presented in Christ is preferable. "Come unto me all ye that labour and are heavy laden and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you and learn *from me*" (@Matthew 11:28,29). That is the principle of leadership. It is not like Mary,
{372}
hearing His words, nor receiving His commandments; the idea there is learning from a model. Therefore one fully in the good of reconciliation is imbued with the spirit of the four gospels. There is nothing lacking morally as regards Man in the four gospels; every quality is presented in the four. That was what God saw, and it is presented in the four gospels in the way of testimony, so that we should feed on them. A man in the full enjoyment of reconciliation is a man that meditates in the four gospels.
W.C.R. We understand the gospels much more slowly than the epistles.
J.T. I think it is intended the epistles should come first. A child in school in some respects learns from another child more readily than from the teacher, because the child is *nearer*. So that we get the idea from one like ourselves, but then the strong meat is Christ. That is what is under the eye of God. He could not open the heavens on Paul and say, This is my beloved son. It is only on Christ the heavens could be opened, because there was nothing lacking there. All that God sought in man was there. The gospels afford the food for those who are reconciled. @Colossians 1, I think, shows how the thing comes about, and the Person in whom it comes about. The greatness of His Person is first spoken of, and then it is stated that the Godhead is undertaking to reconcile all things to Itself by Christ. Then it goes on to say: "And you, who once were alienated and enemies in mind by wicked works, yet now has it reconciled in the body of his flesh through death; to present you holy and unblamable and irreproachable before it, if indeed ye abide in the faith founded and firm, and not moved away from the hope of the glad tidings".
H.G. Why does he say, "If ye continue"? (@Colossians 1:23).
J.T. Wherever you get an "if" there is a possibility
{373}
of decline. In fact I would say the evidences of decline were there. It is not that an *individual* should ever lose it. The danger was that the *company* should disappear and decline, and I think the elements of decline were there; but it does not say that in Ephesians. In @Ephesians 2:16 it is "Reconcile both unto God in one body by the cross"; there is no "if".
J.L.J. Would you say the "if" is connected with a company, not with an individual?
L.T.F. The moving away would be by individuals.
J.T. You could not of course disassociate the idea of individual conduct from the company, but I think it is the company that is in view.
H.G. The apostle speaks of God having committed to him the ministry of that reconciliation, but He had also put in him the word of that reconciliation. Was the word the actual thing itself and the ministry the setting forth of it?
J.T. I think the ministry is, in a way, wider and more official. In every country there is a "foreign minister". There is only one. There may be many ministers under him, but one only has the portfolio. I apprehend that Paul had the ministry officially. The "word" would refer to the *expression* of it, how it is presented in formal communications. "Putting in us the word of that reconciliation" shows how the apostle was qualified to speak of it.
H.G. You see in Romans, Colossians and Ephesians different aspects of it.
B.T.F. Would you say what the end of reconciliation is?
J.T. It is that God might be restful; that there might be no cause of disturbance anywhere.
B.T.F. And was the point that the Corinthians should enter into God's thoughts regarding them?
J.T. Undoubtedly he had that in view, although I think his statements here are wider. He is really dealing with the thing, more than making a local
{374}
application of it. The objects of reconciliation is that God might be restful, in men first, and finally in "all things".
B.T.F. Do you mean that is the subjective aspect in regard to the people of God; that they should be restful toward each other?
J.T. If you are reconciled and I am reconciled, we, in measure, rest in each other. There are no hard *corners*! That is the idea. There is in the believer an *ascending* love, and a horizontal love. In Ephesians reconciliation is presented in *one body*. It is not here "in the body of his flesh through death"; it is "by the cross". The thing is seen in one body. That shows the enmity has been slain, and Jews and Gentiles are brought together in love. How pleasing this was to God! Reconciliation in Ephesians, therefore, takes the form of unity in affection.
H.G. "Ephraim shall not envy Judah; and Judah shall not vex Ephraim" (@Isaiah 11:13).
J.T. So God will be quite restful in Israel in the future. Everything is to be reconciled, principalities and thrones and all seats of government. All these things were created by Christ and for Christ, but they are occupied for the moment by persons wholly out of sympathy with God, and, therefore, God has no restfulness in the present rulers of the world for instance, nor in unseen principalities; but when Christ is the Ruler of the world God will be restful. There will be nothing to disturb. It is not that there may not be details out of harmony, but Christ is in supremacy and God is quite restful. Things are in good hands. That is the principle of it. In Colossians we have "you hath he reconciled". The Spirit in Christian epistles is occupied mainly with the saints at the present time.
A.F.M. In Colossians that was in view of the teaching of the body; whereas in Ephesians it was
{375}
in view of the house. Reconciliation is presented in both.
J.T. Yes, it runs on into the house in Ephesians.
A.F.M. So it answers to what you were saying: "This is my rest for ever, here will I dwell" (@Psalm 132:14).
J.T. It answers to what I was saying this morning in regard to Jacob. One always reverts to Jacob in order to get a right idea of the house of God. It is formally stated that God appeared to him at Bethel; and Jacob arose from his sleep and he set up a pillar where God appeared to him, and he poured oil upon it, and he calls it the house of God. Now after he has been away from there for twenty years or so he returns, and God meets him on the way and wrestles with him till the breaking of the day. Jacob says, "I will not let thee go except thou bless me" (@Genesis 32:26). I believe there was the beginning of Jacob's history as for God's pleasure. There is a man who wants to be blessed by God. He was alone and he clung to God until he got the blessing. Then his name was changed. God gave him a new name, *Israel*, which signified that he had power with God and with men. But his natural strength was curtailed, he halted on his thigh. The sun rose upon him as he passed over Penuel. All the natural greatness was left behind. *That* could never go into Bethel. His name, *Jacob*, signified that he was a man who would act against another from *behind*. This is descriptive very largely of things that go on among the Lord's people sometimes, backbiting and the like. That is wholly unsuitable to the house of God, and anyone who is given to it has no part in the house of God practically. God taught Jacob in his wrestling that things were to be *face to face*. He saw God face to face. That is the principle of the house of God; looking at a brother, into his countenance, and being transparent. It is in that connection that he gets the name *Israel*. So that he goes up into the house of God now as a
{376}
transparent man; (@Genesis 35). You do not get power with men by acting behind them, but by speaking with them face to face. That is how you get power with the Lord's people. "Faithful are the wounds of a friend" (@Proverbs 27:6). They are not from the back and not under the fifth rib like Joab's attack on Abner.
W.B. Peter speaks of those things as to be laid aside: "Guile, malice", etc. (@1 Peter 2:1). They have to be laid aside before you go to the house.
J.T. You have the spiritual house after that; after coming to the Lord. "To whom coming;" "If indeed ye have tasted that the Lord is good" (@1 Peter 2:3,4). Jacob tasted that the Lord was good, in His wrestling. Well then he goes out, and (passing over the sad experiences of @Genesis 33 and 34), God said to him, "Arise, go up to Bethel and dwell there". He goes and "the terror of God was upon the cities" (chapter 35:3,5). There was nothing to fear. As your face is Bethel-ward the terror of the Lord is against your enemies. In Bethel the Lord appeared to him after he came back from Padan-aram. Jacob had asked for His name at Penuel, but the Lord declined to give it to him there, but at Bethel He opened up His name to him, and it says that Jacob set up a pillar where the communications were made. It was as if he said; Now, I am going to stand up here for God where the light has come to me, because really Jacob is to be the pillar. The assembly is "the pillar and ground of the truth" (@1 Timothy 3:15). But how? Well, he first pours a drink-offering on the pillar. That indicated that he had made headway; that he had come to reconciliation; he had come to know that he was pleasing to God, for the drink-offering was for God. Then he pours the oil over the drink-offering, so the one is for God, and the other, the oil, is for testimony here. The assembly is the pillar, but it is set up where the communications have been made to him. It is set up there, and it is to be for God's pleasure. It is composed of persons who
{377}
love God, and who love Christ, and one another. That is the drink-offering. That is for God's pleasure. God anoints that, as it were.
W.C.R. @Luke 15 was alluded to this morning as typical of reconciliation. That is, the younger son returning from the far country and how he is received, and how he is for the father's pleasure.
J.T. I think that is very beautiful. Luke's gospel really is the great gospel of reconciliation. It is announced at the Lord's birth, "Peace on earth, good pleasure in men". But first there is peace in heaven. Now peace in heaven involves the Christian dispensation, because Christ has gone in, and the assembly is there anticipatively. The prodigal is brought to this. So that chapter 15 is the climax as regards the effect of the gospel. The prodigal is in the house with the "best robe" on. You can understand how the father would be delighted in that son as at home free and happy, and in every way suited to the place.
H.G. The servants put on the best robe, indicating, I suppose, the place ministry has.
J.T. The servants evidently knew where the best robe was, when the father told them to bring it forth. There is such a thing as a wardrobe in Scripture, and doubtless in it are other robes besides the "best" one, but the best one is for Christianity, for the present time. So that I suppose God has more pleasure in the heavenly company than in any other company, because they are characterised more by Christ; there is a greater similarity to Christ in members of the assembly than in any other family.
W.B. The whole creation eventually shares in reconciliation.
J.T. Yes, quite. I think I would put it in this way, that the new covenant enables us to be at home in the presence of God; reconciliation enables God
{378}
to be at home with us. There is nothing to disturb Him, so He comes in to dwell with us.
G.A.T. Do you get the sabbath reached in that?
J.T. It is the same idea, only of course the sabbath does not suggest dwelling, but rest. Dwelling implies affection and family relationships. So that reconciliation in that way is that God is pleased with us, but after that there is the development of family affections. These belong to the house.
J.B. Distance must be distasteful to God.
J.T. Distance is intolerable to love. Therefore God hated darkness. He commanded that out of it light should shine.
H.G. Going back to Jacob, it is very beautiful to see that it was God with him at the beginning, but he was with God at the close.
W.B. In the book of Leviticus the position God takes is suggestive. He takes His place among His people, figuratively, I mean, and then after that there is the offering to Him in worship. That is, He comes among His people.
J.T. Leviticus is on that platform. He speaks out of the tabernacle in Leviticus, so He is already dwelling there. He sets Himself to be approached by men. But I think you can see in @Exodus 19 to 21 how God proposed to prepare for the dwelling and that the covenant precedes it. The idea of reconciliation is seen in the offerings of the people for the tabernacle.
A.P. Why did Jacob call Bethel a dreadful place?
J.T. Because he was not reconciled then. He did not call it a dreadful place when he came back to it in @Genesis 35. He was suited then to the house of God. He did not even know the covenant in the first visit. If you know God's heart toward you, you will not think His house dreadful. You will be at home in it.
{379}
Ques. So you need justification before you can touch reconciliation?
J.T. Oh, you do, quite. From the outset Jacob had faith. He learned the manner of faith from his grandfather. I have noticed particularly of late that the responsibility of a father does not cease with his immediate children. According to Scripture, it runs on to the grandchildren and great grandchildren. So by faith Abraham dwelt in tents with Isaac and Jacob. Now he was not long with Jacob, but whatever time he was with him he took account of Jacob, and so far as in him lay he helped Jacob. He set the right principles before him; he dwelt, not in *houses* with him, but in *tents*, and hence it says of Jacob at the beginning, that he was a plain man and dwelt in tents. He had learned from Abraham how to live. So he had faith from the beginning. But his natural traits were stronger than his spiritual, as it is with most of us. Therefore he has to go through the painful experience of twenty years in Padan-aram, but when he comes back God settles the matter. The natural is crippled, but he has spiritual power.
R.S.S. Would you speak of the new covenant as world-wide, as toward all men?
J.T. I think not; it is "as regards the house of Israel" (@Hebrews 8:8). It is between God and His people.
R.S.S. I was thinking of the Lord as Mediator between God and man; that is world-wide, but Mediator of the new covenant is a more limited thought.
{380}
THE HOUSE OF GOD
@Acts 2:1 - 3; @Ephesians 2:11 - 22
J.T. I think these two scriptures connect the idea of the house with reconciliation. The one hundred and twenty, according to the facts presented in the first chapter, were reconciled. They had learned from Christ and partook of His character. They were marked by prayer; by being together with one accord; and by reverence of the Scriptures. The disallowance of man's will is seen in the selection of an apostle. So, as together, they represent the idea of reconciliation, and consequent upon that you have the Spirit forming them into the house. In Ephesians the passage read shows that reconciliation precedes the thought of the house.
R.S.S. We have reconciliation in Romans, Colossians, and in Ephesians. Could you say a word as to the special feature of it as presented in each epistle?
J.T. I think in Romans it is presented as a general truth of the gospel. We are said to have received it, and we are said to have been reconciled by the death of God's Son. It is presented in a general way as a part of the gospel in Romans, without any special reference to the subjective state of those that were reconciled. In Colossians it has reference to what is agreeable to God in the circle of the saints. Pending the reconciliation of all things, God would have His satisfaction now in the circle of the saints. In Ephesians it is in the body; "that he might reconcile both unto God in one body by the cross"; showing that it is seen in the way in which love works out in us practically; the enmity being annulled.
R.S.S. There is no "if" in Ephesians, but in Colossians there is.
{381}
J.T. It is because of the element of defection, although hidden perhaps, it already existed there. The "if", I think, always supposes that a tendency to defection is present, and clearly in Colossians, conditions were not as we have them in Ephesians. Things were as yet as the apostle had established them in Ephesus.
W.C.R. In Colossians he beseeches too that they might be united together in love. Would that show there was defection there?
J.T. I think they were not *complete*, on the experimental side. There was a danger of being led away through philosophy and vain deceit. The "if", I think, was an allusion to that.
R.S.S. In Ephesians the purpose of God is presented.
J.T. It is more what is for God and Christ in the assembly; so that they are reconciled in one body. The body is for Christ, for the display of Christ. Therefore, reconciliation is brought in in that connection in Ephesians; that there might be a vessel here suited for the display of Christ.
J.D. The ministry of Christ produced an order of man to which the Spirit of God could join Himself.
J.T. That is the idea, I think; corresponding to what God expressed as to the Lord Himself; "This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased" (@Matthew 3:17). That was the Man on whom the Spirit came. The pleasure of God was there, and the gift of the Spirit is in that connection. God comes in to dwell there. So with Zion; "here will I dwell", He says, "for I have desired it" (@Psalm 132:14). There was that which pleased Him there.
W.B. Would you connect reconciliation with the new man?
J.T. Yes, it is so, only that the new man is more for testimony here. It is what you *put on*, what men see in you. I think reconciliation is more what is
{382}
*for God*, as we have already said. The drink-offering in @Genesis 35 speaks of reconciliation, but the new man is more the oil which is put over it.
R.S.S. Would you make that clear to us?
J.T. The Lord Himself, in His thirty years of private life was like a drink-offering for God. He was not yet in public, but He was under God's eye during all that time.
R.S.S. Is refreshment the thought of the drink-offering?
J.T. Pretty much; drink is for refreshment and satisfaction, too. The Lord in His thirty years of private life was just that. He answered to Jacob's pillar. The drink-offering was there for God, and then the oil was put over it. Now we might extend that thought. The one hundred and twenty here were like that. They were pleasing to God in so far as the facts presented show. They were together with one accord in prayer, and having to decide a matter, the selection of an apostle, they appealed to the Scriptures, and they appealed to God by means of a lot. They did not use their own wills. The coming of the Spirit is like the oil poured on the pillar. In this chapter it is not what they received inwardly, but what came *upon* them; the external effect of it.
R.S.S. Did they not receive something inwardly at that moment?
J.T. Undoubtedly, it is the beginning of the dwelling, of the house of God, but it was the external effect that was in view; what others could take account of.
B.T.F. What was the bond between the hundred and twenty before the Spirit came?
J.T. The bond was Christ. They had been companying with the Lord, and had learned from Him. He had taught them to love one another as He had loved them. That was the kind of love. The love
{383}
of reconciliation is the love that Jesus taught the disciples. It is the love of a Man to men.
B.T.F. The bond was, that they loved Him.
J.T. Oh, yes, but they loved one another, too. The Lord's great concern about them was that they should love one another.
W.L.P. They were of one mind as to the Lord.
J.T. He was their bond primarily, but I think we ought to remember that each of them was lovable. It is not simply that they loved the Lord; they loved one another, and so "they were all together in one place".
G.A.T. Would you say that in His death He brought this about. He not only removed their sins, but the distance between them?
J.T. Yes, that is according to @Colossians 1:22 "reconciled in the body of his flesh through death". They could not be together under God's eye aside from that, because the question of sin has to be dealt with; but there was also the effect of His work in each of them, so that they became lovable.
J.D. In the meat-offering, there is the fine flour mingled with oil, and then the fine flour anointed. Is your thought that the period between the ascension of the Lord and the coming of the Spirit shows the same elements found there as in Christ before the Spirit came?
J.T. Yes; only we always keep in mind, of course, what He was as a divine Person.
J.D. Yes. What was true in Him as Man is found in them in measure before the Spirit is given. It is the difference between the whole sheaf and the two loaves, in @Leviticus 23.
J.T. Well, yes. The sheaf of first fruits is what Christ was. There was no need for the action of a fire with Him, but the two loaves required the action of the fire on account of the leaven. It is the distinction, as you said, between Christ personally and ourselves.
{384}
We need the action of the fire in order to render ineffectual the leaven. They were to be baked with leaven, denoting that there was leaven in the one hundred and twenty, but it was rendered ineffective in them.
J.B. Would you say they had eaten of that meat-offering, and so they became, in that way, a reconciled people?
J.T. They had learned in one way and another from Christ. He, for instance, was accustomed to prayer. They saw Him pray, and they say: "Lord, teach us to pray" (@Luke 11:1). And they were taught how to pray, and they pray here. That is one point. There could be nothing, in a way, more pleasing to God than a praying man. In fact, it was as a praying Man the Lord received the Spirit.
R.S.S. They were much exercised during those ten days; more so than during the forty days in which they were kept together at Jerusalem.
J.T. During the forty days the Lord was with them; but being left to themselves was a test. *Ten days* was a time of testing. That is what God does. He leaves a man to himself, and what that man does as left to himself brings to light where he is. Take Saul, the king, for instance in @1 Samuel 13; it says he reigned one year and then two years, then he is left to himself. He had every possible advantage at the outset of his reign, but he must be tested. So he reigns one year, and then reigns two; he blows a trumpet, and the first word he utters discloses where he is. "Let the Hebrews hear" (verse 3). He is disqualified for the eye of faith by that one word, *Hebrews*. He is wanting in divine instincts. Otherwise he would never call the descendants of the man whom God had called *Israel*, "Hebrews". So the disciples, being left to themselves for the ten days, show the nature of the work that had been effected in them. It stood.
{385}
B.T.F. Do you not think it is very affecting to take up the history of the disciples with the Lord, and to note how they speak to Him as a company? They say "we". "Lord, to whom shall *we* go?" showing there was a bond formed between them.
J.T. Yes, and I have often thought that He sanctioned that, too. He says, "who do *ye* say that I am?" (@Matthew 16:15). Now He meant to challenge every heart in the circle. Peter replies, and that reply is for them all. It represents the judgment of each of them, for no one challenged it. Therefore, holding their peace, we are entitled to conclude that they acquiesced in that confession. They committed themselves to it.
H.G. I would like to ask in connection with our brother's questions, if it is the thought that the Holy Spirit on the day of Pentecost connected Himself simply with the work of God, really with Christ subjectively formed in the hearts of the disciples, and if ultimately that becomes the material out of which the house is formed?
J.D. I understand so. Our brother has been pointing out the moral features found in them, and that they were according to Christ.
J.T. Yes, it is a very concrete idea you get here. It is reconciliation presented concretely. It is with that the Spirit identifies Himself.
R.S.S. You mean it is seen in a practical way?
J.T. Yes, seen in men and women. It is presented tangibly. It can be seen. The effects are there.
A.F.M. The working out of that for us would be the epistle to the Colossians, would it not?
J.T. Yes. What is under God's eye irreproachable in His sight is "to walk worthily of the Lord unto all well-pleasing" (chapter 1:10). It is remarkable how the idea of pleasure comes in in Colossians. "In him all the fulness of the Godhead was pleased to dwell" (chapter 1:19). It was the pleasure of God that all should be there.
{386}
H.G. In that way they were what might be called "A Christed company".
G.A.T. We do not understand just what that expression means.
H.G. It is a people under the anointing of the Head.
A.F.M. I was going to ask about the expression "put on". We could not "put on" anything before there was formation within, could we?
J.T. That underlies it all; and so, in regard to reconciliation, new creation underlies it.
G.A.T. Would you say the Lord recognised the foundation in the soul of Peter when He put to him the question as to who He was? (@Matthew 16).
J.T. Matthew presents a *revelation*, whereas Mark and Luke do not. Mark presents it as the normal result of education, the normal result of what had been presented before their eyes. He presents it in that way; as if they had formed a judgment, so that the confession in @Mark 8:29 is "Thou art the Christ"; and they were all committed to that. He had taken up man's place, and as a Man born into the world He was for the pleasure of God. Luke gives us that side. Before He received the Spirit He was for God's pleasure. Now, taking up man's place, He is found in Luke as a praying Man. At the end of thirty years He had said, "Suffer it to be so now for thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness" (@|Matthew 3:15). That was the Man to please God. There never had been a man like that before, a man to undertake to fulfil all righteousness. Some might have fulfilled items of it, but not everything, all righteousness. So He is a praying Man; it was in keeping with such an undertaking that one should pray. It is in connection with prayer that you have the Spirit. Then He allows the Spirit to have supreme control. So it is said He was "carried up into the wilderness by the
{387}
Spirit". It was the Spirit's doing. He did everything afterwards by the Spirit.
R.S.S. "Who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God" (@Hebrews 9:14).
J.T. Yes, so in @Acts 1:2 it is said, that He "having *by the Holy Spirit* charged the apostles whom he had chosen". As ascended He received of the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, and He shed Him forth.
J.D. Referring to @Acts 2, what bearing has @John 20 on this? "He breathed into them and says to them, Receive the Holy Spirit".
J.T. @John 20 is the *internal* state. "He breathed into them". It is what they received inwardly, and it was in order to qualify them for their heavenly relationships.
W.C.R. In receiving the Spirit, the believer receives everything in principle.
J.T. Yes. With *us* reconciliation, in a practical way, comes about after we get the Spirit. The Spirit has a great deal to effect in us, but then the apostles were different from us in that way; they were unique. They were the handiwork of Christ before Pentecost, which never could be repeated. What the Lord did in them before the Spirit came has to be done almost entirely in us after we receive the Spirit.
B.T.F. There had been a great deal effected. The Spirit came in connection with all that.
J.T. There were conditions suited for God to come in and dwell there. I should not say that about myself when I received the Holy Spirit. Generally He has to make room for Himself. The flesh lusts against Him. You cannot connect dwelling with warfare. If you have to fight a thief in your house you cannot talk of dwelling then. You must put the thief out before you can dwell. In @Romans 8 we learn that God raises up our bodies on account of
{388}
His Spirit which *dwells* in us. Now in @Acts 2 I apprehend the conditions existed to warrant the Spirit coming in to dwell. Their wills had been broken, and there was nothing unsuitable.
G.A.T. In @Acts 2, Ishmael was gone.
J.T. I think so. They were reconciled before the Spirit came in.
J.D. In @Acts 1 the conditions are set forth. They were praying, and they acted in accord with the teaching of Scripture.
J.T. That is what is so important. Their wills were not active. As I was saying a moment ago, what tests us is to be left to ourselves. If you have to deal with a matter of discipline, and you have not a direct precedent, a local company has to act according to its own judgment. It is their responsibility to do it, and how they do it discloses where they are. In @Acts 1 we have evidence that what they did was right; it was after the teaching of the Lord Jesus.
R.S.S. In connection with the point our brother raised as to @John 20 and @Acts 2, the fact that the Spirit did not come until the day of Pentecost would rather confirm what you said as to the former passage; that it was not a question of what they actually received when He breathed on them, but what they should receive.
J.T. "The Spirit was not yet", it says, "because Jesus had not yet been glorified" (@John 7:39).
R.S.S. And then the fact that they drew lots would show the Spirit was not in control. We do not draw lots now because the Spirit is here.
A.F.M. Is the thought in Acts that it was a hard breathing, a more pronounced breathing than @John 20?
J.T. There was a sound from heaven as of a "rushing, mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they were sitting". That is the idea of a dwelling. The presence of the Spirit made itself
{389}
felt in the whole house where they were. All was suited to the divine presence.
H.G. You referred to an element in reconciliation which is not often in our minds. I mean in regard to seeking to be pleasurable to each other. One could be encouraged to love Christ and one's brother, but there has not been much said in regard to making yourself lovable to your brother. What would be the motive-power in that?
J.T. I think it is to be spiritual. I have heard of a spiritual man saying to a child, 'What you love in me cannot be photographed'. A child loves a spiritual man, because he is lovable. The Lord spoke of the "little ones" and if we are lovable they will love us. If the saints do not feel at home with us, it is quite evident we are not spiritual. There is something about us that is fleshly, however much intelligence we may have.
W.C.R. If the Spirit is really *dwelling* in one he is spiritual.
J.T. I think so. The Spirit has made room for Himself if He is dwelling, but I believe that with most of us it is a state of conflict in our souls, first up and then down. One day the Spirit has control, and another day the flesh controls. That is not the idea of dwelling.
G.A.T. How would a spiritual man feel if the little child did not love him?
J.T. One would be tremendously exercised as to why it is if the saints object to him; why is it a brother does not fit in with his brethren? There is something lacking.
G.W.H. It is seen in Judah when he offered to become bondman for Benjamin. He made himself lovable to his brethren.
J.T. I think Judah comes out there as the brother, and, coming out as the brother, Joseph makes himself
{390}
known to them all. They all get the benefit of Judah's spirituality.
R.S.S. He really gave his life; was willing to be a slave.
G.W.H. It was an easy matter for Benjamin to love him.
J.T. And Joseph could now make himself known. Christ "is not ashamed to call them brethren" (@Hebrews 2:11). Joseph did not acknowledge his brethren until the brotherly spirit was there, and that is the idea of reconciliation.
J.D. There is a cause for which He is not ashamed to call us brethren.
J.T. Yes, because we are "all of one". He that sanctifies and they sanctified are all of one. That is what comes out at Pentecost. They were of a kind with Christ.
W.C.R. It says of Asher that he was to be acceptable to his brethren.
J.T. His foot was to be dipped in oil. If a man's walk is right he will be acceptable to his brethren.
H.G. He was blessed with children.
J.T. It is very suggestive what is said of him in @Deuteronomy 33:24, "And of Asher he said, Let Asher be blessed with children; let him be acceptable to his brethren; and let him dip his foot in oil". That was Moses¬ desire for him, which undoubtedly was, or will be, realised, and then it says, "Thy shoes shall be iron and brass; and as thy days so shall thy strength be".
W.H.F. The foot dipped in oil indicates a spiritual man.
J.T. I think so. He *walks* in the Spirit.
W.C.R. You said a while ago that the Lord tests us. Just before He left to go to the cross, in @John 13:15, He sets an example. He says, "I have given you an example that, as I have done to you, ye should do also".
J.T. That was how they learned, and, as I was
{391}
saying, you never could have that repeated. The circumstances of the apostles were unique. What the Lord did for them has to be done for us by the Spirit, so that, as far as I apprehend it, you could not find reconciliation afterward in the same sense. The Lord had brought it about in the disciples, so that there should be that which was suitable and pleasing to God, in order that He might dwell there.
Rem. They did not have to be baptised afterwards, as others were.
J.T. There is no record of their being baptised; so their position was unique.
A.F.M. Receiving the Spirit, they were able to rightly represent God.
J.T. Now, in @Genesis 35, you have the pillar anointed with oil. God went up from Jacob in the place where He talked with him. He went up there, where His communications were made. Now what will Jacob do? We know that in @Genesis 28 he was not stayed from his journey to Padan-aram by time appearance of God to him; he went on his way. What is said of Jacob after he returned is that he set up a pillar in the place where God spoke to him, it seems as if he so valued the communications that he would have a witness to them. Now the assembly is the pillar. The assembly is established here in the place where the communications were made.
W.H.F. Would you say, in connection with the one hundred and twenty and the Lord's ministry, the Lord prepared the material for the house and the Spirit took up His abode there? David prepared the material for the temple and Solomon built the house.
J.T. I think that in resurrection and ascension the Lord answers to Solomon. In the gospels He is seen in the David character. It is very interesting and touching that it is the *Son* that builds the house.
{392}
It is one in that relationship; not a man of war, but one who is a son.
R.S.S. I suppose you connect that with the thought of the Son over God's house.
J.T. Yes.
E.H.T. In connection with Jacob, you said God went up from the place where He talked with him. Jacob had opportunity to respond to the light.
J.T. And what Jacob did shows his appreciation of the communications made. The first epistle to Timothy has reference to that. Communications have been made; God's name has been revealed. Now His house is here, and one is to know how to behave himself in it. Paul writes to Timothy: "But if I delay, in order that thou mayest know how one ought to conduct oneself in God's house, which is the assembly of the living God, the pillar and the base of the truth" (@1 Timothy 3:15). Now that answers, as far as I understand it, to Jacob's pillar. It is set up where the communications have been made, and it is for everyone in it to know how to behave himself.
J.D. What effect would this presentation of the assembly have on us in our meetings?
J.T. I think what the Spirit of God would especially impress upon us at this time is what it is to be for God's pleasure. Things are done for God's eye, and if that state exists we shall find God with us. God is dwelling. We realise the blessedness of the divine dwelling.
J.D. It gives us encouragement to go on with one another if we see the basis of reconciliation.
J.T. God has great pleasure in looking down on a company of brethren that love one another; where there is divine order, as the apostle says. He insists on order in 1 Corinthians; rejoices in the order at Colosse; "rejoicing and seeing your order", he says (@Colossians 2:5).
A.B. In @Acts 4:31,32 we have a practical illustration of what you have been saying, "And
{393}
when they had prayed, the place was shaken where they were assembled together; and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and they spake the word of God with boldness. And the multitude of them that believed were of one heart and of one soul; neither said any of them that ought of the things which he possessed was his own; but they had all things common". There was a feature of reconciliation. And they "laid them down at the apostles¬ feet; and distribution was made unto every man according as he had need" (verse 35). There was a practical illustration of love among the brethren.
J.T. I believe, that what the Lord would say to us would be just that; that there should be reconciliation seen in a practical way, and if there is that you will get the dwelling. Now @Ephesians 3 leads on to the full thought of God, not at Jerusalem, but at Ephesus, where the full effect of Christ's death is seen. The enmity between Jew and Gentile is annulled by the cross, and the wall of partition broken down; and the saints are so brought together that they both have access by one Spirit unto the Father. You could not get a more complete representation of unity than that. If we assume to draw near to the Father collectively apart from the unity of the Spirit we shall be made to feel it.
W.C.R. "If thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there rememberest that thy brother hath ought against thee, ... first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift" (@Matthew 5:23,24).
J.T. That is it; *both* had access to the Father, and it was by the one Spirit through Christ; that is what you get in @Ephesians 2. So the apostle goes onto say: "Ye are no longer strangers and foreigners, but ye are fellow citizens of the saints and of the household of God". There can be nothing more precious as a privilege at the present time than having access to the Father together, by the Spirit, through
{394}
Christ. We are recognised as belonging to the household of God.
B.T.F. It shows the importance of walking in the Spirit, because otherwise this great privilege could not be maintained.
Rem. We have the three divine Persons here referred to, the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit.
J.T. What is presented here is that God has come in to dwell. First we are said to belong to the household of God. The *habitation* is another thought that comes in later. Firstly, we need to see, that as having access to God the Father, we are in this relationship; we belong to His household.
R.S.S. And it is very striking that that wonderful Scripture; "through him we both have access by one Spirit unto the Father", immediately follows what has been said about reconciliation.
J.T. If we attempt to draw near to God He will test us as to whether we are united in love or not.
R.S.S. And I think you discern it yourself when you get into God's presence.
J.T. "If two of you shall agree on earth as touching anything that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father which is in heaven" (@Matthew 18:19). I think it is very beautiful to connect oneself with the household of God. The household of God is a matter of privilege, but the end of the chapter says, we are "a habitation of God in the Spirit" That is for God. That is what God has. But my privilege is that I am part of His household.
A.F.M. Does the household grow?
J.T. It is said to grow into a temple. After we are said to be of the household of God it says: "Being built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the cornerstone, in whom all the building fitted together increases to a holy temple in the Lord". The household is one thought by itself.
{395}
J.D. Are the last three verses progressive or descriptive?
J.T. You have the statement as to the foundation, and then you have the statement as to the increase. It increases to a holy temple in the Lord. It has pointed out that that has the millennium in view. That is, it is in the Lord, and has in view the sphere that comes under the Lord.
A.F.M. The holy city in its millennial character.
J.T. That is it exactly.
J.D. It begins in verse 19. I was wondering if he was explaining in detail what he had spoken of as to reconciliation. But you think it is progress, from the household to the temple and then to the habitation of God.
J.T. I think there is progress to the temple certainly, because it says it increases. "All the building ... increases to a holy temple in the Lord". The increase would be in view of the place the assembly is to occupy in the future, I suppose.
J.D. Have these three verses any bearing on @1 Peter 2? Is it the same idea as "to whom coining"?
J.T. Only there the point is, that it is a *spiritual* house, it is the kind of house.
J.D. The same house though?
J.T. Oh, quite. But you have a fuller view here. It is the *habitation of God*. We have the *complete* idea here as to the household of God, the temple, and the habitation. I think you will find that limitations exist in all the epistles with the exception of Ephesians. When you come to the epistle to the Ephesians, in whatever is presented you get the complete idea; whether the body of Christ, the household of God, the temple of God, or the habitation of God. It is the thing in its entirety. In Corinthians it would be the *character* of the thing; "body of Christ",
{396}
"temple of God" without the article; but in Ephesians you have the complete idea.
E.H.T. As to growth or increase, does "fitly framed" give the manner of the increase?
J.T. It is fitly framed. You are not out of joint. The idea is that if there is growth there is no dislocation. If a child has a limb dislocated and it grows, it becomes more and more obvious that it is deformed. So, before increase, there must be the fitly joining together. Every brother must be in place.
W.C.R. Similar to the one accord and one mind.
J.T. So there is no dislocation, nothing out of proportion. There is perfect symmetry.
J.B. You were speaking of "in the Lord". Would you enlarge on that thought, as bringing in the kingdom?
J.T. It is the One who rules, who subjugates everything, and, in connection with that, you have the temple. No doubt Solomon presents the idea. There was no evil occurrent; nor was there an adversary. So the temple was there, that in which you might inquire of God.
G.W.H. In connection with what you said about new creation underlying reconciliation, is new creation the sovereign work of the Spirit?
J.T. It is the work of God by the Spirit undoubtedly. "If any one be in Christ, there is a new creation; the old things have passed away; behold all things have become new; and all things are of the God who has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ" (@2 Corinthians 5:17,18). It is God's work. And how could any of us be pleasing to God without it? @Genesis 1 is an account of the creation and the details of it, and God pronounces things "very good". What is "very good"? His handiwork is good. That is what is good and nothing else.
A.F.M. Is the great end of this chapter approach to God; "access by one Spirit to the Father"? {397}
J.T. I think the apostle is showing the great privileges that the reconciled ones have come into, and he reaches the top when he says, "we both have access by one Spirit unto the Father". Then he says, as it were, looking at all these things, you must conclude you are no longer strangers and foreigners, but fellow-citizens of the saints and of the household of God. This statement is based on all he has been saying.
A.F.M. In @Acts 2 do you have the house in the manward view, God expressing Himself manward in grace, and then in @Ephesians 2, the thought of the house Godward; that, as a household, we have access?
J.T. Well, no doubt, but having mentioned the thought of the household, the apostle cannot stop, as it were. He might have stopped if it were only a question of our privilege, but, as is peculiar to Ephesians, he goes on to the complete idea. He shows the bearing of the building, that it is toward the world to come. It will appear there as a temple. In Ephesians it is the setting forth of the counsels of God, so that, having touched on their privileges, he must go on and show the complete thing. Therefore, you have the foundation of the apostles and prophets and Jesus Christ being the chief corner stone. Then he says, "fitly framed together", it "groweth unto a holy temple in the Lord". But it is *in whom*, showing that Christ is supreme in relation to the building. Then he finally says, "in whom ye also are built together for a habitation of God in the Spirit".
R.S.S. That is what is true here and now.
J.T. This last verse is what is true here and now, but in the last verse it is not their privilege exactly, but what they were for God. A habitation for God.
H.G. Does the last verse bring eternity in in a sense? I mean the eternal state. "The tabernacle of God is with men"?
{398}
J.T. We never cease to be this, although it has a bearing at the present time, but we never cease to be the habitation of God; in the future the assembly is that.
R.S.S. It is inhabited by the Spirit now.
J.T. But I do not suppose God could be in men otherwise.
A.F.M. The tabernacle was anointed after reconciliation was accomplished, typically.
J.T. Yes, quite, but then God came in after that. The glory came in on the ground of the anointing. I think we have to distinguish between the Spirit anointing and God dwelling. The one is what we are in testimony, but the other is what God has in us, and I apprehend that God could not be in man except by the Spirit.
H.G. A habitation of God *Spirit-wise* is the thought, is it not?
J.T. Yes, that is what I understand.
G.A.T. I am not clear about the expression the Lord used to Peter: "upon this rock I will build my church" (@Matthew 16:18). Is that the same foundation we read about in verse 20, where it is built on the foundation of the apostles and prophets?
J.T. In @1 Corinthians 3:11 Paul says, "Other foundation can no man lay besides that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ". The foundation of the apostles and prophets refers to their testimony. At Ephesus the corner-stone is made prominent. No doubt it binds the whole structure, but there is the idea of ornament in it. The beauty and symmetry of the building are in view in Ephesus, whereas it is more the elementary side in Corinth; the foundation side only. But the *general* truth as to the foundation is what is presented in Matthew; "On this rock I will build my assembly". That is the confession of Peter that He was the Son of the living God.
J.B. That was built in Peter's soul.
{399}
WORSHIP
@1 Peter 2:1 - 10; @Hebrews 10:19 - 25
R.S.S. Something was said yesterday that struck me very much; that it does not say God was seeking *worship*; that would be too abstract. It is God seeking *worshippers*, the individuals, and I think we every one would wish to be found responding to God's desire; we have had that in mind in our meetings, that God might get His end in connection with us.
J.T. That really leads us on in the types as far as Leviticus, in which book God speaks *out of the tabernacle*.
R.S.S. Quite so; the book of Leviticus begins that way.
J.T. The book of Exodus shows that which was pleasing to God. It says they brought their work to Moses in @Exodus 39:42,43. "According to all that the Lord commanded Moses, so the children of Israel made all the work, and Moses did look upon all the work and behold they had done it as the Lord had commanded; even so had they done it, and Moses blessed them". All the parts of the tabernacle are brought as completed, and it is said they were made as the Lord commanded Moses. They are brought to Moses, as if to be passed upon, and Moses blessed them. That is, he blessed the people. In the next chapter they are all put together; then it says in verse 9: "Thou shalt take the anointing oil and anoint the tabernacle, and all that is therein, and shalt hallow it, and all the vessels thereof; and it shall be holy. And thou shalt anoint the altar of the burnt-offerings, and all his vessels, and sanctify the altar; and it shall be an altar most holy. And thou shalt anoint the laver and his foot, and sanctify it. And thou shalt bring
{400}
Aaron and his sons unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and wash them with water. And thou shalt put upon Aaron the holy garments, and anoint him, and sanctify him; that he may minister unto me in the priest's office. And thou shalt bring his sons, and clothe them with coats; and thou shalt anoint them, as thou didst anoint their father, that they may minister unto me in the priest's office; for their anointing shall surely be an everlasting priesthood throughout their generations. Thus did Moses; according to all that the Lord commanded him, so did he".
Then it says further, Moses having set up and anointed everything; "Then a cloud covered the tent of the congregation, and the glory of the Lord filled the tabernacle. And Moses was not able to enter into the tent of the congregation, because the cloud abode thereon, and the glory of the Lord filled the tabernacle". Now there you have the dwelling presented as wholly pleasing to God. Moses had anointed every part of it with the holy oil. The oil did not represent God dwelling. It rather represented God's approval of the work. It was anointed, but then the glory entering in is typical of the divine dwelling; that God had come in Himself, so that the whole tabernacle was filled. There was nothing there undesirable to God; nothing to cause Him displeasure; He is complacent in all.
Now the book of Leviticus opens with God speaking out of that. It says, "The Lord called unto Moses and spake unto him out of the tabernacle of the congregation". It is not out of the tabernacle of *witness*, but out of the tabernacle of the *congregation*. That is to say, that in which He is to meet His people. So that Leviticus stands on that ground, and I think the passage we read in Peter is a direct allusion to Leviticus, only that Peter is insisting that things are to be *spiritual*, so he says, "yourselves also as
{401}
living stones are being built up a *spiritual* house, a holy priesthood, to offer *spiritual* sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ".
R.S.S. In Leviticus it was a material building, and they offered up material sacrifices, but in Peter it is a spiritual building and spiritual sacrifices.
J.T. Yes, I thought that would help to make clear what you said as to worship in @John 4. God is a Spirit, and they that worship Him must worship Him in spirit and truth.
R.S.S. That sets aside everything that is material.
J.T. So in the passage in Peter we are on spiritual ground, from which we may proceed. Things are entirely spiritual now. We do not get, I apprehend in @1 Peter 2, as far as the holy place, or the holiest. We do not get beyond the court; but even what was in the court represented what was spiritual; spiritual sacrifices.
R.S.S. You said something as to this scripture in Peter and the end of @Ephesians 2. Would you repeat it?
J.T. I think the reference here does not go beyond the thought that the house is spiritual. It is a spiritual house, without saying that it was the house of God. I think the point is to emphasise that it is spiritual. The apostle was writing to the Jews of the dispersion, and it was well to lead them on to spiritual lines, because they were accustomed to material things.
R.S.S. They were not the losers by not being at Jerusalem.
J.T. They were to have a new inheritance, unfading and undefiled. They were a spiritual house, a holy priesthood; so they had lost nothing.
W.B. Would not the holy priesthood take them beyond the court?
J.T. The *service* referred to does not go beyond the court, because it refers really to the opening
{402}
chapters of Leviticus. The sacrifices were all offered in the court.
A.F.M. What are they in Christianity? What is the antitype of those sacrifices?
J.T. Anything that is given up, having God in view, is a spiritual sacrifice. In your mind you are not thinking of the value of the thing materially, but you have a spiritual thought in the gift.
A.F.M. Of course, those sacrifices stood for Christ very distinctly.
J.T. Oh, they did, but I think the point Peter has in his mind is that things are to be spiritual. No matter what it is that you offer as a gift in regard to God, the thought behind it is that it is spiritual, although it may be material help; "with such sacrifices God is well pleased". He is not pleased with the material things, but with the motive behind the gift; that which is surrender on your part. We know "the cattle upon a thousand hills" (@Psalm 50:10) are His, and the material thing itself is not what ministers pleasure to God. It is the motive that underlies it.
W.B. I suppose we get an illustration of that in @Luke 20, in the two mites offered by the widow.
J.T. She was spiritual; she was a priest according to Peter's way of looking at it; she was an offerer; she belonged to the holy priesthood.
W.B. @Hebrews 10 would go further than Peter goes. It speaks of the holiest.
J.T. That is the reason I suggested it. It leads us further on. It is most important that we should begin on spiritual lines, but Peter does not, as far as the sacrifice is concerned, go beyond the court. But even there it is spiritual. What we might think a trivial thing is spiritual in God's eye.
B.T.F. Material things would have a spiritual end in view, if properly offered, would they not?
J.T. That is the point. It is the motive that prompts the gift that God takes account of. So he
{403}
says, "If thou bring thy gift to the altar and there rememberest that thy brother hath ought against thee" (@Matthew 5:23). Now the gift is to be left at the altar. But supposing you do not go back and be reconciled to your brother, the gift loses its value; not its material value, of course, but its spiritual value. It is all a question of the way things are done, what motive is behind them.
G.A.T. It takes a spiritual man to lay aside the things mentioned in the first part of this chapter.
J.T. A spiritual man would be marked by laying aside those things.
W.B. The great thing is being acceptable to God; how He approves of it.
J.T. That is the point; it is to be a spiritual sacrifice. If it is not spiritual, it is not acceptable to God. God is a Spirit. He is not occupied with what is material, because we know that what is material will pass away. What He is occupied with is what is spiritual. Hence, one is tested in giving, because sacrifice is something you give up on account of God. Therefore, you are tested as to the motive behind the giving.
A.F.M. Has not this scripture a collective view? It says, "to whom coming as unto a living stone, ... *ye* also as lively stones are built up a spiritual house". I wondered how you connected that with individual sacrifice.
J.T. It is general. It must take form individually. I am speaking now of the sacrifices. In Leviticus it is any one coming up with an offering.
W.B. In @Hebrews 10 it seems to go no further than the entering, "Having boldness to enter".
J.T. What occurs after that is not stated in Hebrews.
W.B. Where do you get that now?
J.T. I do not know where you get a concrete presentation of worship. One takes the Psalms as
{404}
an example of worship. What you find at the end of each book is the outgoings of the heart of the psalmist God-ward. The Psalms are well illustrated in @Psalm 18, as compared with @2 Samuel 22. It is almost an exact reproduction of David's song after God had delivered him from the hands of Saul and from the hands of his adversaries; but observe that @Psalm 18 begins with, "I will love thee, O Jehovah, my strength"; while @2 Samuel 22 begins, "The Lord is my rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer". I wanted to point out that when he writes the song it is the celebration of his deliverance, but in inserting it in the book of Psalms, he begins it with the verse quoted, showing he had profited by the experience, and that he not only enjoyed the deliverance, but was now thinking of the Deliverer. So he begins by saying, "I will love thee, O Jehovah, my strength". That was the great result of the deliverance. He had found salvation, but now is thinking of the Saviour, and he was going to love Him. That is the result of salvation, corresponding in a way with the chapter in Peter, that one may grow up unto salvation, and then you go on to the Lord, "to whom coming". The psalmist had Jehovah before him, and in the end of each of the books it will be observed that he breaks out in a doxology, "Blessed be the Lord God of Israel from everlasting to everlasting". Now, I think that is what God is seeking to bring about in His people through all the experiences we go through; that He should be before us, and the heart at every opportunity should go out to God. We have it also in Paul, who is, I suppose, the great psalmist of Christianity. Take, for instance, the end of @Romans 11.
W.B. @Romans 9:4,5, too; "who are Israelites, to whom pertaineth the adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and the giving of the law, and the service of God, and the promises;
{405}
whose are the fathers, and of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came, who is over all, God blessed for ever. Amen".
J.T. Yes, that is one of them, and in the end of chapter 11 is another; "O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! For who hath known the mind of the Lord? or who hath been his counsellor? Or who hath first given to him and it shall be recompensed unto him again? For of him, and through him, and to him, are all things; to whom be glory for ever. Amen". These are the outgoings of a heart affected by the truth he has been dealing with, and in chapter 16:25 - 27 he says, "Now to him that is able to establish you, according to my glad tidings and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the mystery, as to which silence has been kept in the times of the ages, but which has now been made manifest, and by prophetic scriptures, according to commandment of the eternal God, made known for obedience of faith to all the nations -- the only wise God, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever. Amen". That is what I understand to be worship.
W.B. Do you get an instance of worship in the case of the ten lepers? There were ten got blessing, but only one returned to give glory to God. That is, he prostrates himself before the Lord. Of those in Christendom who receive good and deliverance in a sense, only about one-tenth of the number come out in thus way.
J.T. Then the man in @John 9 is a very notable illustration of it. He illustrates the "works of God". He was not blind because of his sin nor because his parents sinned, but that the works of God might be manifested in him. In the manifestation of the works of God he worshipped the Lord.
{406}
B.T.F. So worship could be spoken of as priestly, or is it the outflow of a heart in the knowledge of relationship in the full sense of the term?
J.T. It is both. But, of course, all the redeemed will be in some sense related to God as Father, for, all the families which are in the heavens and on earth are named of the Father. There are, therefore, degrees, so that the assembly is that to which the Father's name has been declared. "I have declared unto them thy name, and will declare it" (@John 17:26). The assembly has a special knowledge, a special declaration of the Father. Now the standard of the assembly's worship is according to that revelation. Therefore, the worship of the assembly must necessarily be of a higher order than that of any other family.
A.F.M. Is collective worship rendered to Christ?
J.T. It is surely. He is worthy of our homage.
Rem. I thought it is the Father we worship?
J.T. It is; but the question is raised as to whether the Lord receives it, and He does. The book of Revelation abounds with instances of worship to Him. The elders and the living creatures worship. They give a reason for it. That is a very important thing; that you are able to give a reason for your worship. "The Father seeketh such to worship him" (@John 4:23); the One of whom it is said: "Of him, and through him, and to him are all things". Although having part in the Godhead, the Lord has, become Man to bring it all about, but @1 Corinthians 15 shows that God is the ultimate object for everything. God is to be all in all.
R.S.S. And is it not true, as a general principle, that one divine Person speaks not so much of Himself as of Another? That is, when the Spirit came He was not to speak from Himself, but it was of the Lord and His things; and the Father constantly draws attention to the Son, and the Son constantly draws attention to the Father.
{407}
J.T. The apostle Paul makes very clear the Christian's relationship with God and with Christ. "There is one God, the Father", he says, "of whom all things, and we for him" (@1 Corinthians 8:6). Now that is a clear presentation of our position in regard to God the Father. We are *for* Him. Then the next statement is "One Lord, Jesus Christ, by whom are all things". He has effected everything, "and we by him"; not for Him, but *by* Him. I think that makes the position clear as regards God as an object of veneration and worship, and our relative relationships to Him and to the Son.
B.T.F. You would say that David's worship was measured by the knowledge he had of God as Jehovah, but New Testament worship would be in the sense that we are brought into the relationship of sons with the Father?
J.T. Oh, quite, but still the idea of a psalm remains in Christianity, and the idea of a hymn. A psalm is what one has been through experimentally, but a hymn is more objective. In it God is more definitely before the soul.
W.C.R. What is a spiritual song, then?
J.T. I think the emphasis is on the word *spiritual*, because there are a great number of different kinds of songs; religious songs, a number that sound very nice, especially to music, and we like to play and sing to the music, but the question is whether they are spiritual. It is quite right to have the outgoing of one's heart if you have time and have nothing else to do. It says: "Speaking to yourselves" (@Ephesians 5:19). That is, you can join in that which is in the song, but the thing to be sure about is, that what you are singing is spiritual, because God has no part in it if it is not, and you do not want to sing anything God cannot have part in. So with the songs of Zion. The songs of Zion were spiritual songs, and they could not be sung in a strange land.
{408}
B.T.F. Every believer should have his own peculiar psalm. That is, the experience he has passed through with God remains with him ever, and forms a theme of thanksgiving.
R.S.S. And that might come out in what we speak of often as prayer. I mean addressing God; not asking Him for anything, but rather expressing what our brother has just said.
J.T. Hannah's prayer, for instance. It is formally called a prayer but there is nothing asked for at all. It is really a song, the outgoing of her heart in the sense of God's deliverance.
W.C.R. And you get songs in connection with Zechariah, do you not, and Mary?
J.B. Many of the psalms are expressed in Christ Himself.
J.T. They are; they rise to that at times.
G.W.H. Worship of the assembly proper is more from the knowledge of divine Persons than from divine intervention.
J.T. It is; you have God before you. As I said, @2 Samuel 22 is a celebration of God's deliverance, but you see David is "the sweet psalmist of Israel", which refers to what God had in the Psalms. @2 Samuel 22 refers to David's deliverance, but @Psalm 18 was in relation to the temple service. In the latter we have love for Jehovah. That was Jehovah's portion. David is called a man of God, as having ordered the service of the house of God. The Levites really had very little, you might say, to do from the days of Moses until the days of David. David gave them employment, and the employment was to serve Jehovah in song in the temple, but he gave them the songs and the psalms; he gave them the means by which God was to be ministered to in the temple. So that God regards David in a peculiar light in that way, inasmuch as he set up the service. We know Christ has inaugurated the service of God; it is He
{409}
who is the psalmist of Israel, and God loves the praise of His people. He speaks of God as He who inhabits the praises of Israel, so David was figurative of Christ in bringing in the Psalms; that in which God lived and delighted.
W.C.R. And the Lord said; "in the midst of the assembly will I sing thy praises" (@Hebrews 2:12). What would that be?
J.T. It answers to David. Christ is the Chief Singer. On the cross, @Psalm 22, He speaks of God inhabiting the praises of Israel, but as the Lord rises from the dead it is the congregation. "In the midst of the congregation will I praise thee" (verse 22). He would praise God. He had inhabited the praises of Israel, but there would be a new service inaugurated when the Lord arose from the dead.
W.C.R. The theme was the Father's name.
J.T. That emphasises the remarks just made. "I will declare thy name unto my brethren". The praise would be according to the revelation; not now of Israel but of the brethren. "In the midst of the congregation I will praise thee".
W.H.F. Is it correct to say He leads the praise of His people?
J.T. I should say He sings through our hearts. He touches our hearts.
H.G. Does a psalmist indite the psalm and then lead in singing it?
J.T. That is the idea, I think. David delivered his first psalm after the ark was brought into Zion, and it was a celebration of God's mercy; God had recovered things on the ground of sovereign mercy. "My heart is inditing a good matter; I speak of the things which I have made touching the King; my tongue is the pen of a ready writer. Thou art fairer than the children of men; grace is poured into thy lips; therefore God hath blessed thee for ever" (@Psalm 45:1,2) That is the idea of a psalm.
{410}
H.G. Hence the importance of being distinctly under the Head in that way. I was thinking of the Lord's supper, which brings Christ in as Head in that sense. He takes charge of the whole situation and everything is spiritual then.
J.T. Sometimes the headings of the Psalms refer to David's care as to the music; that the melody should be right. "To the chief Musician". It is repeatedly found. The chief Musician understood the music. You have not only right words, but right music spiritually.
R.S.S. What does "speaking to yourselves in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs" (@Ephesians 5:19) mean?
J.T. I think that passage is most helpful as to what we have before us, as showing the continuous state of soul suggested as proper to Christianity. That, whilst there is teaching and mutual encouragement, melody to the Lord and thanksgiving to the Father are ever present in the heart; "giving thanks at all times for all things to him who is God and the Father" (verse 20). You see the element of worship there. It is not so periodical as one might think. It is an ever present thing in the heart of the spiritual. Divine Persons are ever referred to.
R.S.S. That expresses what was in our minds in connection with our meetings; that, not only might the saints get encouragement, blessing and refreshment by being here, but, as you were saying, the Lord might receive something, and above all that God the Father might receive something.
H.G. Do you distinguish between praise and worship?
J.T. It is not easy to distinguish. It seems to me that any outgoing of the heart Godward in the sense of praise must be included in worship. There may be degrees in it, and I suppose the highest thought of worship is that one is lost as to oneself
{411}
and one's benefits even; one is entirely taken up with God, the Father. You are entirely taken up in your intelligence and affections with God revealed in Christ. That I suppose would be the highest thought, so that Paul said: "whether we are beside ourselves it is to God" (@2 Corinthians 5:13). God revealed in Christ so commanded his affections and intelligence that he was utterly lost to himself and the benefits that had come to him through Christ. He was beside himself to God.
G.W.H. In @John 12 Lazarus says nothing.
H.G. David sat before the Lord. There was silence in both cases.
J.T. Will you enlarge on that a little?
H.G. Of course he afterwards expresses himself. I was simply thinking in regard to the highest form of worship that possibly it is inexpressible; whereas praise and thanks to God can be expressed.
R.S.S. In connection with what our brother was saying as to the difference between praise and worship, is not praise more in connection with what God has done, but worship in connection with what God *is*; the apprehension in your soul of what God is? It is Himself. It is far beyond anything He has done. What God is lies behind everything that He has done, and you have a sense in your soul that He is the spring and source of all blessing.
J.D. It would be indicated in the two lines of a hymn we sometimes sing: "The Father's love, the source of all, Sweeter than all it gives" (`26:5). Do you find it difficult to express the thought of worship?
J.T. I think the highest form of it is in silence. I do not suppose the apostle would be speaking when he was beside himself. It would be a state of attraction in which he would be with God. "Whether we are beside ourselves it is to God". When he returned to his sober calculations he would no doubt speak to
{412}
the Corinthians, but I do not apprehend he would speak when he was beside himself.
W.C.R. When he said: "Whether in the body I cannot tell, or whether out of the body I cannot tell" (@2 Corinthians 12:2), would that allude to it too?
J.T. I think it would allude to a similar state. If one is beside oneself one is unconscious of material things and conditions. When beside yourself you are governed by other laws.
A.F.M. What connection has what you have been speaking of just now in regard to psalms, hymns and spiritual songs with the holiest in @Hebrews 10?
J.T. I think the holiest is an individual matter, enabling you to regulate your psalm and your hymn and your spiritual song. I apprehend the holiest is that by which one learns how to do things; how to be before God; that you are there in a suitable manner.
E.H.T. Do you learn the ways of God in the sanctuary?
J.T. Yes, you learn how to be before God rightly. I understand the holiest qualifies us for the assembly.
G.A.T. That is where you learn the end of the first man.
J.T. Yes, you learn it by seeing the perfect Man in Christ. You learn to disallow what is imperfect by beholding what is perfect. You have the perfect idea.
J.S. You were saying yesterday that some learn from the experience and exercise of others. Is there not the same danger in the hymns we have to use; that a hymn may be given out not in keeping with the occasion, putting the whole company out of gear?
J.T. I think that is right. Therefore entering into the holiest is very much parallel to @1 Corinthians 14, which teaches you that you are to use your intelligence, your "understanding". Spiritual understanding
{413}
is acquired in the holiest. It is by going in there that you get a spiritual understanding. "Then *understood* I their end" (@Psalm 73:17). @1 Corinthians 14 shows that you are governed by your understanding; you *know* what to do; so that if you have a psalm you know where to set it; you know just where it fits. If another has a psalm you do not put it in his place. So it says; "when ye come together each one of you hath a psalm" (verse 26). You are supposed to have one.
R.S.S. Does that refer to your own spiritual devotions?
J.T. Yes, what you have acquired with God in your daily exercise. "What is it then, brethren? whenever ye come together, each of you has a psalm". What are you going to do with your psalm? It is supposed you have one. One thing that is very objectionable in the assembly is crowding. It is said here; "each of you has a psalm, has a teaching, has a tongue, has a revelation, has an interpretation". There is a variety of things. The point is to regulate these things so that there may be no crowding; that the right psalm is presented at the right time. Now I apprehend that the understanding which governs all is acquired in the holiest. You will notice in the passage you read in @Hebrews 10, that the idea of assembling comes in after the holiest "not forsaking the assembling of yourselves together". At Corinth they did not forsake that. In fact they came together for the worse sometimes, because they were not regulated. So going into the holiest enables you to be there for good and for edification. Therefore, if you have a psalm you are not to crowd it in. You are to wait. That is a great feature of the assembly; that we are to wait on one another.
J.D. What do you mean by going into the holiest? How do we go in practically? I think it would help if you would say something about going in.
J.T. It is, in a simple way, being enabled by the
{414}
moral power you have in your soul to dismiss the things that are material, and take up the things of God, and quietly meditate on the revelation of God in Christ, *and on Christ as before God*; the order of man that is before God. You contemplate that. We are apt to be legal about it. You might do it in reading the Scriptures, or it might come in prayer at any time. The thought comes into your heart as to what God is and what Christ is before God. The effect becomes power in your soul, and the next time you have to do with the brethren, with ministry, you are helped by it.
J.D. The holiest then is a Person rather than a place?
J.T. It is what Christ is before God. It is so difficult for us to get rid of what is material; the idea of a material place, whereas Peter is endeavouring to help the saints by using the word *spiritual*; "spiritual house" and "spiritual sacrifices". The holiest is a spiritual thought.
G.A.T. @Psalm 73 shows how it affects a man to enter there. When he comes out he says: "Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire beside thee".
Rem. You lose there for a moment the sense of time and scenes around you.
W.H.F. We reach the millennium in a way there.
J.T. And I am afraid we are apt to be legal about it. The holiest is often reached in reading the Word and pondering on how the Lord did things, and what He is.
W.H.F. There is a lot of danger of our having in our minds a place; it is Christ Himself really.
J.T. When He expounded unto them in all the Scriptures the things concerning Himself, there was the idea of the holiest.
H.G. Mary at the feet of Jesus in @Luke 10 was there.
{415}
J.D. There is a thought that it is the advanced brothers that go there, but I feel what you say about its being open to all. The blood of Christ gives title to go there, and it belongs to the weakest believer in Christ.
W.C.R. In your address last night you spoke about three mountains, the latter being the mountain of contemplation. I thought at the time you perhaps alluded to the holiest.
J.T. I did; it is really for contemplation.
L.M. What do you understand by boldness?
J.T. Full liberty. The blood of Christ has settled everything. There are certain things said: "Having therefore, brethren, boldness for entering into the holy of holies by the blood of Jesus, ... let us approach with a true heart". Everything is finished. The word *having* is a great word there. You *have* the necessary things.
Ques. Must there be a company for worship?
J.T. I think not. The man in @John 9 did homage individually. The things we have in @Hebrews 10 are for every believer. We have the new and living way and the great Priest over the house of God. It is in having these things we have liberty to enter. It is well to note, however, that the *Father* seeks *worshippers* (@John 4).
R.S.S. Where does priesthood come in in connection with what we were speaking of?
J.T. I suppose as having to do with God we are all priests. Even in the court we are regarded as priests; a royal priesthood.
R.S.S. But are we there in company with our great Priest, with Aaron, so to speak?
J.T. Perhaps so. Hebrews does not connect priesthood with the saints. I think we are priests necessarily, as entering; because none but priests could enter according to the type. The contrast is between Aaron and us (@Hebrews 9:7,8). Even Aaron
{416}
did not have liberty. He could only go there once a year. "The Holy Spirit showing this, that the way of the holy of holies has not yet been made manifest while as yet the first tabernacle has its standing". Even Aaron did not have liberty.
R.S.S. But then it says: "And having a great Priest over the house of God, let us approach".
J.T. I think in drawing near, entering the holiest, we certainly are priests. We could not enter otherwise, although it is not so stated.
R.S.S. But is it not in the consciousness that we are, so to speak, anointed, and that we come in under the shadow of our High Priest?
J.T. Only here it is over the house of God He is said to be Priest. The house of God takes the place of the tabernacle in Hebrews.
R.S.S. And what does that embrace?
J.T. All Christians. "Whose house are we" (@Hebrews 3:6). We are God's house, so that in that way the idea of true worship is very intimately connected with the idea of the house.
G.A.T. I thought in connection with true worship we come as sons. He takes His place as Son and we with Him in the Father's presence, and there the true worship flows out.
J.T. There can be no doubt about that, but it is not Hebrews. Hebrews does not go beyond title to enter. What takes place when you enter is not made clear. *It is more to realise than describe*. Like many other things, it has to be discovered in one's soul.
B.T.F. Is your thought in saying that Christians are not said to be priests in Hebrews that the Priest is Christ?
J.T. Yes. The saints were low down, and needed the sympathy and succour of Christ in order to enter. We have a great Priest over the house of God. In Hebrews the emphasis is on the High Priest.
{417}
B.T.F. But then other Scriptures indicate that believers are priests; (@1 Peter 2).
J.T. And as we were saying, we could not enter the holiest unless as priests.
W.C.R. I am not quite clear that worship is not a collective thought. It says, "we both have access by one Spirit unto the Father".
J.T. I should not say that it is not, but neither would I say that an individual could not worship God. I am quite sure that the Father is not seeking a worshipper. It does not say that. He is seeking worshippers. @Revelation 11:1 says, "measure the temple of God, and the altar, and them that worship in it". We are measured in that light, as worshippers. In regard to entering the holiest, it is not so far away as people sometimes think, nor are there so few that enter as we think. You can tell by the way a brother speaks to the Lord, by the manner of his ministry, by the hymns he gives out, when he gives it out, by his remarks on the things of God, and by other things, whether a man has entered the holiest.
A.F.M. Do you qualify for this by means of the court and the holy place? Is not there a gradual entering into it?
J.T. Quite so. One begins by sacrifice. There is no possibility of going into the holiest without sacrifice. If your will is not accustomed to surrender you have not qualified for the court even, but if you qualify for the court in the way of spiritual sacrifices; that is, by surrender, then you come to prayer, because if you give up something the soul turns to God and you get recompense. That is the holy place. But the holiest is not sacrifice, nor is it prayer. It is what God is as revealed in Christ, and what Christ is before God. That is what the holiest is.
W.C.R. And would you not say the way a man discerns and judges of things outside exposes whether
{418}
he has ever been in or not? "Then understood I their end", says the psalmist (@Psalm 73:17).
J.T. That is another test. One would not like to lower the standard and make it too common, but I think it is well to be simple and encourage one another. There is more evidence of this in a practical way than we give credit for.
B.T.F. Did not Mary get there in a simple way? She sat at the Lord's feet.
J.T. And so the circle in the end of @Mark 3. The crowd was more or less in the way until then. I was referring to the idea of a crowd. We must not crowd things in the assembly. The crowd are not opposed, but they may hinder, nevertheless. They pressed around the door, but in the end of @Mark 3 it says the crowd were sitting around the Lord. They are not called disciples. They are simply the crowd, but they have come to sit. That is the point. They have come to sit down and listen to Christ. One has often seen that in the meetings. There is a crowd, but presently there is a subduing effect because of the presence of the Lord, and instead of activity there is quietness and subjection. That is the effect of the presence of the Lord.
Now His mother and His brethren came at this juncture and they stood without, it says, asking that He should go out to them. But He was inside speaking and the crowd was listening; sitting down and listening. A great change had come over the crowd. The effect of the Lord's ministry had brought about subjection, quietness, and attention, and so the Lord said: "Who is my mother or my brethren?" He looked around in the circuit on those sitting around Him, and said: "Behold my mother and my brethren; for whosoever shall do the will of God, he is my brother and sister and mother" (verses 33 - 35). They were doing the will of God. They were regarded as the
{419}
brethren of the Lord. In a way they were in the holiest. They had profited by it. I mention all this because I think it is encouraging to young Christians to make clear that the privileges of the holiest belong to all. If you are subdued and learn to listen in the assembly, and appreciate Christ as He is before God, that is an indication that you have reached the holiest.
{420}
THE LORD'S SUPPER
@1 Corinthians 11:17 - 34
W.B. What place has the Lord's supper in connection with coming together? I notice in this Scripture that the expression "When ye come together" is prominent. Do we come together to eat the Lord's supper?
J.T. The expression: "come together in assembly", appears here. It is a significant expression, showing that in the instruction given by Paul, the Supper had been entirely limited to the assembly. It was not breaking bread "in the house" any more, as they did earlier.
W.B. As seen in @Acts 2, do you mean?
J.T. Yes, before the temple was formally disowned, the breaking of bread was not, as you might say, so ecclesiastical. They were breaking bread in the houses, and at the same time participating in that which went on in the temple. But after the judgment of that system by God, Paul's ministry implies that the Supper henceforth must be connected with the assembly. So that to connect it with anything else now, with any sect, whatever it may be, you would simply say, it is not the Lord's supper. The question is often raised as to whether these denominations really do partake of the Supper. This Scripture would show that, whatever it may be, what they have is not the Lord's supper. The Lord's supper must be connected with the assembly; and notice the first statement is not simply that the saints are together in one place, but they are together "in assembly".
W.B. This is quite distinct from what goes before. I mean we get to another section in verse 17.
J.T. In this verse the apostle speaks of something he is going to prescribe, in regard to which he could
{421}
not praise the Corinthians, because they were at fault as to it, and he points out that they were accustomed to come together for the worse; and then he says, "for first, when ye come together in assembly, I hear there exist divisions among you, and I partly give credit to it. For there must also be sects among you, that the approved may become manifest among you. When ye come therefore together into one place, it is not to eat the Lord's supper". That is the *condemnation of all sectarianism*. You cannot connect the Supper with a sect.
R.S.S. It is rather remarkable that the only mention of the Lord's supper is not what it is, but what it is not. As far as I know, this is the only place where the expression is used. It might, I think, well exercise us in regard to what you were just saying, that there is so much passed as the Lord's supper in the world today which is not it.
J.T. The statement, therefore, covers a good deal in that way. It is a condemnation of all sectarianism, and a shattering of all pretension on the part of sects. Whatever they may have, this is what they have *not*. They have not the Lord's supper.
J.D. Why do you judge that the Supper is the property of the assembly?
J.T. Because he says: "When ye come together in assembly"; that is in verse 18; then he says in verse 20, "When ye come therefore together into one place, it is not to eat the Lord's supper". It is as if he would say, it ought to have been that, but the things that occurred precluded the idea of the Supper; they rendered it null and void. It was the normal thing, and according to @Acts 20, the disciples came together on the first day of the week to break bread, but at Corinth they had evidently lost sight of the light that Paul had communicated as to the Supper. This was no doubt largely through sectarianism springing up among them, so they had disqualified
{422}
themselves. When coming together it was for the worse. It could not have been for the worse if the Supper had been truly recognised.
Ques. Why is "the assembly" mentioned in one place, and "the assemblies" in another?
J.T. Of course there were assemblies. The point in verse 16 was that all were governed by the same principles. "When ye come together in assembly" in verse 18, the function of the assembly is in view; and then "into one place", verse 20, shows that the saints may be together in a given place, and not be in assembly. "In assembly" supposes that the saints are in function as the assembly. We were remarking as to Congress, taking the House of Representatives at Washington as an illustration. Strictly speaking, the Speaker has to be there if the House is to be in function. In the House of Commons the Speaker has to be there and the mace has to be on the table. Now you might get all the members in the House in "committee", in which they select a chairman of their own. When the House is in committee it has no legislative powers, although they are all there in the same place, but when they are all there with the Speaker and the mace they have legislative powers. That, I think, is what answers to coming together in assembly. We are qualified now for administration.
R.S.S. Would it be the same when we come together on Lord's day morning and break bread? You could speak of that as coming together in assembly character, but not when we are together for a Bible reading as we are now?
J.T. All the saints here this morning might be here now, but we are not in the same capacity. We were together in assembly; at least that is the light in which we came together in the morning, but not now.
{423}
W.C.R. Would it also suggest there is to be no independency?
J.T. No doubt it does. It surely is important that we should come to one place; but even coming together in one place, as we see here, might be for the worse; and, on the other hand, according to chapter 14, it might be simply for edification, for ministry.
R.S.S. For instance, when we come together "in assembly" we do not come together to speak to one another. We address God. What we are doing now would have been quite out of place this morning. I think anybody could understand the difference.
J.T. Yes, quite out of place, because "in assembly" the Lord receives His place and He directs there.
H.G. Is @Matthew 18:20, the assembly?
J.T. It is in the sense of legislation, I think. It is not the Supper, but it is a provision for a day of small things; that the principle of administration goes on although things might be greatly reduced in the assembly. That same chapter shows the place the assembly has in Matthew. It is the final appeal court. If one does not listen to it "Let him be unto thee as an heathen man and a publican". I think @Matthew 18:20 is a provision for our own day. The administration goes on in spite of the fact that there has been reduction, providing there are two or three gathered. "Where two or three *are gathered*".
A.B. Would @1 Corinthians 5:4 help us? "In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when ye are gathered together, and my spirit with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ".
J.T. I think @1 Corinthians 5 is for discipline. It is an assembly meeting that is in view, but it would be for discipline. I believe that for discipline the thing is to call the assembly together. The Supper is the rallying point, as has often been said, for the
{424}
*normal* assembly-gathering, but if evil exists, an alarm should be blown so that the saints should be gathered, and as gathered thus the assembly is in function, not now for privilege but for the execution of discipline (@Numbers 10).
A.F.M. It would be very unsuitable to call a meeting of that kind, or to use the Lord's day morning for a case of discipline.
J.T. Yes, I think the expression in @Matthew 18, "are gathered together in my name" is of great importance. The Lord's authority is implied. @Acts 20:7 refers to the normal assembling of the saints for the breaking of bread. It was on the first day of the week. There is a thought implied akin to the convening of Parliament, or the convening of Congress. The members do not go there on their own initiative. The President has to convene Congress.
J.D. Who is the President?
J.T. The Lord. It is the Lord that convenes. It is a very important point because it shuts out our wills. If it is the Supper, it is out of love we come. He has left it with us to do. "This do in remembrance of me". So it is more that *we* do it. The disciples came together to do it.
J.D. How would He bring about that gathering in @Matthew 18 today?
J.T. I think it arises from the exercises of "two" who would agree as touching anything. The conditions known to you would lead to exercise; certain conditions that had to be met in the way of administration, and you would be exercised about it, and another would be exercised about it; so that two of you would agree as regards that thing and what you ask is done unto you the Lord says, "of my Father which is in heaven". But then the way it is done largely is through those *gathered*. He has committed administration to the saints.
W.C.R. Would that not be levitical?
{425}
J.T. It amounts to that, I think. Those that are agreed about the thing are bearing the burden, and they pray about it; but then there is an additional provision that, as coming together, you have the *support of the Lord* in the deliberation and administration; and this applies to our own day, because it is brought down to two or three.
Ques. Is that true of every meeting?
J.T. Oh, no, it is a matter of burden. Just as Congress is called together to meet certain conditions. In every country there are certain requirements; certain things have to be met; and hence there is a call, a convening of those responsible. So the Lord brings us together in that way, and now, as together, He is with us; "there am I", He says, "in the midst of them".
J.D. In such a meeting as that would the Lord give His mind by impressions?
J.T. Yes, I think so. I think He confirms the exercises that you have had. One has often seen it; the saints have been exercised, and the brethren come together, and the Lord is there and He confirms their exercises. So the issue becomes clear, and what is to be done becomes clear.
A.F.M. How about a brothers¬ meeting in that connection?
J.T. It falls under that head very much, I think. It is a meeting of those who are burdened with the care of things.
E.H.T. Is a brothers¬ meeting right?
J.T. It is a meeting of those who have the care of things; those burdened with the things.
J.D. So you think in instituting the Supper the Lord had the worshipping company in view.
J.T. I do. I think the Supper leads to that.
G.A.T. I think you referred to the man with the pitcher of water; what had you in mind?
J.T. The man with the pitcher of water is to
{426}
guide you. You are guided by the refreshment of ministry. It is only lately one has had to do with people who had been turned aside from the truth, and the thought came before us that the food supply had been cut off. The Midianites had cut off the food supply in Gideon's day. Now souls experience that. The indication that things are right according to the Lord is that there is food. Many a soul has been guided aright by discovering that they were dwelling in "Lodebar", a place of no pasture, and finding that there was food elsewhere. The presence of food is an excellent indication of where God is.
W.B. That is illustrated in Naomi and Ruth. They heard there was food there and found Boaz.
W.C.R. Would you make it a little clearer about the lordly supper?
J.T. It shows the dignity of the Supper, that it is the Lord's supper. It is not one's own supper. There is a great difference between the two. If your own supper, you ought to eat that at home. All that side has reference to family relationships, and friendships. All that should be rigidly excluded from the assembly. Household affairs, natural relationships, friendships, must be recognised, but these things must have no place in the assembly. They belong to your own house.
W.C.R. You were saying this morning that we are very slow to change from what is material to what is spiritual.
J.T. I believe the Lord would help us on that line, and what I would suggest is that by looking into the gospels it will be found that although John does not mention the Supper formally, he gives us more that *appertains* to it than any of the evangelists do, because he gives us the *spirit* of things at the Supper.
J.D. Yes, I think so.
J.T. @John 13 is devoted to the spirit of things at the Supper, whereas the other evangelists give us
{427}
the Supper formally. They are all to be studied, but John most if we are to get the spirit of things that belong to the Supper.
J.D. That is, in John you are still holding on to the pitcher of water, but in connection with feet washing.
J.T. Quite, and he is engaged with the spirit of things; not with the outward symbols, because after all they are like the ark taken into the camp of Israel to combat the Philistines. If you have not the spirit of @John 13, the Supper is an empty symbol and really effects nothing.
J.D. That is saying a great deal.
J.T. I believe it is right.
B.T.F. Would you say the spirit of @John 13 commences at the opening; "having loved his own which were in the world, he loved them unto the end"?
J.T. That is the spirit underlying the Supper.
W.C.R. You were speaking about taking our own supper. There might be members of the family that had little differences and they would yet be able to take their own supper, but is there anything of that kind contemplated in the Lord's supper?
J.T. The Lord's supper certainly should tend to remove them from our hearts; the love expressed in @John 13 is intended to remove them.
J.D. Have you any thought as to what would help us to have a proper apprehension as to the sanctity of the Supper; why it stands connected with the assembly?
J.T. In the first place there is no circle with which the Lord could connect Himself save the assembly. If it is His Supper it would soon deteriorate in a man's house. It is quite true that the Lord blessed the house of Obed-edom on account of the ark, but anyone can see the house of Obed-edom could not perpetually be a suitable place for the ark.
{428}
The Supper might have been preserved in the early days of Christianity in houses, on account of the energy of the Spirit, but in the decline of things you could not guarantee much in a man's house.
G.A.T. Why do you object to breaking bread in a man's house now?
J.T. Because Paul communicates it to the assembly, and only supposes it in the assembly, and you could only have it preserved in the assembly. It would quickly deteriorate anywhere else.
W.C.R. Would it be wrong to have the assembly in a house in a small place?
J.T. It is more than once mentioned. Philemon had the assembly in his house, but although in his house, it is distinct from his house. I do not think Paul would ever think of the Supper in a man's house *as his house*.
R.S.S. That is only a question of the place really.
J.T. That is all.
G.A.T. A man should not take any special liberty in his house.
J.T. No, because it is a devoted thing. He has no more right to the devoted thing than anyone else. Otherwise it is not devoted.
H.G. There is a striking connection between the Supper and the rapture as to conditions required for both. You have *reconciliation-atmosphere*. It is the only atmosphere for the Supper, and for the rapture, as seen in Enoch; and then as regards the relationships and position into which you are led, the Father's house.
J.T. Those suggestions are very beautiful. The saints are never more pleasing to the Lord than at the Supper; nor are we ever more pleasing to the Father. I have often noticed as regards Enoch that it was before his translation he had the testimony that he pleased God, and the Supper brings that about. I believe the object in view in making the
{429}
Supper so prominent in these late years is to bring about a state that is pleasing to the Lord, and that the saints should be made conscious of it. I think we are made conscious of it by the fact that He comes to us. He makes us conscious that we please Him.
B.T.F. Would you say the difficulty at Corinth was that they did not discern the Lord's body? Was it not that which lay at the root of all their failure?
J.T. No doubt, and they despised the assembly of God. How serious that was! Sectarianism is a despisal of the assembly of God. To have cliques and parties is a despisal of the assembly of God. You may have certain circles, family relationships, and all that, in your own house. That is the place for them, but do not intrude them into the assembly of God, because the Lord is supreme there. It is His assembly and He must determine who is to be honoured there. You may honour a man in your own house. The Lord is to determine who is to be honoured in the house of God.
J.D. In the Supper, I think you said it was to give Him His place; to bring Him in. What for?
J.T. First of all, He desires to have a place in our affections. You see in the narrative given by Matthew it is simply: "This is my body" and as to the cup it is; "This is my blood of the new testament which is shed for many for the remission of sins"; *for many*. And so in Mark. But when you come to Luke, it is, "This is my body which is given for you". That is to say, for a certain class of people. His disciples. Matthew says "many" and Mark says "many" but Luke says "you". Therefore Luke has the assembly in view. The Supper denotes that Christ gave His body for *us*. Then also as regards the cup He says, "This cup is the new testament in my blood, which is shed for you". I think Matthew and Mark simply support the
{430}
ministry of the twelve, when the Supper was not as yet dissociated from the Jewish system. It is simply seen as associated with the passover in Matthew and Mark, but Luke disassociates it from the passover. It is a thing by itself, and it is formally stated by him that the body is "for you".
J.S. Would you say that in @John 20:20 we get the answer to that? "Then were the disciples glad".
J.T. He comes to us. I think it is realised there. It has often been remarked that @John 14 indicates the line. Verse 15 is, "If ye love me, keep my commandments. And I will beg the Father, and he will give you another Comforter; that he may be with you for ever, the Spirit of truth whom the world cannot receive, because it does not see him nor know him; but ye know him, for he abides with you, and shall be in you". Then He says, following upon that, "I will not leave you orphans, *I* am coming to you". That was enjoyed at the beginning. Failure is not contemplated. It goes on to say; "He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me; but he that loves me shall be loved by my Father, and I will love him and will manifest myself to him". This supposes that there were those who were not keeping His commandments, and the proof of love would be in anyone who *had them and kept them*, and He would manifest Himself to such an one as that. I believe the Supper would be suitable to one like that; or to two like that; or three, those who had the commandments, any number like that. It would not be just like "I will not leave you orphans, I am coming to you". This is the whole company at the beginning. And then the question is raised as to how He could manifest Himself to them and not unto the world, and the Lord says, "If any one love me, he will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and we will come to him and make our abode with him".
{431}
R.S.S. That is a further thought.
J.T. His commandments are specific things by which we are governed here, but His word is more. Those who love Him do not stop at the commandments. They want to know all that is in His heart. What is in His mind has been revealed, and so we are to keep His word; consequent on this He and the Father come.
G.A.T. What did you say the commandments were?
J.T. @1 Corinthians 14:37, says, "If any one thinks himself to be a prophet or spiritual, let him recognise the things that I write to you; that it is the Lord's commandment". It is, as it were, a fixed law by which the assembly is to be governed during the Lord's absence.
R.S.S. When it comes down to @John 14:23, there it says, "If any one love me, he will keep my words; and my Father will love him, and we will come to him, and make our abode with him". What does that refer to? Here it is both the Father and the Son, and They will come and make Their abode with you.
J.T. It seems a wonderful statement as regards an individual, but look at the kind of man he would be, the one who kept the commandments; the one who kept the words. I think it is a chapter that is intended to provide for conditions that would arise in the history of the assembly, so that even if you are reduced to yourself you are not at any loss. You have the greatest privilege the assembly could have, namely, the abiding of the Father and the Son. You can scarcely conceive of anything greater. It is the character of the thing. It says, "we will come to him and make our abode with him".
R.S.S. It is not just a visitation, it is more than that.
G.W.H. If according to our expectation He comes,
{432}
what should become us in that part of the meeting?
J.T. There is a change in the meeting, I am sure of that. We have had it so often, but still it seems we do not take it in. *He* does things. Read @Judges 6:19 - 21; "And Gideon went in, and made ready a kid, and unleavened cakes of an ephah of flour; the flesh he put in a basket, and he put the broth in a pot, and brought it out unto him under the oak, and presented it. And the angel of God said unto him, Take the flesh and the unleavened cakes, and lay them upon this rock, and pour out the broth. And he did so. Then the angel of the Lord put forth the end of the staff that was in his hand, and touched the flesh and the unleavened cakes; and there rose up fire out of the rock, and consumed the flesh, and the unleavened cakes. Then the angel of the Lord departed out of his sight".
I have turned to that because it gives you what*Gideon* did and what the *angel* did. Now what the angel did corresponds with what the Lord does in the midst of the assembly. What we do is to celebrate the Supper. That was what Gideon did, as it were. He brought in certain things which were quite suitable. He acted intelligently. Now the angel acts from himself in regard to what Gideon did, changing the whole scene. That is an illustration, as far as I understand it, of what the Lord does in the assembly. What the angel did affected Gideon, and so what the Lord does in the assembly makes its impression on us. That is the point to get hold of.
R.S.S. What the Lord does is of quite a different character from what we do.
J.T. John is the one that knew the Lord. He said "It is the Lord" (@John 21:7). That is what the spiritual man recognises. Gideon recognised that it was an angel of the Lord; we recognise that "It is the Lord".
W.C.R. You recognise when the Lord affects a brother.
{433}
J.T. You are not thinking of the brother. It is what the Lord is doing you think of.
B.T.F. "In the midst of the church will I sing praise unto thee" (@Hebrews 2:12). Is your thought that praise goes up through the saints?
J.T. Yes. The Son thinks of the Father. Now if He is acting in the assembly it is toward the Father. He acts in that connection. He knows what the Father seeks. He said to the woman of Samaria, "God is a Spirit" (@John 4:24). It is remarkable that He should have said that to her.
R.S.S. I have often wondered why.
J.T. I think to set aside all material worship; to set aside the prejudices as to what they had in mount Gerizim and what was at Jerusalem. God, as a Spirit, could not be connected with either of these mounts. Things must be spiritual, so He says, "The Father seeketh *such*". "They who worship him must worship (Him) in spirit and truth". He seeketh such as His worshippers. I think that in the assembly the Lord has brought in the worshippers. As I was saying yesterday, "One Lord, Jesus Christ, by whom are all things and we by him" (@1 Corinthians 8:6). We are *by* Him. He has brought us in in that way before the Father.
G.A.T. The Lord says, "In the midst of the assembly will I sing". I think you made a remark once that He sings through the hearts of the saints.
J.B. In @Habakkuk 3:19 it says: "To the chief singer upon my stringed instruments". As though He is the One that plays upon our hearts.
J.D. Is your thought that the Supper gives Him the place of Head consciously among the saints?
J.T. That is what I understand, and now He plays on His own stringed instruments, as our brother was remarking.
J.D. I want to get your thought about Jacob
{434}
being the best type of a worshipping man in the Old Testament.
J.T. It is very remarkable that he should be the one selected by the Spirit in @Hebrews 11 as the worshipper. "By faith, Jacob when he was a dying, blessed both the sons of Joseph; and worshipped, leaning upon the top of his staff" (verse 21). That is what is said of him. It is a very beautiful ending of a course such as his. We were remarking at the close of our meeting yesterday that the moral reason for the house of God being connected with Jacob lies in the fact that he knew how to live at home. Abraham taught him how to live at home. We are told; "By faith he ... having dwelt in tents with Isaac and Jacob, the heirs with him of the same promise" (@Hebrews 11:9). That is, he lived with his child and his grandchild in the light of God's purpose, and he lived with them according to that. He lived with them in tents, as a stranger and sojourner. That was Abraham's side, and it was in keeping with what the Lord said of him; "that he will command his children and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord and do justice and judgment, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which He hath spoken of him" (@Genesis 18:19). He had God's end in view. Jacob profited by the example of his grandfather, because it is said of him, in contrast with Esau, that he was a plain man, of no outward consequence or lordliness. He was a plain man and dwelt in tents. Therefore I think he is morally qualified to receive the light of the house of God. The idea of living at home and respecting a father's instruction and example is according to God. God honours that, and it leads into the house of God. So that the house of God stands related to Jacob and to his offering, the drink-offering, the oil, and the worship. He was a worshipper.
J.B. He had reached the top.
J.T. I think he reached the highest point in faith
{435}
in a way; yet that same man had to say, "Few and evil have the days of the years of my life been, and have not attained unto the days of the years of the life of my fathers in the days of their pilgrimage" (@Genesis 47:9). Still it was a pilgrimage on the whole and God gave him a desired end. If Abraham had seen that end he would have rejoiced. He would have thought that the example he set Jacob had been successful.
Ques. Is that Scripture used to indicate that an individual can worship?
J.T. Surely. As regards Jacob, it is very remarkable how fully he justified Abraham. Although a homely man, yet he was not blinded by natural affection like Isaac. Isaac was blinded but Jacob crossed his hands, it says, "wittingly" (chapter 48:14). He disregarded the course of nature. One of the best evidences of a spiritual man is that he disregards natural things in the things of God. He acts intelligently. He crossed his hands wittingly. He says: "I know it, my son" (verse 19). He was far ahead of Joseph at that time. "I know it, my son ... he also shall be great, but truly his younger brother shall be greater". He had the mind of God.
G.A.T. You put that down to the testimony his grandfather left?
J.T. I think it began there.
G.A.T. Do you mean by that that we ought to be exercised as to the testimony we leave in our homes as parents?
J.T. I was noticing recently that a man's responsibility does not cease with his own children. In Abraham's case it extended to Jacob, and in Joseph's case it extended to the fourth generation, to the sons of Ephraim. Job had two families. He saw the second family to the fourth generation.
W.C.R. I suppose you see in each great servant something natural permitted that hinders them. You spoke about Isaac's natural affection.
{436}
J.T. No doubt in each one there was something. In fact one could easily show there was something, but I think it is a day in which young people are greatly exposed, and what God would do is to bring about a right example. Abraham dwelt with Isaac and Jacob.
J.B. It is significant as to Jacob's staff that in our pilgrimage the top that is within reach of any of us is to be a true worshipper.
{437}
THE HILL COUNTRY
@Luke 1:39,40; @Philippians 3:20
I wanted to bring out the thought of the "hill country". Scripture speaks of it, as you will observe in the verse in @Luke 1 and it speaks of it elsewhere, as I hope to show. The example set by Mary, the mother of the Lord, in this respect is to be followed. Her movements before the Lord's birth, one might say, are more spiritual than those after His birth, and the example she sets us here is to be noted and to be followed. "She went with haste", we are told, "into the hill country".
The Lord also paid attention to the hill country, and in the epistles we have that which corresponds to the hill country in the gospels; especially the passage I have read from Philippians. It denotes the spiritual hill country and I want to show that the tendency of the spiritual is to repair to that country. Our citizenship is there. The apostle had been there himself, so he is a competent witness. We have heard of climbers; people who climbed Mt. McKinley, the Himalayas. They can give some account of the character of the atmosphere in these high altitudes. Now the apostle had been in this altitude of which he speaks here. You will all remember how in his second letter to the Corinthians he tells us that in Damascus he was let down over the wall in a basket. It is remarkable that he should tell us it was in a basket. There is more in it than the mere historical fact of his being let down in such a manner. He was not caught up to heaven in a basket. In the next chapter, @2 Corinthians 12, he is said to have been caught up into Paradise. Certainly the law of gravitation had nothing to do with that! He says; "whether in the body, I know not, or out of the body I know not; God knows". He knew of the basket. It was
{438}
necessary for him to know. It was a humiliating thing to be reminded of the basket, but the humiliating things go before the elevating things. You never could ascend without descending first. The descending is the humbling thing, and all the humiliating circumstances connected with the descent are impressed on the mind. It is of God that they should remain in the mind.
The question is raised more than once in the Old Testament as to who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? (@Psalm 24). I wonder if that question has ever been raised in your soul? It is most noteworthy how much is taken for granted by young people. In the Old Testament the questions young people were to raise are provided for. The Israelites were forearmed in regard to the questions of the young people, in @Deuteronomy 6:20. I wonder, young people, if you are accustomed to ask questions. Your parents, as Christians, are supposed to be able to answer. It is a very serious matter to have children. Parents must not only feed and clothe them, they must answer their questions; and if the Spirit of God is working with your child he will put questions to you. You must answer them. The book of Deuteronomy prepares the ground for the questions of the children. The difficulty in this country very largely is that there are no children in the true sense. I do not mean by that that there are not babies, and girls and boys, but the idea of a child, subject to and deriving a character from the parent is greatly lost sight of in this country. Indeed, in every country now, but especially here.
But I was speaking of descending. If you are born into a house in which there is no unleavened bread you never think of it; you will not think of *going down*. You think of *going up* in this world. You think of acquiring means, and a position in the social world. Happily a child sometimes makes it for
{439}
himself, but this is exceptional. The right and safe thing for parents is to have the unleavened bread in the house, and the unleavened bread is sure to raise a question in the minds of the children. Why this? Why do you not have something that inflates the bread like other people? Is not that what a child would say? Well, there is a reason for it, and it is the parents¬ privilege to explain the reason. Look at Lot's children. Do you think they had any relish for that break he baked for the angels? Would they go out of Sodom? To his sons-in-law this was mockery. They had been too well accustomed to the leavened bread to have any taste for unleavened bread. Beware, young man, of the food of Sodom! Have respect for that unleavened bread even if your father has only begun to bake it! Have respect to it, and if he explains it aright he will tell you that your baptism does not mean you are to be a man of this world. It means that you are to be a "little one" as in this world; but the other side is, that you are to be exalted in God's world. That is what it means. Well, now, in order to ascend into the hill of the Lord you have to learn to descend, as I said. You have to give up all those high thoughts of which the natural mind is fruitful. The thoughts of the human heart ascend up to heaven itself. Capernaum was "exalted to heaven". That was inflation of thought indeed.
Now the first thing, as I said, is to go down; you have to go down in the eyes of your fellow-workmen, your neighbours and your acquaintances, but God will lift you up. Paul says: "I know a man in Christ". It is not merely a historical thing he is referring to. He does refer to the historical incident, but he refers also to *what he knows*. "I know a man in Christ". Do you know a man like that? That is a very serious question. If I do not know in myself that I am a man in Christ, it is unlikely that I shall
{440}
discern another. Paul knew one. I think if he had known any in Corinth he would have said so. I know a man in Christ, fourteen years ago he was caught up to the third heaven. He knew that man. Whether caught up in the body, or out of it, he did not know but *he knew what was there*. Think of that! Caught up into Paradise! He was truly in the hill country! He heard wonderful things; things that were not lawful for a man to utter. Paul is thus a competent witness as to the character of the "hill country".
Now I wish just to give descriptions of certain eminences in the hill country. I call attention to the cities of refuge in Canaan, not in Bashan, but in Canaan. There were three cities of refuge on either side of the Jordan. The three that were in Canaan were in the hill country; one in the hill country of Naphtali; one in the hill country of Ephraim; and one in the hill country of Judah. They were all in the hill country. Now that is very significant, and I want to come back to it in a moment, because the cities of refuge have reference to those who are under the influence of heaven; who reflect what is in heaven; that is, the assembly. I will dwell on that just in a moment, but I wanted to come to the eminences in the hill country which may be scripturally designated.
The first one in the gospels is what may be regarded as the *legislative* hill. It is found in @Matthew 5. The Lord Jesus is pleased to go up into the mountain, it is said. The Lord was owned by the Father; attention was called to Him; and He attracts disciples. We are told in @Matthew 5 that He went up into a mountain and called His disciples and opened His mouth to teach, and we are told what He taught; what He laid down in His teaching had reference to the principles by which the people of God and the kingdom of God were to be governed and regulated.
{441}
Now remember, it is not enough to be a disciple. You have to learn to govern. You do not learn it in the plain. The Lord might have spoken on the plain, but He did not. He took the disciples to the mountain to speak. Now, you say, I am not in a position to rule, but you are, and you have to *begin with yourself*.
One of the most important lessons to be learned by a believer is how to rule himself. You do not get the ideas from Congress, nor even from Moses. Time after time the Lord insists; "*I* say unto you". Are you listening to what He says? If you do not listen to what He says you will never rule yourself, and if you do not rule yourself you will never rightly rule another. And yet the Christian, in the mind of God, is intended to rule the universe. He is intended, according to Paul, to judge even angels. How serious! Have you learned to rule yourself, to govern your own spirit? You must go to the mount of legislation for that, and you must go up with the Lord. How important to be withdrawn from the influence of the plain! Those friends of yours whose acquaintance you have made in business; the children of your father's neighbours. These are found in the plain. If you stay there you will never learn to rule yourself. You must isolate yourself and ascend with the Lord Jesus, and listen to those wonderful pronouncements of His. "I say unto you". How worthy of attention is such legislation as that!
Now the next mountain is that in which *servants are taught how to serve*. Mark gives us that mountain. Matthew, as you all know, is the great administrative gospel; Mark gives us the mountain in which servants, or Levites, are taught how to minister. It says, He "calls whom he himself would" (chapter 3:13). Now mark that. It is not now the disciples simply. Every disciple must learn how to rule. Every one, young
{442}
and old, must learn to how rule himself. You have no place in the assembly if you have not learned how to rule yourself, no place in the kingdom. But when you come to levitical work the Lord reduces the number. Not now simply a disciple. He "calls whom he himself would". I am referring to @Mark 3. You cannot go up if you please in this instance. We cannot all be preachers or teachers, but we are all disciples. If you are not a disciple you are outside of the pale of Christianity. But when you come to levitical work it is "whom he himself would". So He selects twelve and He takes them up, we are told, to the mountain, in order "*that they might be with him*". That is a different idea; "*that he might send them forth to preach*; and to have power to heal sicknesses and to cast out devils". How different from the modern ideas of service acquired by a course in a divinity school! Titles are conferred in religious colleges, but the Lord titles His servants. I would not accept a title from any one but Christ. He has titles to give, but He gives them to those whom He knows. He selects them deliberately.
In one gospel we read He prayed all night before He selected them, but in Mark it is the *sovereignty of His choice*; "whom he himself would". He takes them up to the mountain in order that they might be with Him. Do not miss that. He took them with Him up there on the mountain in order that they might be with Him; not now to hear His laws; not even to hear His teaching, but to have His company; that they might learn from Him by seeing how He did things. It is in the hill country of Scripture. It is away from the plain and from the valley. The valleys lie in the mist, you know; lie covered with mist and fog. We all know how the summit of a mountain may be in the clear sunshine, whereas the valley below is in a fog; a description of this world on man's level. The Corinthians walked
{443}
as men. They walked there on the plain. They did not ascend into the clear atmosphere of the hill country.
These disciples whom the Lord chose were with Him on the mountain and we are told that He gave titles. He called Simon, Peter. He gave him the name of Peter, and James and John, the sons of Zebedee, He called Boanerges, "Sons of thunder". These are simply illustrations. It does not mean that others may not have had names. The point is that the Lord confers the titles; He confers the name that indicates what should be set out in each person who receives it. So that you come down from the mountain with these impressions and you carry out the service down here where the evil is. You carry it out in the dignity of one who has been in the hill country with Christ.
Now the third hill is, as I said a moment ago, the *high* one. It is the most exalted altitude and that is the mount of transfiguration. It is called *high*. That, I would take the liberty of regarding, as the mount of privilege. It is the mount of contemplation, really. He took three only up there. You see there is reduction as you go on. First there are disciples; then there are certain ones especially selected; taken up, and then a reduced number; three taken up, and they are taken high. Finally it is reduced to one. Paul went higher than all of them, to the third heaven. That is the greatest altitude in the hill country.
Now the "mount of transfiguration" is, from the disciples¬ point of view, the mount of contemplation. There is little said as to the hearing after all was over. It is true the disciples heard the Father's voice, and they were to hear the Son, but it is not hearing on the mount of contemplation so much as *seeing*. He was transfigured *before them*. They were to see this.
{444}
John says, "we beheld his glory" (@John 1:14). That is contemplation. Peter says, "but were eye-witnesses of his majesty" (@2 Peter 1:16). John says, "we have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father". What a sight to behold! To ascend the mountain involved exercise. That is what we lack. The apostle says, "I keep under my body" (@1 Corinthians 9:27). He knew how to keep his body under. His body did not hinder him. It was subordinate to his judgment; it never ruled him.
The Lord took the disciples "up into a high mountain apart"; a *high* one. That required exercise. Young people, in coming into fellowship, often think it is all nice easy sailing. You do not get anything in your soul without exercise. If you want to get hold of things you must be exercised about them. Certainly Peter, James and John could never have reached that altitude without exercise. But they reached it, and they saw wonderful things. Peter says, "but were eye-witnesses of his majesty ... when we were with him in the holy mount". Now these are the three mounts that one has taken the liberty of designating. You can easily trace them. They stand out prominently in the range as we may say. They are the peaks of the range and the highest one is the mount of contemplation.
I just refer one moment in closing to the cities of refuge. You see it is those who have visited these mountains that I have spoken of who with others, ultimately formed the cities of refuge. This is worth noting. If a man is to flee for his life, we would let him run down hill if possible. He could run easier; run faster, but not so in Scripture. The anxious question, "Men and brethren, what shall we do?" (@Acts 2:37) shows there was exercise. The avenger of blood was abroad. The blood of Christ had been shed. The Jews had become the murderers of the Lord Jesus, and the avenger was abroad. "Men and brethren,
{445}
what shall we do?" That was the question, they were exercised. The cities of refuge were in the hill country of Naphtali, the hill country of Ephraim and the hill country of Judah. If they were to escape for their lives, so to speak, they had to climb that ascent to get to the city of refuge. Those who say, "What shall we do" were exercised. The climbing had no terror for them. Exercises are most exhilarating experiences spiritually. The greater the climb, the more the strength, the better the air; where this exercise is the Lord helps. The Lord helped them. "The Lord added to the assembly daily those that were to be saved" (@Acts 2:47). That is an allusion to the city of refuge. Was it on a level with the temple in Jerusalem? No. Morally, it was elevated. To the true Jerusalem the *tribes go up*. You go *up* to the house. Solomon is the great leader in that; there was "his ascent by which he went up unto the house of the Lord" (@1 Kings 10:5).
The Lord, in adding the repentant ones in Israel to the assembly, those who were exercised, had *placed them in the hill country*. Peter and John are in the dignity of it. Mount Zion represents this dignity. "Behold how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity!" (@Psalm 133:1). That marks the hill country. It is in Zion. There is one high peak, mount Hermon, towering up into the clouds where it catches the dew and throws it off on to Zion. How dignified the expression, "As the dew of Hermon that descended upon the mountains of Zion" (verse 3). Brethren were dwelling together in unity in *that* hill country and the Lord commanded the blessing just there, "even life for evermore". So that Peter and John, it says, went up to the temple together at the hour of prayer. They were in the dignity of the hill country. There was unity there, and Peter and John were in it. They were *together*. They represented in their relation to each other the spirit of the hill
{446}
country. Hence Peter says to the impotent man, "Look on us" (@Acts 3:4). There was something to look at.
Now mark that, He does not say, Look on the Lord. He says, "Look on us". But on whom? Those that were truly *together*. They were together in the spirit of affection one for another, and in testimony to Christ. They had nothing of that which marks the man in the plain at all. "Silver and gold" he says, "have I none, but such as I have give I thee" (verse 6). Where did he get that? In the hill country. He got it in the sphere of unity. He had been on the mountain with the Lord Jesus. "In the name of Jesus of Nazareth", he says, "rise up and walk" and the man rose, and he walked and leaped and praised God. All this is really connected with the hill country. I have ventured to say all that in regard to the cities of refuge, because Peter and John represent the spirit of the cities of refuge; they lived, so to speak, in the hill country. As to the man that was healed, do you think he would have any difficulty in going up to mount Ephraim, or to the hill country of Naphtali or Judah? Look at the ability he had now. He was crippled before; but now he can walk and leap and praise God.
I have not touched on the two passages read. I only read them to suggest the subject. You see how Mary, the mother of the Lord, had received a wonderful communication from the angel and directly he leaves her, she went in haste to the hill country, and visited Elisabeth. Elisabeth lived there. She was a spiritual woman. She hid herself five months there. The epistle to the Colossians is the great hiding epistle! It is a good thing to be hidden. You do not want to be under the eyes of men; you do not wish to be a public man or a public woman. It is contrary to spirituality. Those whose minds are set on things above, not on things of the earth, are said to be dead, and their life hid with Christ in
{447}
God. Now that was Elisabeth. She was a good companion to seek.
Where do you seek your companions? If the Spirit of God speaks to you, you seek a spiritual person, and you seek him where he lives, and that is in the hill country. He lives away from the influences of this world, his associations are outside of it. Hence Mary went in haste. She knew where to go. The Lord had touched her heart. A wonderful communication had been made by the angel, and she went in haste, we are told, to the hill country of Judah, where one of the cities of refuge had been, and she found a companion there in Elisabeth, one who honoured her, who recognised the great honour that had been conferred on her by the Lord. And so it will be in your case if you repair to the hill country, my young brother and sister, you will find some one there who will recognise your true dignity. You have dignity although you may not know it. If you are a believer in Christ, you have dignity, but you do not get any credit for it in the plain. If you go to the hill country, they will recognise you there. They know you, they know how to estimate your dignity, and they honour you.
If you read the verses that follow those which I read you will find how Elisabeth honoured her cousin Mary. What holy and happy communion there was between those two women in the hill country of Judah! And so today, to make it very practical, there are such places. The apostle indicates all this to the Philippians. He says, "Our citizenship is in heaven", not on the earth. He had just been speaking about people who "mind earthly things", and he says, "they are the enemies of the cross of Christ". He had been speaking about those people, and it says he spoke about them, weeping. People that mind earthly things caused tears to flow from the apostle, to the man who had been in the third heaven; well
{448}
they might; he had been up to the highest altitude of all, into Paradise, he says. He uses the word Paradise to show the *blessedness* of the place and he used the term "third heaven" to show you the *altitude* of the place.
Do you wonder he sheds tears over those who grovelled in the plain, in the valley? He says, I speak of them, weeping. "They are the enemies of the cross of Christ". He does not say they were enemies of Christ. There was not outward opposition to Christ, personally; but man as in the flesh was recognised, and earthly things were fostered. The apostle goes on to say, "Our citizenship is in heaven, from whence also we look for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ". That is the great hill country for Christians. We realise it in some measure as we come together, as we recognise the Holy Spirit. There is a moral elevation where we realise through the Spirit the influence of heaven, and it has a great effect upon us afterwards.
May the Lord grant, that however feebly the subject has been presented, each one may follow it in the Scriptures, and not balk at the exercise. Exercise is needed in order to realise what I have presented. It is easy enough to live in the plain, but there is exercise required to live in the hill country.
{449}
THE SON OF MAN GLORIFIED
@John 13:31,32
I wish to speak at this time about our Lord Jesus Christ as Son of man, not in a general way, for He is so designated in many parts of Scripture, but to confine my remarks to John's presentation of Him in that character. The other evangelists, as you will be aware, refer to the Lord under this designation more frequently than John, particularly the official gospels, as I may call them, Matthew and Luke. But in order to understand their references, and indeed, the references of the prophet Ezekiel, in whose book the designation is found more frequently than in all other parts of Scripture combined, we have to understand John.
One is impressed, the more one considers John, that we have to understand everything now from his standpoint, and particularly this subject that I propose to dwell upon. For whilst he refers to the Lord in this way less frequently than do those other two evangelists, yet he refers to Him in peculiar connections, in connections that are intended to emphasise in our minds the Person of our Lord Jesus Christ under this title. I hope that in what I have to say, we shall each afford Him in this connection more place in our affections, because I apprehend that these verses in chapter 13 have reference to the place that He now has. God has glorified Him in Himself, and He has done so immediately; and the immediate glory that has come to the Lord according to this passage, involves the place that the Father has given Him in the saints, that is, in ourselves, who form the assembly. The assembly, or the circle of the saints, as seen in John, is the sphere in which God operates now, and in which He glorifies His Son, the Son of man. The world is not yet the sphere in
{450}
which to glorify the Son of man; and, as yet, Israel He has not, but He has the assembly. The Lord as He rose from the dead said, "I will declare thy name unto my brethren; in the midst of the congregation [assembly] will I praise thee" (@Psalm 22:22). The assembly was that which God secured immediately, and which is thus available for any display which He may make; and as He glorifies the Son of man immediately, it is obviously in that sphere, which He has immediately secured. So I hope the Lord may use what I have to say to enhance His own place in our affections as the Son of man.
Now the first reference to Christ as Son of man in John's gospel is in chapter 1:47 - 49; it is the Lord's own statement, made to Nathanael, whom He Himself describes as "an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile!" He had said to the Lord, "Thou art the Son of God; thou art the King of Israel". Nathanael had come into the light of the second psalm, and as moving to Christ, the Lord describes him as an *Israelite indeed*. Nathanael says, "Whence knowest thou me?" Jesus says, "Before that Philip called thee, when thou wast under the fig tree, I saw thee". To Nathanael's mind the Son of God was present; the King of Israel was present. What a moment for an Israelite, to be brought thus face to face with the Son of God and the King of Israel! And what that suggests to my mind is that the opening part of John introduces to us certain persons who apprehended Christ. The opening chapter is not so much occupied with direct divine statements, as it is with giving an account of what certain persons *apprehended*. It is a question, therefore, since John applies to our own time, of what we *apprehend*, and what is apprehended is the result of contemplation. The evangelist says, "We have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father, full of grace and truth" (chapter 1:14). They contemplated His glory as with the
{451}
Father; He was apprehended as an only-begotten with a father. You see, the present moment is the outcome of God having wrought in certain individuals, who through contemplation came into the apprehension of Christ.
To enforce this great principle, John the baptist tells us that in being sent to baptise with water, he was told how to locate Him who should baptise with the Spirit. For of what value is water baptism save there be Spirit baptism? Water baptism in itself can avail nothing unless there is One to baptise with the Spirit. We must couple these two things together. John says, "He that sent me to baptise with water, the same said unto me, Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending, and remaining on him, the same is he which baptiseth with the Holy Ghost. And I saw, and bare record that this is the Son of God" (@John 1:33,34). Thus we see that this gospel introduces to us those who by contemplation acquired a knowledge of the Son of God, and John the baptist bears record. Now in the evangelist and those with him, and in John the baptist, we have a nucleus which became the witness; the light of the knowledge of the Son of God was in their hearts and in their minds. Then we find that John the baptist, looking on Jesus as He walked, says, "Behold the Lamb of God!" (verse 36). He bore testimony to Him as an object of attraction; and may I say that scarcely any one is too young to be attracted by a lamb! We read here, that the two disciples heard him speaking, and they followed Jesus. Now there is a movement; we have a nucleus of light, as I said, of persons illuminated with the light of the knowledge of the Son of God, and I believe this corresponds exactly to our own times. There have been those who came into the apprehension of the Son of God, and they bare record. John represents the type of testimony that affects people at the present time. He says, "Behold the Lamb of
{452}
God!" He himself was affected; he was moved, and two of his disciples heard him and they followed Jesus. You will observe, that I am speaking of the Son of God, because it is the Son of God who gives character to our dispensation; but I wish to show that as He is apprehended thus, His place as Son of man is to be fully recognised in our minds and hearts. John the baptist is, as I may say, a characteristic witness; he seems to be in the mind of the evangelist a model witness; he is moved by the testimony, by the light that has come into his soul, and his testimony draws others to Jesus.
Now in speaking of the Son of God, I may add another word, and that is that the Son of God is Christ on the *divine* side. John shows that it is, as it were, God approaching men with His beloved Son in His hand, you will understand me. Luke presents the other side; he shows you Simeon in the temple with the Babe in his arms. If God approaches us with His beloved Son, as He does, He is contemplated as with the Father, full of grace and truth. It is God approaching us with His Son, as it were, in His bosom, and His Son is full of grace and truth. He has in Him the means of meeting men as they are, and setting them up suitably to Himself. That is what the Son of God means. God has His answer by Him. His Son is the adequate witness to His love. "God so loved ... that he gave his only begotten Son". But when you come to the Son of man, He is seen in the arms of Simeon. It is not through the Son of man that God approaches us, but it is through the Son of man that we approach God. You will note that Simeon had Him in his arms. What a spectacle, beloved! Simeon is our representative; he is a man who came by the Spirit into the temple, and as he was there by the Spirit, Joseph and Mary came in with the Babe, and he took up the Babe in his arms. I stand behind him, as it were, and I see
{453}
that Babe as He is there in the temple, and I say, How enriched the race is, how graced it is! He has come in on our side; and he who by the Spirit understands the position, takes Him in his arms. If God comes in on His own side to meet us, to make known His love to us, He comes in with His Son, but if I am to draw near to God, it is with the Son of man. It is not, I may remark by way of guarding these thoughts, that He intended to adorn man in the flesh, it was far otherwise, but nevertheless, coming into this world as a babe He came in in connection with humanity, and Luke presents Him to us in that light; and Simeon, who is in the mind of heaven by the Spirit, takes Him in his arms. I do not know that I can commend anything greater to you than that you should understand how to take Christ, viewed as Son of man, in your arms. You are then before God as belonging to the race of men according to all that Christ is.
Having said that much about Luke, I intend now to show how the Lord would bring in the thought of the Son of man to the mind of an Israelite; I refer to Nathanael. Whilst he is called an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no guile, he is nevertheless marked by those limitations that always mark a nationalist. Nationalism is one of the most potent elements there are even amongst the people of God, but the Son of man is not in relation to nations as such; He is in relation to *men*. Hence the Lord would emphasise to the mind of an Israelite the place that the Son of man has in heaven. He was an Israelite in all that the term signifies; but he was to see "greater things". That is a word that should come home to us. It is the "greater things" that deliver us from the lesser. The lesser is the national, the greater is the universal. It is obvious that what Adam represented must be greater than what Abraham represented. Adam was a primary thought; Abraham represented the provisional
{454}
thought. Very great indeed in its development is the idea of a nation and a kingdom, and God will develop these two features to their completion. We shall see a nation such as earth has never seen, and we shall see a kingdom such as earth has never seen; but those who are to have part in these things, great as they are, are to understand that there are greater things. And the greater has reference to Adam, and so Adam's son, the Son of man, inherits all the glory that attaches to the race; and the "Israelite indeed" has to understand that these are greater things. So the Lord says, in that well-known strengthened affirmative of John, "Verily, verily, I say unto you, Hereafter [or henceforth] ye shall see heaven open, and the angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of man" (chapter 1:51). The Israelite is to know that heaven, instead of for the moment being occupied with Jacob, or with Christ as descended from Jacob, is occupied with Him as descended from Adam: "which was of Adam", Luke says, "which was of God". Man has a wonderful place with God; He had him in His mind from eternity.
Now the evangelist John in chapter 3:11 quotes the Lord as saying, "We speak that we do know". How great a thing it is to have One who can speak, who knows; One on our side too. Then He goes on to say, "No man hath ascended up to heaven, but he that came down from heaven, even the Son of man which is in heaven". What we find there is that we have on our side One who ascends up to heaven, who came down from heaven, and who is, wonderful to say, in heaven. We are brought face to face with the mystery of His Person, and yet such a One as He is, is on our side; One who, although speaking on earth, could say, "the Son of man which is in heaven". Then further we read, "And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up". I was saying there was no thought
{455}
of His coming among men, as a man, to adorn man after the flesh, but to remove him. He is not going to take up the race as we know it; He is to bring in a race of men according to Himself, but ere He does that, He glorifies God in respect of the race in connection with whom He came, for becoming man, He must deal with that. Personally He was immune from all that belonged to man in his sinful state, but as taking up His place in relation to man, He must deal to the glory of God with what lay upon man, and so He says, "Even so *must* the Son of man be lifted up" (@John 3:14). What for? "That whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have eternal life". You see what we have on our side in the Son of man. He removes, as "lifted up", all that lay upon us, to the glory of God, and those who believe have everlasting life. In chapter 5 He says He has authority to execute judgment, because He is the Son of man. We see how, as on our side, God, as it were, would place in Him the power to execute judgment. It is God's gracious consideration for us, for He who died for us and is on our side will surely judge righteously. He executes judgment also because He is the Son of man. Thus we see how clearly and instructively the subject is opened up by this great evangelist, so that the Son of man should have His place in the hearts of those who know Him as the Son of God.
Then in chapter 6 as Son of man He is sealed by God the Father to give us food that endures unto everlasting life. It is as if God were to say, I am placing everything in His hands; the Son of man is sealed by Me to provide you food; all is in His hands and He is on your side. How it should shut out every bit of legal fear from our hearts, in regard of God. Then He goes on to say, "Unless ye shall have eaten the flesh of the Son of man, and drunk his blood, ye have no life in yourselves" (verse 53). Later on, when many who had heard murmured, He said, "Doth this
{456}
offend you? (verse 61). What and if ye shall see the Son of man ascend up where he was before?" It is not here a question of the mystery of His Person as in chapter 3, but that He has title as Son of man to ascend up where He was before. He has lost nothing in the descent; His place on high is as great as ever; He ascends to where He was before. He was made a little lower than the angels for the suffering of death, but He is crowned with glory and honour. "Where he was before" was the place and glory that belong to Deity. "The Word was with God, and the Word was God" (chapter 1:1). How marvellous, therefore, is His word, "What, and if ye shall see the Son of man ascend up where he was before?" (chapter 6:62). He has gone up as man in all the dignity of His Person to where He was before, and He is there on our side. The Jews are referred to again in this connection in chapter 8:28. He says, "When ye shall have lifted up the Son of man". That is their side; they lifted Him up and in consequence He is known. "Ye shall know", He says, "that I am he". The Spirit of God in this evangelist would lead us on to the apprehension of Him as Son of man, so that whilst we claim Him, and rightly according to God, as on our side, He is nevertheless One who ascends up where He was before, and He is to be "known" thus as lifted up. "When ye shall have lifted up the Son of man, then shall ye know that I am he". The remarkable passage in chapter 13 affords a beautiful climax to this great subject, for it is the last mention of it in this gospel so far as I know. We have in chapter 12 the coming up of the Greeks who desired to see Jesus.
What I am aiming at is that we might have this blessed Man in our minds so that we should be universal, that we should have men before us and not nations or favoured districts. There is nothing more destructive than to attach undue importance to a favoured nation or district. That has reference
{457}
to the government of God, not to the revelation of God. Christianity is not based on the government of God, but on the revelation of God, and the revelation of God has reference to all men. Light shines on all: "The true light was that which, coming into the world, lightens every man" (@John 1:9). Hence this great subject I am dealing with, rightly apprehended, delivers us from nationalism; it enables us to be with God in all that He is doing, and to have the mind of God for the moment. So when the Greeks come up, the Lord says, "The hour is come, that the Son of man should be glorified". But He adds, "Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die, it abideth alone; but if it die, it bringeth forth much fruit" (@John 12:23,24). Now we have arrived at the thought of God as regards the *kind* of race of which Christ is to be Head, and this kind of race has taken form in the assembly. The "much fruit" no doubt includes the whole race which is the result of His death. It all looks on to the time when the tabernacle of God shall be with men. It was as if He said, If I am to have the Greeks, if I am to have the race, I am to have them as the product of My death, not as they are now. There are on every hand those who aspire to rule over men, to be great among men, but the Lord would disdain to head a race with such shame attached to it as the race of men now. He removes all the stain through His death; He removes all the shame attached to man. He brings in, through dying, a race according to Himself the "much fruit". What joy must have filled His heart as He contemplated the "much fruit", the universal results of His death! And so He said, "The hour is come". That hour is still deferred, but it is hastening, when He shall be set over the habitable earth.
In chapter 13 it is *not* said, "the hour is come that the Son of man should be glorified", but "*Now is* the Son of man glorified". It is not an hour; in the ways of God the hour refers to millennial glory. There
{458}
is an hour fixed for the glory of the Son of man; it is on the calendar, so to speak. That hour had struck; it was His due, but He would only take up the race as having died; He would take up a race which is the fruit of His death. And so the whole race of men that will inherit the habitable earth which is to come shall be of such, and His delights shall be with them. Are we not in sympathy with our Lord in view of what He shall have in that day as the fruit of His death on this earth? Think of the change that will have come about! As one moves about the world one is depressed at times, as one sees the awful misery of men, the awful degradation of men, morally and physically, but what relief as one thinks of the day that is now nearing, in which the Lord will be set over the habitable earth, an earth filled with men like Himself, men who are the fruit of His death. The hour had come for that, but it is deferred; so in chapter 13 there is nothing said about an hour, but *now*: "Now is the Son of man glorified, and God is glorified in him".
I desire that we should apprehend the Lord in this light, that He has glorified God in respect of sin. In @John 13 the betrayer had just gone out to betray Him into the hands of sinners that He might be put to death. "Now", Jesus says, "is the Son of man glorified, and God is glorified in him". The glory that He refers to is the moral glory that He acquired by dying in obedience to the will of God. He submitted to death, having the right and power to escape it. He allowed Himself to be betrayed into the hands of sinners by one of His disciples. He did not move a finger to influence Judas against his course. It was the will of God; and when Judas went out He said, "Now is the Son of man glorified". A halo of moral glory shone there, discerned and well-known in heaven, beloved, and it is for us to see it now. He laid down His life. He did not interfere in the least
{459}
degree to dissuade Judas from his purpose. "That thou doest", He says, "do quickly" (verse 27). He was absolutely subject to His Father's will.
A halo of moral glory, as I have said, shone round about Him at that moment when Judas went out. Then He says, "and God is glorified in him". As never before, God was glorified in respect of sin in the death of Jesus. So He says, "If God be glorified in him, God also shall glorify him in himself, and shall glorify him immediately". Thus, as I suggested at the beginning, the immediate glory has reference to what God has *now*. The assembly is the sphere in which He displays His glory; and He glorifies Christ as the Son of man in the presence of His beloved people at the present time. Stephen says, "Behold, I see the heavens opened, and the Son of man" (@Acts 7:56). He was in heaven; He was glorified in the eyes of Stephen and in the eyes of every Stephen since. Every one of them sees Jesus and He is glorified. That is what God is doing; He would glorify the Son of man in our minds and hearts; He would have the Lord in His place with us in His universal relation; He would have us to understand that the Son of man has reference to the whole race of men, and as He is glorified in us, we shall be sympathetic with God in regard to the whole race of men. That is something to be taken to heart. What I am contending for now is to hold to a right principle; it is principles that deliver us from error, from any narrowing influences such as that of any favoured nation. All these, severally or collectively, tend to shut out the place of the Son of man from our minds and our hearts; whereas John, in unfolding this great subject of the Son of God and eternal life, makes abundant room for the rights of the Son of man, that we may see that what God is doing is universal, and so he says at the very outset, "In him was life, and the life was the light of *men*" (chapter 1:4).
{460}
THE GOSPEL FOR THE HOUSEHOLD
@Isaiah 44:1 - 5
We have warrant in Scripture for addressing the gospel message to the saints, for, as you all know, doubtless, the epistle to the Romans was addressed to the saints at Rome, and it unfolds the gospel as no other epistle does. It is, indeed, said to be the gospel of God concerning His Son, and so I have in mind to address the saints, particularly parents, in connection with their households, and incidentally to speak to the young. God takes account of parents, for normally the households of believing parents should also believe. God encourages parents in the message to the jailor at Philippi, "Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved, *and thy house*" (@Acts 16:31). It is not that the parents can save them from certain features of the world; but the result of the message to the jailor would be to turn the heart of the parent to God.
I have been encouraged to turn to this passage because it holds out great hope for parents, God saying that He will pour out His Spirit upon their seed. Wonderful promise! We may well be encouraged, those of us who have households, to pray in the light of this promise, as God says, "I will pour my Spirit upon thy seed". Those of us who have households know by experience what the flesh is in our children. I often read Jacob's blessing of the tribes in contrast with that of Moses. Wonderful man though Moses was, he was not the parent of the tribes. In @Deuteronomy 33 he views them, in his blessing, not in their crookedness, or their wickedness according to the flesh, but as having the Holy Spirit. In no sense, in a way, are parents more encouraged
{461}
than when their children get the Holy Spirit. We are then entitled to look at them in a new light, not only as our offspring, but as saints, as part of the house of God. The parent regards them then as a man of God would. A man of God, as such, thinks of God, of the house of God. Moses in blessing the tribes views them as a man of God. He has no complaint to make, no reproof; the tribes are viewed as possessed typically of the Spirit, whereas Jacob is the parent. "Hearken", says he, "unto Israel your father" (@Genesis 49:2).
The father knows the child best. So Jacob begins with Reuben, and then he speaks of Simeon, and then of Levi, and there is not a good word. Let parents beware of hiding the crookedness of the flesh, of deceiving themselves as well as their children, and interfering with the operations of the Spirit of God, for, "that which is born of the flesh is flesh" (@John 3:6). You cannot alter it. Do not attempt to hide it, or to palliate it, or minister to it, for in so doing you but interfere with the work of the Spirit. Jacob made no attempt, in speaking to his sons, to hide their guilt. No one knew it better than he and he exposed it to them. Nevertheless, *every one of the tribes was blessed*. This should be an immense encouragement to us. Jacob had faith in God; and so parents have an example, in the man of faith, not to attempt to palliate or hide or encourage the flesh in their offspring. God is not doing it. Our children are no better than others; they are born after the flesh. Whatever you may think about them, however delightful they may appear to you, they need to be born again, as the Lord said to Nicodemus (@John 3).
Those who in Nazareth marvelled at the gracious words which proceeded out of the Lord's mouth, did so only for the moment, and the next moment "led him unto the brow of the hill whereon their city was
{462}
built, that they might cast him down headlong" (@Luke 4:29). Such is the flesh! Hence He did not commit Himself to them (@John 2). But "there was a man of the Pharisees, named Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews: the same came to Jesus by night, and said unto him, Rabbi, we know that thou art a teacher come from God: for no man can do these miracles that thou doest, except God be with him" (@John 3:1,2). He had light in his soul, and the Lord says to him, "Ye must be born again"(verse 7). What a word that was! "The teacher of Israel" is faced with this cardinal truth; a truth which is denied and rejected all around us. The Lord faces him with it at once; and so I would say to the best behaved, the best trained, the most obedient children in this company, "Ye must be born again". It is imperative. That nature you have which seems, perhaps, so affable, may, some day, unless you are born again, turn traitor to Christ. As soon as the restraint is removed, that heart of yours is capable of driving a nail into the hand of Christ.
Then the Lord further says, "The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh, and whither it goeth: so is every one that is born of the Spirit" (verse 8). Were that not true the Lord's announcement would be cold comfort, but the wonderful fact is that the wind was blowing, and it was blowing where it listed. God was acting sovereignly, and He is doing so now. He is working today. My word would be ineffective if God were not working by the Spirit; as the word says, "my Spirit remaineth among you" (@Haggai 2:5). When the wind blows and it strikes you, you are brought down. You discover that in you, that is in your flesh, no good dwells. Those of us who look on know something of that. We thank God you are different from what you were. You are not so haughty, so proud, so
{463}
self-satisfied; you are miserable. Thank God for that misery if it exists in any one of you. You realise you are unfit for God, that you need forgiveness. The gospel is for you; indeed, it is the blessed mind of God for you. It tells you about Christ; about His work on the cross; about forgiveness; about the gift of the Spirit. It tells you of Christ risen, and that God has made Him both Lord and Christ. Such light is what your soul needs, and what your soul embraces gladly if you are born again.
God says, "I will pour my Spirit upon thy seed". If God pours out His Spirit upon you, it is more than new birth. You do not get the Spirit in new birth; you get a certain work of the Spirit. The Spirit comes from heaven as a gift from God to those who believe in Christ and who obey Him. Think of the wonderful gift of the Holy Spirit of God. God promises it; He says, "I will pour my Spirit *upon thy seed*". Parents can count on that. I need not say that this blessing is not limited to the seed of Christians. If there are those who have unconverted parents, the same offer is to you. God proposes to give His Spirit to you also, on the ground of faith in Christ. As Peter said, "Repent, and be baptised every one of you ... for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost" (@Acts 2:38). So that the proposal is for all; but I particularly refer to the young ones. God proposes to pour His Spirit upon you. Are you prepared for it?
And then, as you will observe, He says, "They shall spring up as among the grass". After forgiveness and receiving the Spirit of God you begin to *grow*. "They shall spring up". Now grass in Scripture represents the energy of life. We get other pictures of life, in the animals, for instance, but grass in the field represents life as it appears among the people of God, the fruit of the Spirit.
{464}
In referring to it one desires that God would in these days bring in our households; and if they are to grow, according to this passage, there must be the grass, that is, the evidences of life among the people of God. God would afford in the grass what is, as it were, attractive for the young. They find something in the meeting and in their households. There is little grass in a household that has not the reading of the word of God and prayer daily. Grass is to appear around them as the evidence of spiritual life. They grow up among that; they spring up instead of seeking their satisfaction in the pleasures of the world. The enemy is devising attractions for them. We need the grass, dear brethren, as a counter-attraction to save the young. They shall spring up among it, it says, "as willows by the water courses".
Water courses refer to those occasions in which the Holy Spirit has a free hand. The water is *running*. You see, God would have it thus. If He pours His Spirit in His grace upon the offspring of His people, He also would have among His people the grass and the water courses. Water courses are for life. The young people come into touch with the ministry of the word in the energy of the Spirit in those seasons in which the Holy Spirit is free. They grow up like willows, it says, "willows by the water courses". It is for the young people to know how much this agrees with their experience. And now, as having received the Spirit, you attend the meetings; you enjoy the evidences of life among the people of God, and presently you speak in the language of the next verse: "One shall say, I am the Lord's". *I am* the Lord's; not now your parents only, *you* belong to the Lord.
Let me entreat you young people to make *confession*. Confess to whom you please: your mother, your father, your brother, or your sister, or anyone in whom you have confidence. Make a bold confession;
{465}
take a stand in your soul, in the language of this verse, and say, "I am the Lord's". You are His indeed; He has bought you; He has rights over your soul; He has given Himself for you.
Then further: "Another shall call himself by the name of Jacob". You say, Jacob is not a name I like to be called by. You may prefer to be called Joseph. But if you acknowledge you are the Lord's the next thing is that you accept *responsibility*. One of the most important features of a Christian is to honestly accept obligation. Saul said: "Lord, what wilt thou have *me to do*?" (@Acts 9:6). I need not speak of the use he was to the Lord afterwards; his history is well known. It is an incentive to accept obligation, that the Lord may use you; He may give you work to do which the archangel Michael might desire to do. To Saul he gave work to do which angels might well covet. And so, if you accept obligation, that is, call yourself by the name of Jacob, God will give you something to do. He will employ you in His service, and instead of criticising others, you will think of doing something yourself. Obligation steadies you and sobers you; it brings you into accord with the Lord Himself. He took all our obligation on Him. It is an immense thing for young Christians to accept obligation.
And, further, "Another shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord, and surname himself by the name of Israel". And well you may, for it is a name which spiritually is covered with glory. It really refers to the Christian as he is seen in the epistle to the Ephesians, even as Jacob designates him as seen in the epistle to the Romans. In Romans the believer accepts obligation; "that the righteous requirement of the law", for instance, "should be fulfilled in us, who do not walk according to flesh, but according to Spirit" (@Romans 8:4). It is an immense thing, as I said, to accept obligation. It is not such as you
{466}
fear, for you have the Spirit; you walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. When you write down your name you wish it to be recorded permanently. You are not going to discard the name you have written with your hand, which is Israel; figuratively the saints as seen in the epistle to the Ephesians. I refer to it because it shows us how the gospel leads us on step by step until we reach the divine standard. Israel is the spiritual man. By comparing @Genesis 32 and other scriptures in which Jacob and Israel appear we shall see that the former generally represents responsibility and the latter spiritual power and blessing.
The gospel proposes that we should be brought into the greatest family in the whole universe of God. Nothing less than that is the divine proposal. God gives us not only His Spirit, but He gives us His Spirit as the Spirit of adoption. As it says: "For ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear; but ye have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father" (@Romans 8:15). We are brought into the family of God. There are other families. The Father names all the families in heaven and on earth. Think of subscribing yourself as belonging to the greatest family in the universe. You do not wish that recalled. And now think of the standard of that family: it is the Son of God. We are to be conformed to the image of God's Son, that He may be the Firstborn among many brethren. Think of the dignity of it! The gospel proposes nothing less.
May God lead us to the full height of the gospel, the elevation and the power of it, so that we may come out here like Christ and like God. We are to come out in our dignity, and like the apostle Paul, less than the least of all, to minister unto all. That is the divine intent.
{467}
The believer's house has a much greater place in Scripture than is generally understood. The house or household is noted from the outset. Indeed, the book of Genesis alludes to it more, perhaps, than any other. The headship of the man is a marked feature of the house. Adam named his wife twice, but Eve began to name the children as they were born (@Genesis 4:1,2,25). This was Adam's prerogative, and in naming Seth in @Genesis 5:1 - 3, he made a new beginning, and evidently re-established his headship.
The birth of Methuselah necessitated that Enoch should walk with God. "Enoch walked with God after he begat Methuselah three hundred years, and begat sons and daughters" (@Genesis 5:22). It is clear that the advent of a family made a walk with God imperative for this man of faith. What an example was set to Methuselah and his brothers and sisters by their father!
Noah, the next man of faith, "prepared an ark to the saving of his house". In him there was a new beginning. Compare @Genesis 6:9 with chapter 5:1,2. He "was a just man and perfect in his generations, and Noah walked with God". His sons are mentioned in chapter 5 in chronological order, but in chapter 6 they are again spoken of after it is stated that their father was a righteous man and walked with God. How privileged they were to have such a father! Noah prepared the ark in which God mercifully preserved him and his house through the deluge. He honoured God and God honoured him, but afterwards Noah failed. Alas! he did not control himself, and hence was disqualified as head of his house. Where Noah came short, however, Abraham shone brightly. His house was pleasing to God. The divine visit to the patriarch, recorded in @Genesis 18, would show this. It is touching to note the *mutuality* that marked this visit. At Emmaus, as spoken of in @Luke 24, the Lord Jesus
{468}
exercised the house-father's function. He broke the bread, but here in @Genesis 18 the divine visitors said, "So do, as *thou* hast said". It is mutuality, not authority. Afterwards Jehovah announces that Abraham is to have a son, and commends him, saying, "*I know him, that he will command his children and his household after him*". Thus Abraham may be regarded as the model father, and the statement in the New Testament in @Hebrews 11:9, that he dwelt in tents with Isaac and Jacob, confirms this.
{469}
MORE THAN CONQUERORS
@Luke 12:32; @James 1:25; @James 2:12
I wish to dwell specially upon the importance of maintaining a right spirit. The gospel as in Romans effects deliverance for man. It effects adjustment as to the conscience, and finally views the believer as receiving the Holy Spirit, ending with the statement, that "in all these things we are more than conquerors through him that loved us" (@Romans 8:37). That is a statement that covers all believers who are in the light of that epistle. They are more than conquerors in the most adverse circumstances. What I understand by a conqueror in a Christian sense is that he maintains a right spirit in adversity. He is always superior as to his spirit. There are certain elements presented objectively that help in that connection, but aside from the Holy Spirit it is quite impossible to maintain the Spirit of Christ in adverse circumstances. I would call attention to Paul's letters. It is always interesting to take account of opening and closing statements; these indicate the attitude of the writer towards those written to. In looking at Paul's letters, one is struck by the way he speaks of the spirits of the saints. He ends with the desire "the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all" or "with your spirit". He was concerned that there should be the maintaining of Christ's spirit. Paul had amongst others received of His Spirit. John had said "of his fulness have all we received and grace for grace" (@John 1:16). I think he understood it. He looks at grace as coming wave upon wave from Christ. Paul had received and proved its supporting value in service, in reproach and in suffering. So it should be with the saints. Thus it can be reckoned on, and earnestly desired and sought by each.
There are certain things presented to us objectively
{470}
to help us. One of the great objective things is the *Father's care*. The gospel brings the light of the Father to us, and the youngest believer is viewed as knowing the Father. In the first three gospels the Lord invariably brings in the Father. The disciples had attached themselves to Jesus, and companied with Him; they had continued with Him in His temptations, they were of special interest to the Father in their continuing with Christ in companionship, in His, not their temptations. The Lord continually instructs them as to the Father's care, and as a Man here, He showed in their company what the Father was to Him. In @Matthew 11:17 where the Lord's testimony to Israel is rejected by city after city, He says, "we have piped unto you and ye have not danced". The Lord Jesus came with His ministry of grace and heavenly strains of music. To speak reverently, like David He was the sweet Psalmist of Israel as regards God. He was skilled in heavenly music. I do not know of anything that would bring out the grace of ministry as that does. He says, "we have piped unto you". Think of the music in the ministry of Christ! It drew forth nothing from them but rebuffs, suspicion, resentment and reproach. Village after village, town after town, city after city, was visited, with the wonderful music of the ministry of Christ, but there was no response from Israel.
John sums it up in saying, "He came unto his own and his own received him not" (@John 1:11). The Lord had to face the definite refusal of His ministry. They had rejoiced in John's light for a season, but not in Christ's. Sent from the Father with such music and such good works, He nevertheless had to face their refusal. We but little enter into what His feelings were. In the presence of this refusal, John the baptist's faith fails, and he sends this message to the Lord, "Art thou he that should come?" (@Matthew 11:3) adding to the Lord's pain. But in the presence of
{471}
all *that*, the Lord lifted up His eyes to the Father. I want each to come to a definite knowledge of the Father. Jesus says here, "I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth because thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes" (chapter 11:25). We want to see to it that our spirits never succumb. At *that* time, He rejoiced in spirit. His spirit was right!
Now think of our circumstances. There is always pressure, sometimes more, sometimes less, always something. When it is felt, what do you do at *that* time, when the pressure is heaviest? There are seasons of rejoicing, and we may rejoice, thank God! We may rejoice with them that rejoice. But there are times of weeping. Solomon speaks of a time for everything. A time had arrived of outward defeat in the history of the Lord. At that time! What a moment for Christ and the Father, to see the supreme victory at this moment of outward defeat, in the rejoicing of His spirit and the outgoing of His heart in thanksgiving! I mention that as a model for us in a scene of adversity, either as Levites or as ordinary men and women under God's government here on earth. Hence the Lord proceeds to say, "Take my yoke upon you and learn of me" (chapter 11:29). There He stands out as a model for all to go down. What a blessed yoke! He was here for the Father's will, and He rejoiced in spirit, and in that rejoicing received all that was to follow. To a father a babe must be an object of care. There are the babes, they are objects of the Father's care. The Father's things were revealed to babes. "Even so Father; for so it seemed good in thy sight" (verse 26). It seemed good in His sight. How blessed that works out! It is a question of what is good in *His* sight.
In @Luke 12 the Lord looks upon His own as a "little flock". Look at that word *little*. Christianity began with outward littleness, a mustard seed.
{472}
"Paul" means "little" and he was a little man in his own estimation. Paul was a man like ourselves. It is well to have a model, a man of like passions with ourselves, so it is brought nearer to us. Paul was a model Christian. The word *little* is a characteristic word in Christianity. The saints were outwardly very small, there were not many titled people amongst them. Later, Paul says, "not many noble are called". He does not say "not any", a man is not disqualified by having a title, but there are "not many" such. God is greater than all titles, and a man gets blessing on the ground of being a man, in spite of a title. "Not many noble are called", says Paul, but the "base things of the world, and things which are despised hath God chosen, yea, and things which are not" (@1 Corinthians 1:26,28).
*Little flock*! How happy to be content with that! The Lord never intended to gather huge congregations here. They gender worldly principles. The Lord's thought is littleness as to this world, and fewness; not indeed that there are not to be many, there are, for who can count the dust of Jacob or the fourth part of the seed of Israel? Things are to be very great in God's world, huge, wonderful! The great things of God, the wonderful works of God, but they are small in this world. "Fear not, little flock". How happy to return to a sense of littleness! "Thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes" (@Matthew 11:25). So the little flock were to come into the kingdom. Fear not! The Father's good pleasure is connected with them. We have the light of the kingdom; we are to have it, though kingdoms are in other hands now outwardly, and Romans tells us, that we are to respect these in whose hands the government is, for it is of God. We are to submit ourselves to every ordinance of man for the Lord's sake. It is a free man that has grace enough to restrict himself for
{473}
the Lord's sake. He is worthy of such sacrifice. It is unto the Lord not unto the nations. In Romans, it is for God's sake. The epistles of Peter treat of the government of God from the angels that fell to the end, and so of good and evil. The second epistle speaks of Lot in Sodom. He was a righteous man, but he was not right in his spirit. The government of God takes account of the vexations of our souls. Our tears occasioned by the wickedness around us are put in His bottle, but Romans takes account of a recovered man who is exercised in the conquest of good over evil; he is in victory, instead of being pressed down by evil. Lot was not a recovered man. David recovered *all*, but it was in *victory*; he had something to give in the conflict of good over evil. There are many *Lots* today, hence the need of Romans. Romans contemplates an overcomer every day, and how he overcomes the evil with the good, the good that is of God, not in ourselves. It is by His spirit.
It is very exhilarating to contemplate @Romans 8. Victory overcomes adverse circumstances. It ends in a conquering, not a vexed spirit. It is not a vexed spirit, but a rejoicing spirit. I commend Romans earnestly to you. Lot's vexations are noted down, but how much happier for *rejoicings* to be noted! "Rejoice in the Lord alway; and again I say rejoice". "In everything by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving let your requests be made known unto God, and the peace of God which passeth all understanding, shall keep your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus" (@Philippians 4:4,6,7). It is important to understand military terms when we have to do with evil. Satan attacks our hearts, but they are garrisoned by peace. Peace cannot be defined, but it can be realised. David put garrisons in the towns he took, to maintain them for him. On these lines our spirits are kept right. Romans teaches us to observe man's requirements.
{474}
I never look upon the authorities as my enemies, I regard them as in my favour. James brings in the law under which we are. In Galatians, we have a nine-branches tree, *one* tree bearing the nine fruits of the Spirit, "against such there is no law" (chapter 5:23). As a Christian, that is what I want. The laws of the nations are not against that. I am in possession of that against which there is no law. Thank God for that! How happy to be in relation to that against which there is no law! You can let it be seen before your superior officer. He is not against that, nor is the king, nor magistrates. The law is for lawbreakers, but the Christian is outside all that. He has that against which no law is: love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance. I want you to get hold of this, that there is no limitation to that fruit.
As respecting the laws of the land, I am in outward bondage, but I retain the fruits of the Spirit against which there is no law nor limitation, though outwardly limited as to my body. In Deuteronomy the feast of Pentecost, was not limited by time, but connected with what was unrestricted and unlimited, what indeed belongs to the eternal state of things, belonging to the Father and the Son and our place eternally; no law is against that. In @James 1:25 we have the law referred to, "whoso looketh into the perfect law *of liberty*". My desire is that our souls may remain in liberty. One wonders what the outcome of the present circumstances will be. The spirit of militarism is insidious like other spirits. Is that spirit to give character to the people of God? It must be faced and fought against. The exercise is, that my spirit is to be right and then I shall walk in liberty. Hence "whoso looketh into the perfect law of liberty", (and mark) "continueth therein, he being not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work, this man shall be blessed in his deed". Aside from that,
{475}
liberty will depart, and there will be a shrinking and a narrowing up, and God and the saints will be deprived of the outflow of the affections of the heart. A soldier is foreign to the idea of a brother, and while I say a brother may make a good soldier, a soldier does not make a good brother; hence the spirit must be fought against, so that we may be preserved for God.
I love to think of Onesimus, he ran away and was sent back to be a slave, but also a brother. How are we going to come out of these circumstances? Paul would send you back as a brother beloved not a soldier. See that you return a brother beloved, not a soldier! Onesimus was once unprofitable as a slave, but now profitable to me and to you; says Paul to Philemon. We must be profitable. Do your work willingly as a servant, not grudgingly. We want to maintain the balance, in our behaviour, to those over us, and to the Lord. Do not deprive the saints of the profit. You can be a brother beloved in spite of the uniform. Profitable to *me*, says Paul; profitable to your brethren, but all this hinges on maintaining a right spirit under all circumstances.
May the Lord grant this to speaker and hearers alike!
{476}
CHRIST IN RELATION TO SUFFERING SAINTS
@Revelation 5:5 - 14; @Revelation 6:9 - 11; @Revelation 7:1 - 3; @Revelation 8:1 - 5
This book affords us many features of Christ's position in regard to things on this earth. As most of us here will be aware, chapters 1 to 3 present the Lord as dealing judicially with "the things that are;" that is, the seven churches; in chapter 4 we have presented to us the Lord sitting on the throne in relation to the creation of God; and chapter 5, from which we have read, introduces Him not sitting *on* the throne, but standing in the midst of it, and symbolised as a "Lamb as it had been slain".
I want to speak of Christ in this latter connection because it is Christ in relation to *suffering saints*. He Himself had suffered, but He was now in the place of authority, in the midst of the throne. It is not my thought to open up any prophetic line from these chapters, but to bring before you the relation of Christ to His suffering people. Another thing that I may remark on is the position of the writer of this book, John, who is not here as an apostle, but as a prophet. In describing his own exercises and position, he calls himself a brother of the saints and their companion in tribulation; thus, one well qualified to speak to them.
One would not essay to speak to the Lord's people unless one was in sympathy with them in what they were passing through. One might not be in the exact circumstances of the saints, for our circumstances are all varied, yet one would seek to maintain in the soul a sympathy and companionship in spirit, at least, with all sufferers for Christ's sake; not that one would encourage in any who are suffering peculiarly, any pride in martyrdom; for any glory that accrues from suffering here is not for us, it is for God. We come into the gain of it, but it is not to minister
{477}
to the flesh in us. All the fat is for God. Even the possession of the Holy Spirit might be boasted of by the flesh to exalt itself, whereas any greatness or dignity which the Holy Spirit produces in us is alone for God. All the fat, as we read, is for God; so one would deprecate any development of the spirit of martyrdom with which the flesh would clothe itself in the people of God; and one would be reminded of what the apostle Peter says, "the same afflictions are accomplished in your brethren that are in the world" (@1 Peter 5:9). Peter intimates to those to whom he wrote that their sufferings were not exclusive to them, but general. The people of God in this world suffer characteristically, as true to Christ, as it is said, "Yea, and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus *shall* suffer persecution" (@2 Timothy 3:12).
Well now, that is how John stands in this book. He is a brother, which every true minister of Christ would seek to be, for one cannot serve his brethren unless he has them really before him as being one of them. And then he says, "and companion in tribulation". Although shut off from them in presence in Patmos, yet he was a companion of the saints in their tribulations. I make a point of that. As having passed through and as passing through tribulation, he could be a companion of theirs in their peculiar distress, and in the exercises occasioned by their sufferings. And I would further remark, dear brethren, that we have a great Priest over the house of God; not only a high Priest, but a *great* One; that is to say, One who is capable of taking into account the exercises of every one in the house; indeed we have a suggestion of it here, not that it applies directly, but it says of the Lamb that "he had seven horns" (that is, the perfection of power) "and seven eyes, which are the seven Spirits of God sent forth into all the earth". That is a very comforting thought in regard to Christ.
{478}
I come now to this passage in chapter 5 in order to present the true bearing of the passages in chapters 6, 7 and 8. John weeps, not on account of his tribulations, for they were his glory, but on account of the fact that there was no one in view, so far as he could see, equal to the task of opening the seals, of opening the book of God's thoughts in regard to this earth. In other words, John was with God; he was thinking for God; and that was his qualification to speak for God. He was a man who would weep, not on account of his sufferings, nor even the sufferings of the saints, but because there was no one available, as far as he could see, to open the book and to loose its seals. Such was John, and like John the baptist, too, he was entirely with God in his exercises.
Well now, one of the elders reminds him that he need not weep. Much sorrow amongst the people of God is occasioned through lack of intelligence. Did we only know more, and the knowledge is available, for the Son of God has come that we might know Him that is true, did we know more, we should suffer less in this respect. So the prophet is reminded that he need not weep; the elder says, "Weep not: behold, the Lion of the tribe of Juda, the Root of David, hath prevailed to open the book, and to loose the seven seals thereof". I want to dwell just upon this glorious Person, known here as "The Lion of the tribe of Juda", because it is an immense thing to be maintained in the sense of victory in our souls, whether it be the victory that Christ has achieved in death, or whether it be the victory of the Holy Spirit in the saints.
You will remember how Rahab mentioned to the spies, that she had heard about what the Lord had done at the Red Sea, and what *they* had done to Og, king of Bashan. The former refers to the death of Christ; the latter to the Holy Spirit's power typically. This woman of faith had light as regards
{479}
these two triumphs of God; one the death and resurrection of Christ, and the other the Holy Spirit in the saints. It was a dual victory, and she was aware of it; so that she takes account of the spies and hides them in the light of these great facts. She had beforehand the light of victory. She might well hide the spies. There was no danger, however it might appear outwardly; her faith surmounted the power of the king of Jericho, for she was on the winning side. She was already on the side of victory, and her faith enabled her to ally herself with the victors. She had heard of the victory of Jehovah at the Red Sea, and the triumph of the people over Sihon and Og, kings of the Amorites.
These are great facts that might be brought home to the soul of every believer today. It is an immense thing to be in that way in the sense of victory. "This is the victory which has gotten the victory over the world, our faith". What a statement that is! "Who is he that overcometh the world but he that believeth that Jesus is the Son of God?" (@1 John 5:4,5). Wonderful statements these! They belong to the weakest believer. It is for you to know that victory. Well, that is what is suggested to us, I believe, in the Lion. The lion is one of the three things which have a stately step, and it says of him, that he turns not away for any. That is the lion. You see the symbol in full measure in Christ. He had to face the most powerful combination in the whole universe against God, and He turned not away from it. His sweat as great drops of blood in Gethsemane was not because He feared death itself, He turned not away from death, but He dreaded the forsaking of God. This became Him, surely. He instinctively, and of course rightly, recoiled from the thought of the forsaking of His God. As the Lion of the tribe of Juda He prevailed to open the book, and to loose the seven seals thereof.
{480}
Now the next symbol referred to is not that of a lion. I want you to note that. It is not now a question of the Lion, which is in regard to victory in our souls, but John speaks of a Lamb. The lamb is not a militant creature. Symbolically, the lamb is a passive creature, as so beautifully expressed in @Isaiah 53:7; "He was led as a lamb to the slaughter". The lamb is very different from the lion. The Lion is not seen as if He had been slain; you do not find any such thought in regard to Christ in that respect. It is said that "A living dog is better than a dead lion" (@Ecclesiastes 9:4), but that is not spoken of the Lord. As a Lion, He lives, He has gone through death and triumphed over it, and that is victory for our souls. But as regards the public position, He is the Lamb, and in this respect He is the Leader in Christianity; He is the Sufferer. He is Leader in many things, but He leads in suffering. The Leader of our salvation has been made perfect through suffering. What a suggestion for us! What a wonderful thought for our hearts! The scripture says, "*Ye* have not yet resisted unto blood, striving against sin" (@Hebrews 12:4). The Lord did that, He went through it, and as it is said, "is set down at the right hand of the throne of God" (verse 2). What a Leader! He is "the leader and completer of our faith". The Leader begins the thing. Abel was not the beginner of faith, Christ began, and Christ completed it, and that course involved suffering, and we are to be connected with a suffering Christ; hence in the early chapters of the Acts He is announced as the "Nazarene", the suffering, despised, rejected Man in this world. That is what He is, and so here we have Him presented to us as a Lamb as it had been slain, not *sitting* upon the throne as in chapter 4, where the question is as to His rights, which are God's rights in creation, but standing in the midst of it, surrounded by the elders and living creatures, and as the Lamb. He is the suffering One;
{481}
but although the suffering One, He has the perfection of power, for that always attaches to Christ. "Having seven horns", it is said, too, "and seven eyes, which are the seven spirits of God sent forth into all the earth". What a thought for our hearts there is in that! that the Lord *in this light* is perfectly cognisant of the circumstances of the saints in the earth; He knows everything.
I want now to draw your attention to the seals but not to make a prophetical application. They are opened by His own hands, not by angelic ministry, and I want to show you, dear brethren, that in opening these seals, while terrible things happened on the earth, what comes to light is the suffering, praying saints. The Lamb has His eye on them. Things are happening today that are dreadful to men, but the Lord is concerned about His saints. He will bring them to light; He will see to them. If He is going to open these seals, and to bring to light the mind of God in regard to the earth, He is not going to overlook His saints.
Now in chapter 6, when the fifth seal is opened, there are seen under the altar the souls of them that had been slain, and they say, "How long, O sovereign Ruler, holy and true, dost thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth?" The answer is that white robes are given to them; not vengeance, mark, but white robes; not but that vengeance will come, but they needed white robes, thus their service is owned of God. Though dead, they live to God of course; they are not risen yet; but I just want to point out to you that the answer to their exercises in regard to vengeance is that they are to get white robes. They did not yet get all that God had in His heart for them, but they did get, we may say, what they needed for the moment. Let us not miss the white robes in this hour. Of course, I am not making any prophetic interpretation here.
{482}
I am only deducing certain principles for present application, which is perfectly right, for every scripture is profitable in this way. Suffering, as viewed from God's standpoint, brings about purification, cleansing and holiness; indeed, after it is said of the Lord that He sat down at the right hand of God, having gone through the whole path of faith as a Man here, the word is, "ye have forgotten the exhortation which speaketh unto you as unto children, My son, despise not thou the chastening of the Lord" (@Hebrews 12:5). They had forgotten that God disciplines. Suffering and persecution may be turned to account in the way of discipline by the Father, and under His hand they become the water of purification; so that we become white and pure in our thoughts, aspirations and hopes, and in our associations.
Now all these things and more besides develop as we accept suffering from the hand of God. They are, as it were, in His hand; our sufferings are from the Father of spirits and for our purification. And so to these souls the word is, "that they should rest yet for a little season until their fellow-servants also and their brethren, that should be killed as they were, should be fulfilled". Other things have to happen yet; it may seem hard, but it is the divine way, and to those who are subject, who have faith, and accept the will of God, it is His perfect way, and in the sense of this one would not have anything altered. The will of God must be accomplished, so that it was a question for those slain ones of waiting in patience "until their brethren, that should be killed as they were, should be fulfilled". In other words, a waiting attitude becomes us, in order that every item of the will of God should be accomplished.
Now I read the passages in chapter 7 to show you that under the Lamb's administration in opening the seals the four winds of the earth are held up in order that they should not blow. What for? That the
{483}
servants of our God should be sealed in their foreheads. That is the way God comes in; we may reckon on that. On the one hand, we see God's suffering saints, and there is great gain in suffering, but on the other hand, we see that God can come in and alter things governmentally at His pleasure. I want you to consider this, that men have not everything their own way in this world, however it may appear.
I want you to see that there are angels delegated to act on this earth for God governmentally, in the ordering of government; and that they are here, as it says in @Hebrews 1:14, "for service on account of those who shall inherit salvation". So here we see that the angels hold back the four winds of *the earth*. I wonder whether we are accustomed to reckon upon this sort of acting on the part of God, knowing that He can come in in His governmental ways with the world and alter things according to His pleasure. It is all a question of His pleasure. How restful the soul is that knows this! "And I saw another angel ascending from the east, having the seal of the living God ... saying, Hurt not the earth, neither the sea, nor the trees, till we have sealed the servants of our God in their foreheads". God is coming in to give a little respite to His people. Conditions on the earth are stayed or altered for the moment in order that this operation might take place. I wonder if our souls are waiting upon God for that. Think of this suggestion of "the seal of the *living God*"! As marked by life you are not drifting like a dead fish in the stream. You are able to go against the stream, to stand against the current. You are in the energy of life. That is a very wonderful thing, and then it says, "I heard the number of them which were sealed". It is not *now* a question of being in fellowship. Today the question is that of having life.
{484}
You will remember how that the Lord is said to have shown Himself *alive* to His disciples for forty days; their souls were to be impressed with that kind of life, and that they might be exercised to come into it. That is the idea in Scripture. Think of coming out here in the life of Christ! I am not going to speak of that to develop it, but the Holy Spirit is life to the Christian. Not yet developed life, it is true, but he has the Holy Spirit with a view to righteousness being brought about in him. "The Spirit is life on account of righteousness". I can conceive of nothing that is a greater witness to what God is morally than a righteous life in this world, the acknowledgment of the will of God and the rights of others, and a gracious, giving spirit in the people of God. And so the winds of the earth are held up in order that the bondmen of the living God may be sealed in their foreheads. These are the ones who count. It is not what we *profess* to believe simply. It is life that tells. I am only dealing now with the suggestion here.
I pass on now to chapter 8 before I close, and I wish to show that the prayers of suffering saints are all presented efficaciously by Christ. It says that "when he had opened the seventh seal, there was silence in heaven about the space of half an hour". I suppose, if we come to the prophetic side, something happens that heaven cannot openly condemn or ratify. And then it says, "I saw the seven angels who stand before God, and seven trumpets were given to them. And another angel came and stood at the altar". I want to speak a little about this angel. It says he "came and stood at the altar", not the altar of burnt offering, but the altar of incense; I suppose the passage refers to the tabernacle. That is, it is Christ as our High Priest, One who takes account of our prayers and makes them efficacious before God.
I deal with this just for a moment, because our
{485}
prayers are very indefinite sometimes, very mixed. Mixed motives often enter into them, but I would remind you of the word in @Romans 8, that He who searches the heart knows what is the mind of the Spirit, because He intercedes for the saints according to God, and with groanings which cannot be uttered. So that from the saint who has the Spirit there is constant intercession Godward according to Him. That is not to say that all *our* utterances in prayer are according to God, but the Holy Spirit's motions in us are according to God. I thank God for all this.
One is conscious of needs that cannot be understood or expressed, but He reads the groanings of the Spirit in the saints; He knows how to read the motions produced by the Holy Spirit, but that does not mean that all *our* prayers are accepted; so the Lord Jesus takes them into His hands and presents them to God. I think this is very encouraging; not that we would encourage imperfect prayers, for our prayers should be the expression of the Spirit's motions in us. It is said, "If we know that he hear us ... we know that we have the petitions that we desired of him" (@1 John 5:15). That would be direct prayer, that He hears, unmixed and acceptable; but being what we are, in a mixed condition, it is as well to admit it, that our prayers are very imperfect, and yet we know that what is sincere and according to God goes up to God, they are not lost. Such is the system of grace with which we are connected; as it is said, "the throne of grace". God will rightly interpret any right petition, however imperfectly it may have been expressed.
The Lord then is symbolised in this angel, who stood at the altar having a golden censer; he is acting officially. The elders and living creatures are said to have golden bowls full of incense, which are the prayers of the saints, but not censers. They are not seen presenting the prayers of the saints
{486}
to God. Christ alone can do that; He alone has that place of dignity, so He has the golden censer, that is the official vessel for the presentation of prayers to God at the golden altar; and we read, "there was given unto him much incense, that he should offer it with the, prayers of all saints upon the golden altar which was before the throne. And the smoke of the incense, which came with the prayers of the saints, ascended up before God out of the angel's hand". The time is gone; so I do not dwell upon these verses, but I would commend them to you in closing, that we may have clearly before our minds that the Lord Jesus is at the golden altar, and He is there in order to make our petitions efficacious before the throne of God. They go up in all the fragrance of this much incense; it is the fragrance of Christ as appearing before God as Priest.
I leave these thoughts with you, and I trust God will use this word for our encouragement in present circumstances.
{487}
AN APPEAL TO YOUNG MEN
@Acts 7:58; @Acts 9:1 - 20; @1 Samuel 30:11 - 16; @Zechariah 2:1 - 5
There is a great demand for young men; a great demand for them in the world, and a great demand for them in heaven. Heaven has its own way of expressing itself, and it takes particular care to secure young men. We see in Saul of Tarsus a representative of this class. He is first spoken of in Scripture as "a young man", and as such he was employed in opposition to Christ. He stood as a witness when Stephen, the martyr of Christ, was stoned. He was not there merely as an ordinary spectator of an execution; he was there as an enemy of Christ, who had a personal interest in what was happening. He took account of Stephen as a witness of the Lord Jesus, and he would have none of Christ; he would fain blot out every remembrance of Jesus, and so he had a personal interest in what was happening, as the murderers of that witness of Jesus assailed him with stones. It is not said *he* cast a stone, but he was there, and those who did cast stones laid their clothes at his feet. "The witnesses laid down their clothes at a young man's feet, whose name was Saul". But there was a demand in heaven for this young man. Heaven knew about him; the Lord had His eye on him even before this. He was in the mind of heaven, and heaven has its eye on such an one, and has a great way of attaining its end. Heaven has wonderful resources.
The first activity of heaven that we find in Scripture involved the opening of its windows, to let out some of its reserves in order that the will of God might be carried out. These contributed enormously to the deluge. There were other resources besides, for God controls everything; but let no one assume that God
{488}
has not sufficient resources to overwhelm it, if He see fit. There were the fountains of the great deep which He broke up and the windows of heaven which He opened, great reservoirs of water above and below the firmament, as we read, "and let it divide the waters from the waters" (@Genesis 1:6). These were all at the divine bidding, when God took in hand to deal with the corrupt power. I often think of these resources; how steadily, how surely, how relentlessly the waters rose, and rose, and rose till the tops of the highest mountains were covered. Men might attempt to scale the very loftiest peaks in the hope of escaping the relentless force of those waters, but of what avail? It was only to prolong their torment and terror, as those resources of God rose higher and higher at His bidding, till all the high hills that were under the whole heaven were submerged in the awful catastrophe. Whereby then can any one assume to compete with God, to stand up permanently in such an unequal contest? It were utterly fruitless.
So, as the clothes were laid down at Saul's feet, heaven had its eye on him, and heaven was determined to overwhelm him, not in wrath, but in *grace*, for he was not born in a day of wrath, but in a day of grace, in the accepted time, in the day of salvation. He was born into such a dispensation. He was living when Jesus was here in the days of His flesh, but we know he lived after the cross, after the ascension, and after Pentecost; so he came into a dispensation marked by the grace and love of God, a dispensation pervaded by the very atmosphere of heaven, for One had been here great enough to give expression to all that is there, and that One was Jesus. He gave expression to what was in heaven, and that in face of all the opposition Satan could bring to bear against Him; for no one can dwell on Gethsemane and Calvary without being touched with the greatness of that blessed One who could maintain the grace of
{489}
heaven in presence of such circumstances. He could turn to the women who followed Him, and say, "Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for yourselves, and for your children" (@Luke 23:28), and, as He suffered, He could say, "Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do" (verse 34). He maintained there at its full height what is in heaven; and, withal, as the result of the glorious work accomplished at the cross He opened the windows of heaven, not now to let out the waters of wrath to engulf a guilty world, but to let out grace. He opened wide the sluices of heaven, so to speak, that the grace should flow out from Himself in heaven. And Saul comes into that. Wonderful fact!
So heaven's eye was on that young man, and heaven could bring sufficient grace to bear upon him to overwhelm him. He had in Jesus One who knew a young man's experience. During the Lord's ministry on earth, a young man came to Him, wishing to know what to do in order to obtain eternal life. Think of a question like that addressed to Jesus! He had come to make eternal life possible, and here was this deluded young man asking what he could do to obtain it. How foolish! But the Lord did not call him a fool; He knew better how to deal with young men. We need not always call things by their names, for grace knows better than to wound souls. The Lord could show him how fruitless his attempt to obtain eternal life would be. "All these things", the youth said, alluding to the commandments, "have I kept from my youth". Then it says, "Jesus looking upon him, loved him" (@Mark 10:20,21). He knew the value of young men; and so He knew how to deal with Saul. No one is skilled like Jesus. The wisdom by which the world was framed is now employed in securing young men and young women. Luke enlarges on the wisdom and skill in which grace acts, for, after all, the great point in service is to be
{490}
successful, and in order to be successful we must be wise. Hence the Lord in heaven exercises His wisdom, in securing His objects, and thus making His service effective; so He spoke to Saul, when the time arrived for it. He had allowed him to stand there and look after the clothes of the murderers. It was a poor employ, terribly poor employ; and yet the Lord allowed it, and He did so in His wisdom. But He had His eye on Saul all the while, and permitted him to proceed until He found him near Damascus; then He seized His opportunity, if we may venture to speak thus.
I speak of things in this way because of those here under His eye, whom He may be waiting His opportunity to address. Wisdom can wait, but if it wait, it waits effectively; it does not miss its mark. So light from heaven shines round about Saul, for it is a question of heaven, and a voice is heard in the Hebrew language. The Lord Jesus knows *all* the languages, and He speaks to a Hebrew of the Hebrews in the Hebrew tongue, because it was a question of the success of His service, and He speaks to him as if He were interested in him; He speaks as one well known, not as a stranger. He says, "Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?" And the Lord would speak to *you*. He would say, Why this indifference? it should be otherwise; you have had opportunities, why is it thus with you? He would call you by name as He did Saul of Tarsus here. Think of the occurrence: that a man should be of such interest to heaven that his name is called out twice!
The Lord would say to you, Why persecute Me? You may say, I am not persecuting the Lord. But do not be too sure, do not flatter yourself; for if you pursue your present course, the time will come when you will be tested, and you will find yourself opposed to Christ; you will be found, alas! on the wrong side. You are there now, though your will may
{491}
not be as active as it will yet be. If you do not love the Lord's people, you do not love the Lord, and if not at home among them, you would not be at home in heaven, for the atmosphere there is the same as it is among His people here. You will undoubtedly be tested, and then it may come to light that you are opposed. Do you love Him? That is the test. The apostle says, "If any one love not the Lord Jesus Christ let him be Anathema Maran-atha"; that is, accursed at His coming (@1 Corinthians 16:22). He does not say, Let him be accursed *now*; Paul would not change the character of the dispensation on any account; it is not a dispensation of curse, but of blessing; but when the Lord comes the dispensation will be over. He would not curse any one now, but it was morally right, surely, that the apostle should speak as he does, for how could any non-lover of Christ fail to come under the curse when the day of grace is past? The Lord had His eye on this young man, and I am persuaded on many here, and would raise the question, Why are things thus with you? Your sister is converted, your brother is on the Lord's side, why not you? Why persecutest thou Me?
We know the history of Saul, and the more we ponder it, the more it yields, for it is a model of the Lord's dealing at the present time in expressing the mind of heaven; "that in me first", he wrote later, "Jesus Christ might show forth all longsuffering, for a pattern to them which should hereafter believe" (@1 Timothy 1:16). And Saul surrenders, and says, "Lord, what wilt thou have me to do?" What a moment for heaven! It is one of the most interesting transactions that heaven has ever witnessed. Heaven knew what had happened, for every conversion, however insignificant it might appear, is of interest to heaven. "There is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner that repenteth" (@Luke 15:10). But in Saul we have not only a sinner repenting, but a
{492}
young man secured for Christ, one who was to shine in the testimony. He is called a vessel, "an elect vessel". "This man is an elect vessel to me, to bear my name". Think of the honour of coming into that! That is the demand at the present time, the demand in heaven is for vessels.
Referring now to our scripture in 1 Samuel, we find the need was urgent. Ziklag was burnt, David's wives and family were all carried captive, and David was about to be stoned. He asks for the ephod and gets light, and now he is on the way to victory and knows it. The answer to his inquiry of the Lord was, "Pursue, for thou shalt surely overtake them and without fail recover all". I believe Nelson always counted his victories before his battles; so David knew the end of his exploits, for he never lost a battle, never! He is a type of Christ in this respect. If you are enlisted, it is on the winning side; there is great spiritual exhilaration in the certainty of victory. Now, an Egyptian is found and brought to David. The end of all gospel service is to find these Egyptians and to bring them to Jesus. David had need of this man. He is on the way to recover all and victory is certain, but he needed the Egyptian. It says, too, of the colt, "the Lord hath need of him" (@Luke 19:31). And the Lord has need of you. But to follow the narrative here, they brought the Egyptian to David, and gave him bread and water. These represent the staples of life; but there is more, they gave him "a piece of a cake of figs and two clusters of raisins", and these are the extras, *the excess of grace*, as another has said. Christ is offered to you now. He is the bread of God, and He gives His flesh "for the life of the *world*" (@John 6:51), not only for His people. The food question is a great question in the world, but God has solved it, and solved it in Christ. "Moses gave you not that bread from heaven", He said to the Jews, "but my Father giveth you the true bread from
{493}
heaven" (verse 32). And is there only what the Father gives? No, there is more: "The bread that *I* will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world" (verse 51). What did that not mean to Jesus! He went down to die, He died that we might live. Let that thought come into our hearts. Think of the Lord of glory being dead, and His flesh becoming food, and His blood drink! These are the staples of life; and then there are the extras, what the apostle calls "the fulness of the blessing of the gospel of Christ" (@Romans 15:29), all that the Holy Spirit would bring out of heaven from a glorified Christ, all the witness brought down to earth and presented in the gospel. When the trees called on the fig tree to reign over them the reply was, "Should I forsake my sweetness and my good fruit and go to be promoted over the trees?" (@Judges 9:11). No, it retains its place, so the sweetness is ministered on earth.
Then they gave raisins to the young man; these would stimulate, and having partaken, the spirit of this young man came again to him, we read. He is now in touch with God. My soul puts me in touch with men, it is the seat of one's affection, but in my spirit I am in touch with God. And now he confesses, he tells out his whole history. I doubt if any one would do that till in relation with God; in the light of God there is no need to keep anything back; all can be owned as bad, for through the meritorious death of Jesus it is put as far away from me as from Him who bore it vicariously on the cross. So Paul says, "This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners; of whom I am chief" (@1 Timothy 1:15). The death of Jesus clears me from my public history. So this young man acknowledges himself to be a young man of Egypt, or of the world, as we might say, but now he is a young man of David, and David can use him, and he does so immediately. "Canst thou
{494}
bring me down to this company?" he says. How honoured he was, as doubtless he would realise in after years, to be used in this way! How he would look back upon the grace of David, and rejoice in the service he was able to render to him. He gave the victory to David, it might be said. Think of what you may become in the service of the Lord! Think of the service Paul rendered! God needed Saul just at that moment. The time had come when such a vessel was essential to the testimony. So today the Lord would lay hold of you. It is not for me to say who is to be secured, it is for Him to say, but He gets the heart He is after in due time.
We see in Zechariah how a young man, thus brought to Christ and set up and employed serviceably, is initiated into the purpose of God and what is to take place in the future, for it is a great mistake for any servant to be merely occupied with what he himself is doing, and the results of his service; the Lord would lead him on to the world to come. The writer of the epistle to the Hebrews alludes to "the world to come, of which we speak" (chapter 2:5). Christians in those days spoke of it, and young men coming in today will hear of it, "the habitable world which is to come". Thank God, we do not care much about the habitable earth that now *is*. The inhabitants of the earth cause us pain as we see them, the lowest grades of humanity as well as the most exalted, the hyssop as well as the cedar. The heart recoils from all that goes on, and looks forward to the habitable world which is to come, where men will all be like Jesus. Wisdom could rejoice in the habitable part of the earth, looking forward to that day, and so does every believer. Hence the word in Zechariah is, "Run, speak to this young man". Is he aspiring to a place in *this* world, *this* earth, inhabited as it is? No, he is not thinking of that, he is thinking of something beyond. "I lifted up mine eyes", it says,
{495}
"and saw, and behold a man with a measuring line in his hand. And I said, Whither goest thou? And he said unto me, To measure Jerusalem". It was not the Jerusalem that now is, that is in bondage; not that, but the Jerusalem that shall be, the Jerusalem of God; *my* Jerusalem, as Zechariah would say. The angel is interested in Zechariah as he is in every young man who is looking forward to the world to come and to the purpose of God. So we read, "Run, speak to this young man, saying, Jerusalem shall be inhabited as towns without walls for the multitude of men and cattle therein". What a word for Zechariah and for every one of us as to the future! Men shall be like Christ; and cattle will be there for sacrifice, no doubt, that Christ may be honoured, and God honoured. There is to be abundance.
I just dwell on this, as it shows how light comes. Zechariah was interested, and hence the word, "Run, speak to this young man". I would say there is light for every young person who is interested. You get light as you are interested. It says in @Luke 19:11, "As they were listening to these things, he added and spake a parable". It is a question of whether you are listening, if so, light will stream into your soul. Further, we read, "I will be unto her a wall of fire round about, and will be the glory in the midst of her". Such is the position set before us; so we see that while we may be taken up for service, we are taken up also to shine in the sphere of divine purpose.
{496}
THE IMPORTANCE OF LOVING CHRIST
@John 13:18 - 30; @Colossians 1:12 - 19
The exercise I have is to call attention to the great importance of loving Christ. I want to connect it with the advantages that accrue from it, especially that it leads us into the benefit of His headship. One feels a peculiar exercise as to the headship of Christ, and what I would remark is, that, aside from loving Christ, souls get no *direct* advantage from it. I use the word direct, for you may get indirect advantage from it although your love for Christ may be very little. You may get indirect advantage by observing others who profit by it, who are in the good of it, but it is quite obvious that each believer should know the headship of Christ. Each believer who has the Spirit is in the body, and we read in regard of Christ as Head, "from whom all the body, ministered to and united together by the joints and bands, increases with the increase of God" (@Colossians 2:19). Therefore, every believer ought to be in direct relation with Christ in his own soul, in order that he should get the benefit of the headship and correspondingly contribute to the whole. Our contribution may be little or it may be much.
The two disciples who had left Jerusalem for Emmaus, when they returned to the company made a contribution to the company. In the house at Emmaus their souls had been touched by Christ's headship. They returned to Jerusalem and found the eleven and those that were with them, who were speaking about Christ as risen, and immediately they add their quota, telling the company how the Lord had spoken to them by the way and especially that He was made known unto them in the breaking of bread. Now that was a contribution by those who had come into the light of Christ as Head. The same
{497}
may be said of Mary Magdalene. Look at the contribution she made to the disciples as recorded in @John 20. For the moment she eclipsed even the eleven; she contributed to such an extent as to give them light as to their new relationship and position. I call attention to these two instances so that you may see the great gain of headship. Whether you have a meagre apprehension of it or a very full apprehension of it, there is gain for you and there is gain for the company, for you become a contributor. One would feel extremely poor and ashamed not to be a contributor in some sense. Indeed, we know that to each one of us has been given grace according to the measure of the gift of the Christ, and it is that we should be contributors.
Well now, my point is for the moment to show you that it depends on love for Christ, and I selected John's gospel because he says more about love than any of the evangelists. He says more too, perhaps, about hatred than any of them; he is a man of extremes in a sense, and he presents the things that he speaks of in their absoluteness. In speaking of love in contrast to hatred he intimates clearly that love is according to Christ and that hatred characterises Antichrist. It seems to me that Judas is the representative of the anti-Christian spirit; whereas, in a modest way, John presents "the disciple whom Jesus loved" as the expression of the spirit of Christianity.
In view of the character of @John 13, it is very suited that these two opposites should appear in it. I am not saying that other New Testament writers do not speak of love; they all do; Paul is very express about it; he says, "If any one love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha" (@1 Corinthians 16:22). Very strong language this! It is his way, in one sense, of expressing his estimate of Christ; he had wonderful affection for Christ. He is speaking to the
{498}
Corinthians. Amongst them, alas! there were evidently non-lovers of Christ. You will not remain long a non-lover; if you are that now you may presently become a hater of Christ. Hence the apostle is very pronounced in reminding you of the curse.
In writing to the Ephesians he does not suggest there were any amongst them who did not love Christ. He had a very great experience of the spiritual affections at Ephesus. You will all remember how, having called the elders, they embraced him; that is very beautiful! They loved him. They felt most of all, it says, that they should see his face no more. It was a scene to touch the heart. They loved the apostle, and this was really an evidence that they loved Christ. He does not therefore suggest that there was a non-lover amongst them; he rather emphasises in his epistle that they had faith in Christ Jesus and love, not only for him, but for *all* the saints. It is a wonderful thing to love Christ and *all* the saints. At the end of his epistle the apostle remarks, "Grace be with all them who love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity" (@Ephesians 6:24). He suggests there the possibility of the existence of love for Christ in insincerity. I am not prepared to define how it works out in the individual, but the apostle suggests it, and I mention it so that we may inquire what is the character of our love. Is there an element of corruption there? He pronounced his benediction on those who loved Christ in "incorruption" (N.T.). Remember that word.
So the apostle Paul treats of love very extensively; but, as I was remarking, John uses the word more frequently, he weaves it into the whole fabric of his writings, and on the opposite side you have presented the anti-Christian spirit, and Judas is the father of it. The reason why I say that Judas is the father of the anti-Christian spirit is that he was with Christ,
{499}
and so had the opportunity of knowing Him. Having known the Lord he left Him and betrayed Him. One cannot be an antichrist unless one knows Christ in some sense, you know in some sense what you are objecting to. Hence the characteristic of Antichrist is, "they went out". Judas went out. We have the word, "he went out", meaning that he left the circle in which the love of Christ was active. Let us beware of going out. Perhaps some trivial thing has given occasion to it, but one goes out. In what direction is your face? Think of the company you are leaving when you go out. Judas was the first to go out of the Christian circle; he has had many followers, alas! In his epistle John speaks in the plural. He says "there are many antichrists ... they went out from us" (@1 John 2:18,19). Judas did not go out unexposed. Neither should you assume that you are unexposed. You may fancy you are, but be your grievance what it may, if you go out you are exposed; besides, you will get into bad company, and it will get worse. It is a painful but wholesome thing to reflect on the course of those who have withdrawn from the circle of Christian fellowship. Judas went out exposed, as I said. The Lord said of him, "He that eateth bread with me hath lifted up his heel against me". It is a terrible thing to lift up your heel. It is operating behind a person, the opposite of "face to face". It is an action marked by darkness; it is treachery. One could trace it.
The *heel* is found early in the Scriptures. Satan is the author of that sort of activity: "thou shalt bruise his heel", the Lord said to him (@Genesis 3:15). It is well to be reminded that he who acts in that way has his *head* bruised; it is inevitable. "It shall bruise thy head", that is Satan's annulment. The tribe of Dan is like "an adder in the path, that biteth the horse heels, so that his rider shall fall backward" (@Genesis 49:17). That is anti-Christian. As you know, Jacob himself had
{500}
learned the lesson, for he was a "heel-holder", one who operates in the rear. That thread runs right through Scripture; it is the anti-Christian thread, and Judas is the exponent of it. He had been in the company of the Lord for some three years, so that he had known Him. So carefully was he concealed as to his true character that only the Lord, apparently, knew him; but the Lord knew him from the beginning. We may be sure that the spirit of antichrist is under the eye of Christ in whomsoever it may be.
Well now, there was "the disciple whom Jesus loved", he was not acting from the back, he was on *Jesus¬ bosom*. He is reposing in confidence, the confidence begotten of known affection; that was John. He is pleased modestly to regard himself as the disciple whom Jesus loved, and he rewards the Lord, as it were, for the place He gave to him, for he never tires of calling attention to the love of Christ. In chapter 14:22 Judas says: "Lord, how is it that thou wilt manifest thyself to us and not to the world?" As to this disciple, the apostle carefully says he was not Iscariot. It was not that Judas, it was another. Thank God, there was another Judas. As I was saying, love for Christ is the great antidote to the anti-Christian spirit, hence chapter 14:21,23 enlarges on the great advantage of loving Christ; "He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me", and further the Lord says, "If any man love me, he will keep my words". These are tests, keeping His commandments and His words. Besides the former, all the wonderful communications of Christ are treasured in the heart of the lover of Christ.
Now in turning to Colossians what I wanted to point out was that the Father has translated us into the kingdom of that One, the Son of His love. What a kingdom that is! Think of rule in the hands of the Son of the Father's love. I only refer to that part
{501}
of the passage to call attention to the manner in which the heart is engaged in Colossians. It is engaged with the Son of the Father's love, and then the apostle proceeds to tell us who He is. No one is prepared for such light save a lover of Christ. Colossians is specially for those who love Christ, but the danger was the admitting of an addition to Christ. I call attention to that for a moment. An addition to Christ! True affection will not admit of it. Mary Magdalene would not admit of it for a moment. The apostle, therefore, enlarges on Christ's personal dignity and glory in order that the saints should acknowledge His headship. I want to dwell on that just for a little, and I would refer to David.
Many of you will remember how that in the history of David, after the recovery of Ziklag, he remained in Ziklag for two days. That I apprehend to be, in a sense, the epistle to the Romans. It is not, as it were, a station at which you are to remain, but it is important to remain for some time in it in order that the soul should be matured in the sense of *recovery*. Indeed it is not only recovery, but victory. We are more than conquerors through Him that loved us. David recovered all, and there was that which was designated "David's spoil".
David inquired of the Lord on the third day: Shall I go up to one of the cities of Judah? The point is: Shall I go up? Did you ever ask that question? It is not the divine thought that we should remain on the plain; things on the plain must be adjusted, but the soul that loves Christ inquires as to an upward movement. The Lord says to David, "Go up ... unto Hebron". Hebron was a remarkable place. The Spirit of God, in mentioning it in @Numbers 13:22, tells us that it "was built seven years before Zoan in Egypt". Now ponder for a moment over David in Hebron. Caleb had been there, an illustrious man; the Levites had lived there. Consider David in the
{502}
streets of Hebron. Doubtless there were buildings there. What would David say of them? As a spiritual man he would say, 'These structures are not patterned on anything in Egypt'. How do you order your circumstances, whether domestic or religious? Are they patterned after the world? Christendom is patterned after the world, nothing else. Hebron would suggest that which existed before the world system. That is a thought we need to get into our souls.
Christ is said to be the beginning: He is the image of God. He is before everything; He is the Firstborn; nothing preceded Him, beloved friends. That is Colossians. Romans, in its general teaching, dates back to Eden, it refers to the fall and the recovery, but when you get to Colossians you come to see things that existed before, for Adam was but a figure of Him that was to come. We need to live in Hebron, beloved friends. David lived there and reigned there, partially, it is true, but he reigned there for seven years and six months. What a time it was! He begat children there; he begat none at Ziklag, but at Hebron his family increased. Increase is in Colossians. It is in the apprehension of Christ as Head that you get increase. It is a wonderful thing to dwell on the thought of what existed before the world.
David did not, however, build in Hebron. It is not the grand objective of the Spirit, but a most important point if our souls are to be imbued with the sense of what existed before the world. In saying many things about Christ the apostle goes on to say, "He is the head of the body, the assembly ... the beginning". I would I could convey what I had in my mind as to the idea of the beginning and that the beginning is before the world system was ever devised. It all originates in Christ. John enlarges on the beginning in his epistle. He says, "That
{503}
which was from the beginning" (@1 John 1:1). That is Christ as man. Whereas in his gospel he says, "*In* the beginning was the Word" (@John 1:1). How the Lord would have us to sit down and drink in that thought! Like David, to meditate in the streets of Hebron as to the pattern of things according to God; still, as I was remarking, there is no building. David's period in Hebron was not marked by building, it was a *formative* period; it was a period preparatory to Jerusalem; there you get the structure. I can only touch on the thought.
In Ephesians we come to the headship of Christ, but not only for the individual Christian. It is said that He is set over all things; He is "head over all things to the assembly, which is his body, the fulness of him that filleth all in all" (chapter 1:23). And then it says further that He has "ascended up far above all heavens" (chapter 4:10). What for? "That he might fill all things"; and that being so, it says, He has given gifts unto men. Now I apprehend that the force of that passage is that things are operated, to refer to the type, from Jerusalem. The assembly is really formed on earth by Christ from His present position. The gifts are here to edify; for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body. After what pattern? Anything from Zoan? No, nothing. All is rigidly excluded. You are reminded of the pattern given to Moses.
Now if you look at Chronicles just for a moment, the first book begins with Adam. You have all the threads traced until you reach David! How perfect that is! David is the head typically. According to the narrator in Chronicles Solomon is not the designer of the temple, he is simply acting under David. The temple is wholly designed after a heavenly pattern. Egypt and Babylon are rigidly shut out. Would that the Lord's people throughout Christendom could see that! Things should all antedate the world.
{504}
David received the pattern of the temple "by the Spirit" (@1 Chronicles 28:12). There you are, so to say, at the top. Everything is patterned after divine wisdom. Well, beloved friends, it is in that sense that one understands Ephesians, and I commend to you the subject in that light.
May the Lord give us in these days to have love for Christ, and as we have love for Christ we shall come into these things; whereas if we are devoid of it, sooner or later we shall get on to anti-Christian lines.
