{1}
"WHO IS THIS?"
@Romans 8: 14, 15; @Colossians 3: 10, 11; @Song of Songs 3: 6; @Song of Songs 8: 5
J.T. I thought that the passages in the Canticles illustrate somewhat the passages in the New Testament. The verses in Romans point to the leading of the Spirit, and involve the action of the Spirit as we come together in assembly; so that the assembly is seen moving, so to speak, in her own power, the Spirit being the power, but viewed as in herself. Then Colossians points to Christ leading, answering to the second scripture read in the Canticles; she comes up leaning upon her beloved. The passage in Colossians says in the new man "Christ is everything": He is everything. We reach a point where we are, as it were, full; that we are, for the moment, shut up to Him. Scope is to be given for the working out of this in assembly service. So that the idea of His leading comes in, for if He is everything, He is also a leader. It has often been observed that Colossians scarcely notices the Spirit. It does notice and mention the Spirit -- "your love in the Spirit", (chapter 1: 8), but Christ, who is everything, is what is in mind. Romans makes a great deal of the Spirit. In chapter 5: 5 we have Him shedding abroad in our hearts; in chapter 8 He is mentioned; indeed it is remarkable how frequently He is mentioned in that chapter, having in mind that it is the state of the saints. The state of the saints is to be marked by spirituality, the Spirit having His place.
If the brethren have followed my remarks, perhaps we might proceed, beginning with the passage in @Romans 8, and linking it on with @Song of Songs 3, where the feminine personage in the song is seen coming up out of the wilderness, without any external support
{2}
mentioned, but fully furnished so far as it goes. The passage would correspond in the types with @Numbers 21, where instead of the tabernacle being the direct guidance, the Spirit is guiding and leading; the Spirit is fully recognised, so that they move on steadily from point to point, no longer wandering in the wilderness.
J.R.H. "As many as are led by the Spirit of God, these are sons of God", @Romans 8: 14. How would you bring that in in the wilderness?
J.T. Well, that comes in after @Numbers 21 in the types, forming a junction with the ark in the book of Joshua, and with Colossians in the antitype. Sonship proper belongs to the land, but the Spirit of it comes in in the wilderness, I think. But the Spirit is to be understood before the passage read in Romans; it is to be understood in chapter 5 and, indeed, in the early part of chapter 8. The question is the state of the saints.
R.A.L. We sing in the fourth hymn, 'Now with love's treasure our spirits are freighted'. (`4:2) Does that suggest the work of the Spirit in our souls in the power in which we begin the morning meeting?
J.T. Quite so. Our spirits are freighted with it. It is a question of the state of the saints, for the early part of the assembly service is left as our part. We come together to do something, but it is in the power of the Spirit. We are never seen other than in the power of the Spirit.
E.P. You speak of the people no longer being guided by the tabernacle after @Numbers 21. Would you mind saying a little more about that?
J.T. Well, the tabernacle from the time it was anointed, when the glory entered, was to be a guide. The movements of the people were determined by its movements. You will remember that at the end of Exodus, the people were to move as the tabernacle moved. "And the cloud covered the tent of meeting,
{3}
and the glory of Jehovah filled the tabernacle. And Moses could not enter into the tent of meeting, for the cloud abode on it, and the glory of Jehovah filled the tabernacle. And when the cloud was taken up from over the tabernacle, the children of Israel journeyed in all their journeys. And if the cloud were not taken up, then they did not journey until the day that it was taken up. For the cloud of Jehovah was on the tabernacle by day, and fire was in it by night, before the eyes of all the house of Israel, throughout all their journeys", @Exodus 40: 34 - 38. It points to what is presented to us objectively in the way of instruction and assembly formation.
E.P. Would it correspond at all to the Lord being present here on earth, then leaving the disciples dependent on the Spirit? I was thinking of the disciples in the Acts being left, the Lord having established them in a way, and then leaving them.
J.T. Going up, you mean? Yes, quite so. Therefore, henceforth all would hinge on what transpired in the way of assembly formation, and in the way of devotion to what we get at Pentecost as, for instance, chapter 10. Right through the Acts the saints were governed by the movement of the testimony. Of course, Numbers brings that out more than Exodus. Exodus gives us the general idea, the glory being in the tabernacle. The guidance was in that connection. Numbers gives us more detail as to the taking down of the tabernacle, and its being carried and set up again, involving movement and change of encampments. There were a great many encampments. Each encampment had in mind some thought, and the people were to observe it.
J.R.H. Would you say the pillars of smoke were connected with the encampments?
J.T. I would think they were. They would be the smoke of the sacrifices. Pillars of smoke would
{4}
mean they were formed in things. They rose up steadily.
G.M. And there would be constant exercise. The smoke would speak of that.
J.T. Yes. I suppose it would suggest sacrifice, that is out of love, Godward, so that Romans begins with God's love shed abroad in our hearts; and then in chapter 8 it contemplates our love for God -- "all things work together for good to those who love God", @Romans 8:28. I think the pillars of smoke would indicate the love they had for God, and the sacrifices they offered.
C.A.M. It would be the Spirit's comment on it -- in the Song of Songs, the section that we read; and then that section from verses 6 to 11 does not exactly form part of the conversation between the king and the bride; it was rather a sort of commentary by the Spirit.
J.T. It is a view -- something contemplated, as looking at the movements. "Who is this?" It is a question asked. "Who is this, she that cometh up from the wilderness like pillars of smoke, perfumed with myrrh and frankincense, with all powders of the merchant?" She is described. Who is she? Her history, of course, is in Egypt, and were we to go by the prophets, we would say she has been sinning all the time, from the time she was in Egypt, but as she is identified with the Spirit of God, who is there with her, there was this view. She is coming up out of the wilderness, and there is no external support.
Moses is not in evidence; he was earlier. It is more the power that is within in the type.
S.McC. Would this view, these graces, suggest what is acquired rather than what is put upon her?
J.T. I think they are accredited to her. They are, as it were, an integral part of the position. They are the distinguishing marks. Who is this, that cometh up with these distinguishing marks? I think they
{5}
allude to what is very creditable. You might say it somewhat corresponds with Balaam's view. He saw them in a somewhat similar sense. There was nothing discreditable; everything was creditable. God caused him to see her. He is a man who has his eyes opened -- not an ordinary man, but a man with his eyes opened, seeing the vision of the Almighty; that is, seeing things as God sees them. God is entitled to look at us abstractly; that is, taking account only of what is of Himself in us.
J.W.D. Would you link this abstract view on with the first part of the morning meeting?
J.T. I think we might see that, the place the Spirit has, which is part of the position. It is not external, although the anointing is external. It is more the view of @Numbers 21; they had drunk and moved immediately, and steadily from point to point in the right direction. I think that is what we ought to keep in mind, so that all these figures here -- this smoke -- as we come out of our houses in the morning to approach the assembly, these features are to be seen. They are seen, of course, concretely as we sit down together in assembly. God is entitled to look at us in that way, what we are in relation to the Spirit. @Romans 8 enlarges on what the Spirit is in us. First we have the righteous requirement of the law fulfilled, and then the mind of the Spirit is life and peace; and several others -- some dozen references to the Spirit in the chapter all pointing to a state that is in keeping with the first verses, that God has condemned sin in the flesh; that it is out of sight, that it is viewed as ignored. It is the Spirit now, and these marks are, therefore, the result of the Spirit. First, I think, is unselfishness or love for God in the volume of sacrifices, the smoke of the sacrifices. The church is characteristically sacrificial.
Christ in @John 1 is viewed as sacrificial by John the baptist, and as He walked, He is viewed also sacrificially,
{6}
that is as the Lamb. The Lamb is sacrificial, and I think that that runs into the assembly. Sacrifice marks us.
C.A.M. After @Numbers 21 and after Balaam's vision comes that special household burnt-offering, morning and evening. They did not have that before, I suppose.
J.T. No, that comes in in chapter 28, quite so. First we have, after the brazen serpent and the springing well, the steady movement of the people towards the land and Balaam's view, as if God would give us a right view so that we might look at them abstractly. Moses in Deuteronomy looks at them in that way. Moses does what God is entitled to do, to look at us entirely according to what the Spirit has effected in us. Well, if we sit down in the assembly, God would help us to view things abstractly.
J.W.D. It would be a wonderful release to the work of God amongst us.
J.T. That is just what it will be. John's epistle helps us, too, but Balaam has no desire to justify the people, but he is prepared to do it as one who has his eyes open, who had a vision of the Almighty.
H.B. Would it be helpful to bring in @Numbers 24: 1 - 5, "And Balaam saw that it was good in the sight of Jehovah to bless Israel, and he went not, as at other times, to seek for enchantments, but he set his face toward the wilderness. And Balaam lifted up his eyes and saw Israel dwelling in tents according to his tribes; and the Spirit of God came upon him. And he took up his parable, and said, Balaam the son of Beor saith, and the man of opened eye saith, He saith, who heareth the words of God, who seeth the vision of the Almighty, who falleth down, and who hath his eyes open: How goodly are thy tents, Jacob, and thy tabernacles, Israel!"
J.T. Quite so. There is a reference there, perhaps we might look at it a moment in chapter 24: 4, he
{7}
stresses very much his vision, and how he was affected. That is, God affected him in spite of himself, so that he sees them from God's point of view. The Spirit of God does that for us now; He affects us in spite of ourselves. @Romans 7 enables us to distinguish the working of the flesh, and we learn how God condemned it in the early part of chapter 8, enabling us to see things as they should be seen.
R.S. The devil seems to be very active in the morning meeting. Our minds are often very wandering, and thus totally unworthy of the occasion. Is this required on that account?
J.T. Quite so, there is not one but would admit that. We need the power of God to fix our minds first of all on the order and beauty of Israel, and then on Christ as we see Him in Colossians.
W.L. Is that why the leading is looked at in an individual way -- "as many as are led"? We need to come to this thought on an individual platform.
J.T. Well, I suppose so. We have already had it intimated that sonship comes in late in the service of the assembly, but it is only to make a link with the Spirit; for the Spirit's action begins in @Romans 5, and has considerable authority before we come to chapter 8: 14.
C.A.M. This matter of the order of the saints and having a sense of how wonderful it is, is all taken for granted as we go on to Colossians; although I suppose Paul was dependent on the information from Epaphras, he realised what was existent in Colosse.
J.T. "Your order", you mean?
C.A.M. Yes.
J.T. I think that is the link. It links on with Romans and Corinthians. Corinthians, of course, is the orderly setting, so that Romans and Corinthians enter into Balaam's prophecy. It is a wilderness scene. Balaam comments on the order, like cedars by the waters, like aloes of the Lord's planting.
{8}
Corinthians runs on with that thought into Colossians where it is "rejoicing and seeing your order", chapter 2: 5. That is the pleasure that the eye sees -- not joying and knowing it, but seeing it -- the pleasure the eye has in divine order among the saints.
C.A.M. If it was not regarded it would spoil what the Lord is stressing.
J.T. The link with Romans, Corinthians and Colossians is very striking as applicable to assembly service; the place the Spirit has in Romans, and then the place that order has in Colossians. Christ is made so much of personally in the epistle, the Spirit made so little of (I mean as to mention). It is rather the effect of the Spirit that is in mind in Colossians, so that the apostle has pleasure in looking at that.
"Rejoicing and seeing your order, and the firmness of your faith in Christ". That makes room for chapter 3, which we read, where Christ is all. He is everything. Well, if He is everything, He will be leader. We will understand that every function is His at each particular phase of our assembly service.
A.H.P. Do you think what the queen of Sheba saw when she came to see the wisdom of Solomon would correspond with Colossians in that respect?
J.T. Very good. "There was no more spirit in her". She saw the externals. She had no part in them. It is what she saw. The point here is what is seen. "Who is this, she that cometh up?"
J.W. "God brought him forth out of Egypt; he hath as it were the strength of an unicorn", @Numbers 24: 8.
Would that apply?
J.T. That alludes to the Spirit. @Romans 8 would indicate the unicorn strength.
J.W.D. Do you mean that we are conscious as we sit down together of the inward spiritual power, the Spirit's presence with us?
J.T. That is what I think. Paul stresses it in the Corinthians. The Spirit's place in the assembly in
{9}
Romans is more individual. But we realise it as we sit down together. There is the strength of a unicorn, and the shout of a king. Balaam alludes to these matters; and really and truly it is only that side of the truth that makes our position a tenable one, a legal one, so to speak, an undeniable one as of God. That is, not simply the claims that we put in, but the fact that there are these things in some degree. There is the order, and then there is the unicorn strength, and the shout of a king.
J.W.D. That is to say, as I sit down, I am entitled to forget my connection with the flesh, sinful flesh, and take account of myself as linked with all others in the possession of the Spirit of God.
J.T. That is right, so that "Ye are not in flesh but in Spirit, if indeed God's Spirit dwell in you", @Romans 8:9.
J.R.H. That would have a greatly moving effect on our spirits as we sit together.
J.T. Indeed it would. Anyone present who is not part of us -- if God is working in him -- will see it. It is John's way of establishing the truth, by quoting the Lord's remarks and the remarks of others to exercise souls. "Come and see" -- "Come and see". That is really the final test as to where God is, and what is of God. One comes and sees these marks.
R.S. When you speak about our state, is this just now what you have in mind as to sitting down and making room for the Spirit, and not allowing flesh, or workings of the flesh, as being in it? Is that what you mean by state?
J.T. Quite so. Romans teaches us that we are not in the flesh but in the Spirit -- that state, a state consequent on the action of God really, the confirmation of the apostle's own conclusions: "I know that in me (that is, in my flesh), dwelleth no good thing", he says, and that the victory, the deliverance and the thanksgiving is through Christ. "I thank God
{10}
through Jesus Christ our Lord", he says, "So then with the mind I myself serve the law of God". That is, he has arrived in his soul history at self-conscious ness. He is conscious of himself in the true sense of the word, a man delivered in his mind, and yet in power by the Spirit; but in his mind, through the analysis of the flesh, he is able to pronounce on it and name it, and now he says, I am free to do God's law. "*I myself* with the mind serve God's law". That is not simply the ten commandments. It is a characteristic word, whatever it may be, and God's law must rule me. Well, if I sit down in the assembly on that line my order will be right; I will not be disorderly in my part in the assembly. Then God comes in in chapter 8, and we have that He, having "sent his own Son, in likeness of flesh of sin, and for sin, has condemned sin in the flesh". It is not sin in Satan. Of course He has condemned it in Satan. That matter was settled before man was created.
The brazen serpent meant that was its origin. There was no sacrifice for sin in Satan. But sin in the flesh is dealt with in @Romans 8. God has dealt with that.
He has condemned it. "Has condemned sin in the flesh, in order that the righteous requirement of the law should be fulfilled in us, who do not walk according to flesh but according to Spirit --" (verses 3, 4). The Spirit is seen now operating and the righteous requirement of the law is fulfilled. Then the chapter runs on with other allusions which show that on the basis of God's condemnation of sin in the flesh and the presence of the Holy Spirit, a believer is not in flesh but in Spirit, if so be that God's Spirit dwells in us. Not only that He is in us but undisturbedly in us.
Well, if we are all like that sitting down in assembly, you will see what a time we shall have, and what external order there is, because everyone has in mind God's law -- not my mind but God's law.
R.A.L. What should promote the brother to stand
{11}
up to break bread? His consciousness of himself, or "I speak of the things which I have made touching the king"? He has a song.
J.T. He does not sing a song as he stands up to break bread. "We being assembled to break bread", says Luke (@Acts 20: 7), speaking of the incident at Troas. They came together to break bread. An analysis of that chapter would show that there were spiritual men present. The evident fruit of Paul's work in different parts of the world were there; they accompanied him, and Luke says, "We being assembled to break bread". Now, Paul's discourse there has to be viewed as extraordinary, meaning that before we break bread we must listen to Paul. That is a sort of recovery point before we resume the breaking of bread. After the great captivity in the history of the assembly, we must listen to Paul.
But the primary thought in the passage was that they came together to break bread. Picture them all sitting there, Paul and Luke and several other distinguished men; what would happen? Well, as the brethren waited, Paul would get up and undoubtedly break the loaf. Paul, being there, would have in mind that they had come together to do this. It is not exactly a question of the Spirit leading us. It is not put that way. The Spirit does not come with us to break bread. We understand from Romans that everything is to be done in the Spirit -- that we are in the Spirit; but we are personally there to break bread. That is our business. That is what we come together to do. You can understand how Paul would do that. He would do it with instinctive understanding; and so would any spiritual man with instinctive understanding that the brethren were there for that purpose, and he would have deliverance in his soul in doing it; but he would do it on the principle that they came together to do it. You would feel glad when he did it. Not that Luke could not
{12}
have done it, or others. Any one of them might have done it, because 'we' is a mutual word in that sense. Not Paul and these distinguished men, but *we* came together to break bread.
J.W.D. This instinctive understanding works out more happily amongst us. An instinctive understanding usually expects a certain one to do it who is present, where the brethren are affected by the Spirit, but there is no discourse.
J.T. You feel from the standpoint of @Romans 8 that there would be no difficulty about it. There would be a right understanding as to everybody. Well, that is a point that has been a great help to one, John's way of regarding what was said in that respect, and others¬ too. If you have what is of God, you can invite inspection. So here, "Who is this?" It is a question; no person is mentioned as asking it; but the question has a voice. And John says, "I turned back to see the voice" (@Revelation 1: 12) -- remarkable thing! I turned back, not to hear it, but to *see it*; meaning the person speaking and the person spoken of must be of interest. He is able to take account of these qualities or features in this person, and the first is that she is like pillars of smoke. Suppose Moses was there, and someone asked him what this is, Moses would say this is the love that the saints have for Jehovah. Jehovah said there are thousands of those that love Me. They are characteristically a sacrificial people.
W.R. Would you say this includes the youngest believer?
J.T. Well, it is a collective thought. The smoke is solid. It is not scattered by the wind, it is solid. That is the suggestion in the pillars of smoke.
J.R.H. It is not only what can be seen, but what can be smelt. Perfumed with myrrh and frankincense.
J.T. Well, she could be, I suppose. That would be the person that would be perfumed with myrrh
{13}
and frankincense, with all the powders of the merchant, meaning that she is not like the Corinthian assembly. You take them when Paul left. If anyone came to see what had happened they would see much irregularity.
E.P. Paul speaks of the grace of God bestowed on the assemblies of Macedonia. Do you think there would be smoke there?
J.T. Quite so. The Thessalonians, too. There was a scent went out from them.
A.P.T. According to Paul's second epistle to Corinth, there would have been order on a spiritual basis, would there, instead of disorder prevailing? I suppose they would have done it by rotation according to the first epistle in the breaking of bread.
J.T. By rotation, what do you mean?
A.P.T. Well, there were parties there. I do it this Sunday, you do it next.
J.T. Quite so. I have known that to happen. That is not right; that is not the saints moving in spiritual power. The "we" of Luke in @Acts 20 is no question of gift at all. It is the persons you know, and some of us yesterday were remarking about personality. One feature of the assembly is the personal way we know one another. Normally we know one another, and that helps us in sitting down in a local setting. If there are parties there, cleavages, of course, we shall not be too pleased for a brother of the opposite party to get up and give thanks. We feel he is getting an advantage. That is very poor, because @Romans 8 would dispel all that. We are of the Spirit, not of the flesh at all.
R.S. Then the brother who breaks the bread could also get up later on and address the Father, could he not?
J.T. Yes, he will by the spirit of adoption. But, we do not break bread by the spirit of adoption. I do not say it is not the same Spirit, because the Spirit is
{14}
presented in the scripture in many classifications. We break bread in the power of the Holy Spirit, the Spirit of God known in that way according to @Romans 8.
A.H.P. Had you any thought as to distinctive features of this myrrh and frankincense? Would they suggest something of the inward workings of the Spirit of God now taking form in the expression amongst the saints, carrying the odour like @John 12?
J.T. I think that is good. Perfumed with myrrh and frankincense. Myrrh is usually a suggestion of suffering; not that one would make it that exclusively, but it is a drug with a refreshing odour. Frankincense would perhaps be stronger in that way. All of these would be graces of the Spirit. They would be what is emitted in spiritual power amongst us viewed collectively. Then all powders of the merchant would mean, I think, that you feel as in the Spirit that anything will not do. There must be something that would please the Lord. You must have all powders of the merchant, and I suppose the allusion to the merchant would mean that these cost something, so that the idea of cost and sacrifice enters into this position.
A.H.P. We would be preserved from orthodoxy by all powders of the merchant. It would involve that the Lord is coming to us in ministry at the present time as well as what preceded.
J.T. Yes, this is a current position, a position at a particular time. It is God, as it were, giving us an abstract view; someone who valued these things and who asked the question would understand what these things meant. Who is capable of all this? That all enters into the truth of the ministry of the assembly as presented in the scripture.
S.McC. Would you say a word as to the importance of this ellipsis and its bearing on our part in the assembly?
{15}
J.T. Well, that is the other side. The brethren will understand the ellipsis in the end of verse 6. I n verse 7 the Spirit of God goes on to Solomon. We are directed now to Christ. The other is the feminine side, "Behold his couch, Solomon's own: threescore mighty men are about it, of the mighty of Israel. They all hold the sword, experts in war; each hath his sword upon his thigh because of alarm in the nights", chapter 3:7, 8. Then in verse 9 it says, "King Solomon made himself a palanquin of the wood of Lebanon. Its pillars he made of silver, its support of gold, its seat of purple; the midst thereof was paved with love by the daughters of Jerusalem". That is a beautiful view; a combination of what Christ has made for Himself, and what the daughters of Jerusalem add to it. "Paved with love", that is our side.
S.McC. Is it not important in this relation, to observe and carefully notice the turn in the assembly service, so that we should not persist in going on after a turn is made? I mean in reference to Solomon; the quick turn from her to Solomon.
J.T. Yes, quite so. We go on too long, sometimes, on a certain line. We ought to be on the alert for the turning point, a change-over from the covenant to the feminine side with the saints in relation to Christ. We are together in the Spirit and the flesh has no place in the service. That is very happy, and it is for the Lord's eye, or someone else's eye, whoever has an eye for it. Come and see, if you have an eye for these things.
J.W.D. Would this not help so many of our young brothers to take part in the morning meeting?
J.T. Yes, I think that is good.
J.W.D. Even the youngest brother, as John's child, knows the Father. So many have no liberty in connection with the public service of God.
J.T. Well, they are coming into it, as far as I
{16}
observe, they are coming into it in a remarkable way. We had this morning a very young brother taking part, very nicely, and the oldest brother in the meeting followed him. It was very nice and pleasing to God. Many of our young brothers do not take part, but their taking part is very pleasing to God, and we do right in referring to what happens. "Who is this?" These marks we are entitled to regard in them because that is the position then; but as we move on, we leave all that and think of the greatness of Christ where He is everything, and in all. That is the turn-over now to Solomon. We need support at that juncture. Expert people in war know the turn, and they are on the alert. Darkness, distance, Satan is not very far away, but then we are going on to something Solomon has made for Himself, not something that we have made for Him. "My assembly" comes into mind, not so much the local assembly, but what He made for Himself. Then the paving with love by the daughters of Jerusalem, that is what He made and we are adding to it. That is not the first part of the meeting, but it is where Christ comes in and recognises us.
C.B. On the alert -- guarding against breakdown.
J.T. Anything that the enemy might use to disturb what is going on. These mighty men have their swords on their thighs; we may not need them at all.
C.B. It is not a question of using the sword, is it?
J.T. It is because of alarm in the nights. So these things are in our minds, put there by the Spirit of God, and when we sit down it is to serve us in good stead. We may not mention them at all, but then we are going on. It is what Christ has of His own. "I am come into my garden, my sister, my spouse", chapter 5: 1. That is, it is His now, and then we begin to see that He is taking it on. It is His matter. So that she is leaning on her beloved, and He says, I have brought you up under the apple tree. You
{17}
have good manners. I am not ashamed of you. Many of us cause distress in the meeting because we do not know what to do. But if we are brought up under the apple tree, we would understand what to do, and not discredit the house by our talk.
Ques. What do you mean by good manners?
J.T. I brought thee up under the apple tree -- the upbringing of the saints; how they are nurtured.
S.McC. Paul said that God suffered their manners forty years.
J.T. Quite so, He bore them. Paul is commenting on good manners at Corinth. That is what he is after that there may be good manners among them.
A.P.T. If the saints have been brought up under clerical systems for a great many years, it takes time to bring us to the full thought of sonship.
J.T. We have passed through the patriarchal period, extending back as far as I remember; now the Lord has brought us round to the mutual side, including the youngest amongst us; the least of the assembly. But this matter of being brought up under the apple tree is important that we might have good manners.
C.W. Do you think Timothy would be one who had good manners in the house?
J.T. Yes, he represents that. Paul says, I have sent him to Corinth that he may put you in mind of my ways as they are in Christ. The perfect manners of Paul are represented in his child Timotheus.
J.R.H. What is the thought of being wakened up there? "I awoke thee under the apple tree", chapter 8: 5.
J.T. From the beginning, I would presume. "I awoke thee under the apple tree: there thy mother brought thee forth; there she brought thee forth that bore thee". The allusion is to Christ as the apple tree in the earlier part. That is, He is supreme. There is no one like Him -- no one like Christ. So
{18}
that John would open up the apple tree to us. John the baptist refers to Him as the Lamb of God, walking. He is like the apple tree, and two of John's disciples, seeing Him walk, leave John and follow Jesus. And when He asks the question, "What seek ye?" they say to the Lord, "Rabbi". They need teaching. They instinctively need teaching in the house, that is the idea of it.
J.R.H. Do you mean in saying "Rabbi" that there was the sense of being awake now?
J.T. Yes, and they needed teaching. The apple tree was there. "So is my beloved". There is no one like Him. He is supreme above all. He is incomparable, and now they ask, "Rabbi, ... where abidest thou?" 'Where do you live', and the Lord says, "Come and see".
S.R.McC. There is much that develops out of asking questions.
J.T. That is why these readings are so useful. It is question time. And that largely marks the Lord's ministry, answering questions. He is ready to answer them. They say, "Where abidest thou? He says to them", Come and see."They went therefore, and saw where he abode; and they abode with him that day. It was about the tenth hour". Well, they got teaching. That is how the matter began. The mother is brought in here. "There thy mother brought thee forth; there she brought thee forth that bore thee". It is in relation to Christ, making everything of Christ to them.
C.B. Would you say the Corinthians had moved in relation to the trees of the wood rather than the apple tree? That is why their manners were as they were.
J.T. They were comparing themselves with themselves.
C.A.M. Good manners were really acquired, at the end, even in Corinth, in connection with the great
{19}
awakening in chapter 15. Evil communications corrupt good manners (verse 33).
J.T. I think good manners are in the new covenant. That is the idea in connection with the mother. The new covenant is the love that is current amongst the saints, so that they take on the mother character; and hence, as our brother here was remarking about the young men taking part, probably they are hindered. The more the patriarchal spirit governs the assembly, the less the young will have an opportunity; and if there are party feelings, there will be rivalry, and the young are kept out of the way. Whereas, if the Spirit is there ungrieved, if we are in Spirit and not in flesh, what the young have is just delightful.
E.P. Do you think you have an example in @2 John 4? "I rejoiced greatly that I have found of thy children walking in truth", and then verse 3, alluding to the Lord Jesus Christ, "Son of the Father, in truth and love". And then in verse 13, "The children of thine elect sister greet thee". I was wondering if that were a suggestion of what you are speaking of as good manners.
J.T. It is delightful. The third letter is more like the beginning, but the elect lady who has her children is the mother and as children walking in truth they are brought up under the apple-tree. It is the objective teaching in the apostles, and now the mother is nurturing them and looking after them daily.
R.S. Luke has to call attention to Martha's unspiritual conduct in @Luke 10, but before John passes off the scene, he says her manners are good.
J.T. I think God is bringing us back to the idea of manners. Evil communications corrupt good manners. Good manners were there at first under the apostles but God is bringing us back to them again, and I believe that is why John is so stressed in these last days. He brings in good manners.
C.A.M. In connecting the manners with the
{20}
covenant, would Sarah be a good example of it when she came into blessing and all bad manners had to be excluded and cast out? When she is in the freedom of good manners, there is laughter. "All that hear will laugh with me". I suppose that is good manners.
J.T. Quite so. That confirms what we are saying. The covenant is connected with the mother. There are two covenants. The apostle says Hagar was one and Sarah another. "Jerusalem above is free, which is our mother", @Galatians 4: 26. We are born of a free woman. Well, the apostle is really labouring in the letter to bring the brethren back to the apple-tree, that is to Christ. But then we can be under the mother, wake up under the apple-tree; and then we have the mother's influence; our mother, Jerusalem above. What liberty there is in that!
W.R. Would you say God really called Samuel from under his mother in that sense?
J.T. Yes, quite so. She brought him in there and set him down in the house of God.
A.H.P. Referring to young people again, do you not think it tends to their spiritual progress and prosperity to keep clear of anything of party feelings. It leaves them free for service in the house of God.
J.T. I am sure party spirit in the meeting dwarfs the young ones. They are not far enough on to know what the thing means. Think of coming and sitting down on the Lord's Day morning. Think of the children; some would be sitting over there and some sitting over here. How could they grow up there to manhood, spiritual manhood?
A.P.T. It tends to bondage, as in Galatians.
J.T. Quite so.
J.R.H. So those of us who are older are responsible to provide an atmosphere of peace and love.
J.T. Quite so, we speak of a poor lead in a meeting. What is meant is there is no liberty, no spiritual power. It is the idea of spiritual leading.
{21}
W.R. Meetings of over fifty tend to hinder the growth of the young.
J.T. Well, I think the small meetings greatly facilitate the growth of the young and participation in the meeting.
A.M. It says of Moses that he sent away his father-in-law, and then in connection with the elders going up to the mount it says the young men offered sacrifices.
J.T. That shows in @Exodus 24 that there was spiritual power with the young men or youths offering sacrifices. It would mean there was spiritual power and plenty of it there.
J.W.D. In some places you have linked up the inheritance with the covenant. I was wondering if linking up the mother with the covenant, we should be more at home instinctively with what is involved in the inheritance -- how to place these things, and how to function in relation to them. Do you think that?
J.T. Tell us more.
J.W.D. I was only following out what you suggested. The covenant is an introduction into the inheritance. The covenant is intended to liberate us. It is what God is, the God with whom we have to do. 'What the God that thou hast found'.
J.T. That tends to liberate us and bring in a condition that encourages young brothers to take part. Everybody, brothers and sisters alike, sees that we have part in all this. "We being assembled to break bread", included everybody that was there.
A.P.T. What is the difference between @Romans 5, the love of God being shed abroad in our hearts, and @Romans 7, married to another? "To be to another, who has been raised up from among the dead, in order that we might bear fruit to God", @Romans 7: 4. What is the difference in these two thoughts, one as
{22}
it were coming down from God in covenant love, and what will ascend to God as fruit?
J.T. Well, that opens up a wide range of inquiry. The early part of Romans is from God to us, what the Spirit is to us, how He serves us in shedding the love of God abroad in our hearts, a general matter, not simply known to the older ones. The Spirit gives you to understand He is dealing in a general way amongst the saints, excluding no one. Well, that makes for wealth amongst us, at least in the principle. Then we have baptism, in chapter 6. "As many as have been baptised unto Christ Jesus, have been baptised unto his death" (verse 3). He is before us in baptism; but then what is needed to be stressed is "unto his death". That is, He has been raised from among the dead, so that we should walk "in newness of life". So that in chapter 7 in view of newness of life in chapter 6, and our members being yielded unto God as instruments of righteousness, the marital thought is brought in. He brings in that the first husband is dead. The first husband is the law, making us legal, and we are apt to be legal when we sit down together, having critical thoughts of one another, and that spoils the position and hinders the Spirit. But the first husband is dead, so that you are no longer under him. I disallow in my mind any principle of it, all that sort of thing, "to be to another, who has been raised up from among the dead". Raised up, taken out of the range of the critical spirit. We are on a new platform, being married to another, even to Him that is raised up from among the dead. And then it goes on to speak about serving in "newness of spirit".
D.G. They were all filled by the Spirit in @Acts 2:4; we should all be filled with the Spirit.
J.T. That is a characteristic thought in the beginning of the dispensation, the Spirit coming. They were all together in one place with one accord. The
{23}
Lord says of the cup, "Drink ye all of it". Some have taken it to mean all the wine, but it is all the saints having part in it. Why should anyone be sitting back? Why should he not be taking part in that? The Lord says "all". It is really a constitutional word.
A.H.P. I was just going to raise a question as to what was involved in eating and drinking; whether it would enter much into the liberation of the saints in their souls in their service towards God. Not just eating a piece of bread, or drinking wine as such, but having these wonderful thoughts as to the body and the new covenant, whether we take on the spiritual thought sufficiently.
J.T. Quite so. So that the second epistle to the Corinthians is to bring out the spirit of the thing. The apostles were ministers of the new covenant, not of letter, but of spirit. Then he goes on to tell us the Spirit is Christ. "The Lord is the Spirit", @2 Corinthians 3:17.
A.P.T. I notice a great many of the Lord's people will sip the cup. The Lord says, "*Drink* ye all of it". Would that be a word for us?
J.T. Oh, well, it has a spiritual meaning. We do not want to have the brethren take a lot of wine. Drink is satisfaction, I think; the cup is peculiarly satisfying, and tends to liberate our souls, for we all have been made to drink into one Spirit.
C.B. Each one has part in it to carry the spiritual thought that it means what spiritually satisfies you. You are satisfied with the brethren that you are with. We have all been made to drink into one Spirit, meaning the company carries that thought, and you must not criticise them or think hardly of them because we have drunk into one Spirit. Would the Spirit of God challenge us in the beginning of the meeting as to "Who is this"?
J.T. I think we are entitled as we finish the meeting to refer to what is there.
Such and such a
{24}
brother spoke. Well, we are entitled to do that in a humble way because it is "Who is this?" God has made them thus. But the other side is that Christ is everything. You turn away from all that and think of the glory of Christ. It is no discredit to Christ. They all made much of Him. "... My garden, my sister, my spouse". You cannot discredit Christ by referring to her, but then we turn to Him. "What is thy beloved more than another beloved ... ?" one says to her.
J.A.T. You are perfectly satisfied with the brethren and thankful for them. You are able to look at them in this way.
J.T. But then there is the other side, "What is thy beloved ... ?" What could she say about Him?
He says beautiful things about her, but she says beautiful things about Him.
J.B. So, after that there are those who say, where is he gone, chapter 6, that we may seek him with thee? It would stimulate exercise with each.
J.T. The brethren were charged with making too much of the saints; but it is right to make much of them; but then turn around and make much of Christ as well.
{25}
THE SPIRIT OF SERVICE IN THE ACTS
@Acts 4: 23 - 30; @Acts 5: 1 - 10; @Acts 6: 1 - 7
J.T. What is in mind is to look at the service of God as seen in the twelve. It is important to have a clear view of the service of the twelve, because they appear in the foundations of the heavenly city; so that although we are already in the presence of the heavenly system of things, it is only the foundational side. We have already dwelt on chapter 2 (see Volume 92, page 403), calling attention to the variety of persons upon whom the Spirit should come according to the prophet Joel. It says, "And it shall be in the last days, saith God, that I will pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, and your young men shall see visions, and your elders shall dream with dreams; yea, even upon my bondmen and upon my bondwomen in those days will I pour out of my Spirit, and they shall prophesy", @Acts 2: 17, 18. We dwelt on these verses as having a great bearing on the subject before us and reminding us of the idea that the service of God includes all of us who are christians. Then we saw how the levitical principle came in in the recognition of gift, specific gift, in the twelve and how questions were directed to them, to the twelve, as people were convicted by the gospel. And then we noted the quality and the number; the quality of the result of their ministry at the end of chapter 2. We just mentioned chapter 3, it occupies us with two of them, so as to bring out special quality in the twelve, and the result in one man, also special quality, the peculiar result in the lame man lending itself to the testimony. Then in chapter 4 we have how they merge, how servants merge with their brethren generally, no matter how distinguished they are.
{26}
They unite in prayer so that all the apostles again come into view. It is said, "And with great power did the apostles give witness of the resurrection of the Lord Jesus, and great grace was upon them all". Not simply Peter and John now, but the apostles as such. Then in chapter 5 the service of discipline is taken on by Peter and in chapter 6 the deacon service is introduced wisely. I thought this would give an outline of what is before us now.
Ques. Is the thought of their own company the idea of merging together?
J.T. That is the thought. Chapter 3 is the first consideration as to quality in the ministry, particular quality, and then how those who are distinguished in that way merge in their own company.
A.H.P. Do you regard this man of chapter 3 as a product of the work of the apostles at that time in that he is seen finally standing with them?
J.T. Quite so. The opposers could say nothing because of his presence. How real the healing was!
S.McC. In the earlier part of the Acts the brethren are all together. It is important, as in chapter 3, that the ministers should know how to move together and work together, do you think?
J.T. Yes, these peculiar circumstances are alluded to so that we are affected by the right sentiment. Peter and John went up together into the temple at the hour of prayer, which is the ninth hour. It would call attention to the crucifixion of Christ. It was the hour of prayer and they went up together.
J.W.D. Peter and John stand for what was special, as against the other apostles?
J.T. That is what I understand by the passage, God is putting forth quality. He makes much of quality and graded quality. These two would represent the best at that time. One the leader, "first, Simon, who was called Peter", and John the second representing the idea of a second in the ministry,
{27}
without the slightest shade of rivalry in him. He says little or nothing in all that transpires. Peter does the things.
R.A. Would you say the service in this part of the Acts is marked by oneness, "all together in one place", the servants and the brethren as well?
J.T. Do you mean chapter 2?
R.A. It is mentioned three times in the commencement of the Acts.
J.T. They were together with one accord and the Spirit came. Now we are engaged with two persons, two of them singled out by the Spirit, going up this time. "Peter and John went up together into the temple at the hour of prayer". It is a special testimony rendered to the Jews. That is one leading thought in these earlier chapters, God is apparently waiting on the Jews and presenting a palpable thing to them. There is formation, these two men would represent that, for God would present to the Jews the result of the work of Christ, so that Peter says, "Look on us".
C.B. Going up at the ninth hour would mean the death of Christ should greatly colour our prayer meetings and requests.
J.T. I think we should be capable of spiritual sentiment. The first day of the week carries that thought; and the ninth hour, it was only a short time before that the Lord had cried "Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani?" at that hour. These two men would remember that.
C.A.M. At the ninth hour the darkness would be over, He was heard at the ninth hour.
J.T. Quite so. It ought to affect our hearts.
C.A.M. It gives a great meaning to @Psalm 22, at a certain moment He was heard, and the service of God comes into view. Would you say that?
J.T. Quite so. He immediately proceeds to say, "Yea, from the horns of the buffaloes hast thou
{28}
answered me. I will declare thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the congregation will I praise thee" (verses 21, 22). The product is so in keeping with these words. The gate of the temple, called Beautiful, is called attention to: "And Peter, looking stedfastly upon him with John, said, Look on us". John looked at him, too, but particularly Peter the man of the service of God. They want him to see them first. "Look on us". That is what God has in mind to effect. These two men represent what all servants ought to represent, what God is effecting; not simply what I say, but what I am in saying it.
W.L. Is that the importance of what you mentioned, the twelve apostles of the Lamb?
J.T. Quite so, suffering ones; here it is the formation. They looked at him together and say, "Look on us". Think of yourself, and think of us, we represent what God is doing through Christ.
J.W.D. Would this help us to make room for that which is special in the way of gift? Accompanied by spiritual formation it would produce results like this.
J.T. The thought is the ministers beget children; so that you get the great leaders Paul and John alluding to their children, the children of God, of course, but they are also the children of the ministers.
And you have to consider whether you think yourself a right model for a family.
C.A.M. The man would have the desire to be like them.
J.W.D. There is an attitude sometimes towards a servant, 'We like what you say, but we would not want to be like you'. That is the antithesis of this.
J.T. It is mentioned here, and mentioned for a purpose. It runs down the dispensation, "Look on us". Are we worth looking at? As the work of God, John enlarges on it, "Come and see". It is true
{29}
divine work; not the doctrine, but what is formed by it.
W.R. Paul was so free in bringing forward Timothy, a young man with him, "he works the work of the Lord, even as I", @1 Corinthians 16: 10.
J.T. He was Paul's child. It is usually child because it is a question of family formation, not dignity.
E.P. Is there a certain meaning in the apostles going up to the temple: they were not embarking on public service, but drawing near to God in His temple?
J.T. That is the idea, "*they* ... were continually in the temple". They were God's contribution in the way of testimony to Israel at that time in the temple. The temple never had such persons really, as these men. "Continually in the temple praising and blessing God", @Luke 24: 53.
E.P. I was wondering if the questions asked in @Psalm 24, "Who shall ascend into the mount of Jehovah? and who shall stand in his holy place?" would come into view in these two men.
J.T. They were quite worthy. You find throughout Luke this thought of persons in the temple who are suitable. First of all we have as over against this Zacharias, who is an official priest "of the course of Abia", the eighth of the twenty-four courses. He is thoroughly in order outwardly and he is where he should be, offering incense; but he is unbelieving in his heart, hence Gabriel stands at the right side of the altar of incense, that is over against what follows. He is stricken dumb for a season because he does not believe. He is an unbelieving priest, but he is capable of recovery, capable of being reconstituted. Then Elizabeth, Mary, Simeon and Anna, really priests, and finally the Lord Himself in the temple. Now here in the end of the book of Luke they are led as far as to Bethany, and they return to the city praising
{30}
and blessing God. God is presenting His very best to the Jews, waiting on them for the moment. It is a question of God's patience, He presents the very best. It is not what we say, but what we are.
J.S.T. In going up to serve God we should stand in the pathway to serve men on the way.
J.T. They say, "Look on us". Think of what we are and what you are. Moses says, "We will do thee good". You are conscious of being representative of God. "And he gave heed to them, expecting to receive something from them. But Peter said, Silver and gold I have not; but what I have, this give I to thee: In the name of Jesus Christ the Nazaraean rise up and walk. And having taken hold of him by the right hand he raised him up, and immediately his feet and ankle bones were made strong. And leaping up he stood and walked, and entered with them into the temple, walking, and leaping, and praising God". They are going into the temple now. They are carrying along the fruit of their work to praise God. That fits in particularly just now because God is stressing service toward Himself, and that requires priests.
W.L. That is really the object in view in preaching the gospel.
J.T. Quite so; to secure people for God, to make priests for God's service. He was lame "from his mother's womb", and was being carried. The man in chapter 14: 8 had never walked. This man may have walked, hobbled it may be, as the Jews under the law.
R.W.S. The work was well done. It says in verse 16, "And, by faith in his name, his name has made this man strong whom ye behold and know; and the faith which is by him has given him this complete soundness in the presence of you all". And then in chapter 4: 10, "Be it known to you all, and to all the people of Israel, that in the name of Jesus Christ the Nazaraean, whom *ye* have crucified,
{31}
whom God has raised from among the dead, by him this man stands here before you sound in body". Is that the kind of material that is for God?
J.T. Exactly; so that he is qualified to offer the bread of his God, not only to partake of it but offer it. In the book of Leviticus persons, because of certain constitutional blemishes or infirmities, were not allowed to offer the bread of their God, but they might partake of it. The teaching of today results in imperfect constitutions; so that people are able to partake of what is for the saints, but are not able to worship God. This man is, he is sound and perfect.
J.W.D. I was thinking in that connection that ministry without formation will produce constitutional weakness, will it not?
J.T. Quite so.
J.W.D. This man is a wonderful spiritual product, in vitality and life and vigour.
J.T. Much is made in the prophets of formation, not only the general thought of recovery but formation. It began with Adam really.
T.H. Would you say it is only those who can worship who are qualified to take their place in connection with the testimony?
J.T. You might allow them to take their place as partaking of the bread of their God, to partake of what is ministered. They have a place in the fellowship but not a place in the active service in worship, to offer the bread of their God.
T.H. I was thinking of this man; in the next chapter he is seen standing with the apostles.
J.T. The fact that he entered with them into the temple is specially to be noticed, and we are told moreover that he held Peter and John; he was thoroughly with them, not only outwardly but he held them. As much as to say, These two men are my ideal. It is a great thing to be representative of God. Paul says, "*Ye* became our imitators, and of
{32}
the Lord", @1 Thessalonians 1: 6. He was worth following.
C.B. Would you say a word as to holding Peter and John. How would you apply that to us?
J.T. You thoroughly accept the thing that God is accrediting, you do not question it. You do not say, I go with John to a certain extent and Peter, too, but I have my own thoughts also. The point here is he has thrown all aside. These two men represent what is right, what I believe, that is what it means.
W.R. Would the two suggest balance in the service?
J.T. You mean Peter and John? That is right. John represents the family side, the love side, and Peter order and authority.
E.P. Would the walking, leaping and praising God mean that the ministry is filled out in spontaneity of life? He is not using certain phrases.
J.T. Just so. They do not have to help him along, he holds them. With most of the young people we have to keep holding on to them, and we should, too; but this man does not need this kind of care, he holds on to them.
C.A.M. He must have been very flexible. He was forty years old. If a man is over forty years old there is a deadening influence spiritually, an age that has got set, he really needs to be remade or else he is no good in the service.
J.T. Quite so.
E.P. It is remarkable, is it not, that in @Leviticus 11:21 it speaks of animals "Which have legs above their feet with which to leap upon the earth". Leaping seems to have a certain place in relation to the service of God.
J.T. Quite so; leaping is spiritual power. Of Dan in @Deuteronomy 33: 22, it says "he shall leap from Bashan", to get out of a false position. God would give you strength yourself to do it.
{33}
R.W.S. If we have lost some of this spring, how do we recover it?
J.T. You come back to where you turned aside in self-will. It is a question of self-judgment; you have to discern where you turned aside. Why have I lost spring? Why have I lost power? I think God would come in for anyone who looks at it in that way, settling things with God.
A.P.T. John Mark evidently lost his spring. You feel there is that element amongst us at times, those who lose their spring through mistakes made. John Mark recovers himself and holds on to Peter and John in that way. There are no reservations in regard of the Lord's service.
J.T. Quite so. Paul himself said "for he is serviceable to me for ministry", @2 Timothy 4: 11.
J.W.D. Do you think constitutional weaknesses can be rectified, however long standing they may be?
J.T. Yes, thank God! They generally refer to man's influence and teaching religiously. There is hope because there is power in the Spirit to rectify all malformations.
W.L. It is important that the Spirit of God did not ignore this man.
J.T. I think it is important that the Spirit of God did not ignore you and me. It is a question of God taking account of us, as the Lord did the blind man as He went on. He saw him, and He had him in His mind; otherwise the man would not have been there at all. In the case of blind Bartimaeus, the Lord did not pay attention to him, he paid attention to Christ. The Lord was passing on, and he heard of Him, "O Son of David, Jesus, have mercy on me", @Mark 10:47. That is another side, my taking account of the Lord and the testimony.
E.P. Do you think it is possible to come to meetings like this looking for alms?
J.T. I suppose so. A good many live on alms; a
{34}
good many of the Lord's people are a public charge, and, of course, there is plenty to support them. To use a figure, a nation is bound to support the needy.
There is much of that going on. How much better to be contributory! I think this man represents that.
L.K. What would be implied in the thought of Peter taking him by the hand, not only speaking but also putting forth his hand and taking him by the right hand?
J.T. That is right, "having taken hold of him by the right hand", @Acts 3: 7. You give the man every possible advantage -- whatever may be in him; make much of that. He was not lame in his hands but lame on his feet.
L.K. We get much in the way of speaking, but this would be something further, taking him by the hand.
J.T. It is a magnanimous feature in the ministry, that gives the man every possible advantage.
J.W.D. I think what you suggest is most important. He did not find fault with his feet.
A.P.T. Do you think it is helpful not to magnify constitutional defects, but to bring in what is positive to help in these cases?
J.T. Quite so. David took on Mephibosheth, and he was lame in both his feet. No doubt he looked very well at table.
Ques. What is the difference in the man in @John 5? He did not stand by the Lord like this man.
J.T. He is like many, he brought the Lord into trouble. There are many like that. They get a certain benefit, but do not go on. The Lord said, "Sin no more, that something worse do not happen to thee", @John 5: 14. A man like that is in great danger.
W.R. Would this man learn that it is not for monetary returns?
J.T. Peter makes it known to him that there is
{35}
nothing of that to be expected from them. Many come along for temporary advantages.
C.A.M. Those who are outstanding in that way should be free from such motives.
J.T. Quite so.
C.A.M. You cannot really make them any poorer. What Peter gave him did not make Peter poorer, but richer.
H.B. It says that the people ran together to them in the portico; is that how we are to be affected by the exemplification of the thing?
J.T. "All the people ran together", that is the thought in these signs or miracles, to call attention to what is of God, not only the power that was there, but the kind of persons that were there. "All the people ran together to them in the portico which is called Solomon's, greatly wondering", chapter 3: 11. It was a very real testimony, not only to the power but to formation, the kind of persons that were there, and how God is before them. They were going up to God at the hour of prayer and now this man is brought with them praising God.
T.H. Is there any significance in that it was the 'Beautiful' gate of the temple?
J.T. I suppose so; it was the best side of the religious system, it was called Beautiful. People come to think of it in that way.
A.H.P. Silver and gold would have entered largely into the construction of that temple. What God was aiming at now was another kind of temple as set out in this man.
J.T. Just so. All this enters into the precious stones of the foundations of the city. It is the pentecostal church that is in mind in @Revelation 21, and all this enters into that. It is the quality that is in mind in the twelve.
E.P. "Beautiful in elevation, the joy of the whole earth, is mount Zion", @Psalm 48: 2. I was thinking of
{36}
the beautiful gate of the temple, the attractiveness of it, then the opposition in the next chapter.
J.T. Quite so. I think what you see here is that the thing is gradually displacing what was there materially. It is displaced morally before it is thrown down. Every stone is being thrown down; displacement is the divine thought, working here in these persons, so that you have the true mount Zion.
J.W.D. Would you say gift conveys light, and spiritual formation begets life in the power of the Spirit?
J.T. You cannot have the assembly without spiritual formation that runs along with light. This man is a living stone. We do not get the teaching governing all that but we get it later in Peter's own ministry and also in Paul's.
A.H.P. I think what you say is very important that nothing is allowed to lapse in God's ways; before there is the actual setting aside of the material temple there is brought into evidence this great work that had its foundation in the apostles.
J.T. Yes.
Ques. Prayer and praise would be a nice combination, would it not?
J.T. Yes. What is said of the man here is, "And leaping up he stood and walked, and entered with them into the temple, walking, and leaping, and praising God". So that it is praise really going beyond the sense of need. There is what is for God immediately, that is very striking in the man.
W.W. Would you say that is in contrast to the beautiful gate? Here is a living stone able to praise God.
J.T. Quite so. Look at that stone; there were three thousand before, but now here is one that is special. God delights in that. His work is marked by that. Now the next thing is these great servants, so successful in their work, are brought into suffering
{37}
but having been let go, they came to their own company, and reported all that the chief priests and elders had said to them. It is the idea of merging, which makes for good relations amongst us -- whatever is done is a common matter affecting us all. Because after all, the most gifted amongst us, the most able, is one of us, as Paul says, "ourselves your servants", @2 Corinthians 4: 5. We belong to the community, all is of God, and what God had there! It says, "And they, having heard it, lifted up their voice with one accord to God, and said, Lord, thou art the God who made the heaven and the earth and the sea". There is not an atom of rivalry, of feeling: it is all one whether it is Peter or John; they belong to the company and all merge together beautifully in prayer. Then the whole place is shaken where they prayed, so that the apostles themselves as such come into view again, not simply Peter and John, but the apostles.
Ques. Do you think the Spirit is working to that end in these days?
J.T. Yes, I am sure He is. It is the opposite to clericalism. What is of God in that company will be capable of grading everything, giving credit to whom credit is due. We shall find that in the apostles. Paul speaks of "things that are more excellent",
@Philippians 1: 10. We are to grade everything: not to be communists, not dragging down to our level, but recognising the grace in others to come down to be with us. "Let the brother of low degree glory in his elevation, and the rich in his humiliation",
@James 1: 9, 10. "The rich and poor meet together; Jehovah is the maker of them all", @Proverbs 22: 2.
A.P.T. This man would be with them, he would observe their conduct as they merged.
J.T. Quite so. He would look around at the other apostles, too, as we have already. They spoke "to Peter and the other apostles", @Acts 2: 37. You will never become Peter's man or Paul's man in the
{38}
spiritual realm. It speaks of Joab's men, that is partisan feelings. This man would look around in the company at the other apostles. That Matthew is a wonderful man! Look around Zion and see what God has. He has got more than just Peter and John.
W.L. They shine together. They would never be more beautiful than in their brotherly setting.
R.W.S. You called attention to the word 'despot', I was wondering whether there is scope for that in our meetings. You are not addressing the Father in the liberty of sonship, but addressing the Lord as despot. Where does that fit in?
J.T. We will have to make that clear. "And they, having heard it, lifted up their voice with one accord to God, and said, Lord, thou art the God who made the heaven and the earth and the sea, and all that is in them; who hast said by the mouth of thy servant David, Why have the nations raged haughtily and the peoples meditated vain things? The kings of the earth were there, and the rulers were gathered together against the Lord and against his Christ. For in truth against thy holy servant Jesus, whom thou hadst anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the nations, and peoples of Israel, have been gathered together in this city to do whatever thy hand and thy counsel had determined before should come to pass. And now, Lord, look upon their threatenings, and give to thy bondmen with all boldness to speak thy word, in that thou stretchest out thy hand to heal, and that signs and wonders take place through the name of thy holy servant Jesus",
@Acts 4: 24 - 30. That word "Lord" in verse 24, is 'despot' as the note shows. That is, the setting is not that they speak to God as the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, themselves as sons, but they speak to Him as a despot, as One in supreme authority and having power to enforce it, and they themselves His bondmen. That is a very wholesome attitude.
{39}
R.W.S. How might it work out now?
J.T. It is very remarkable that they addressed Him in that way. The position is most urgent. They are beset all round and they are most urgent for help and they got it immediately.
J.S.T. They know His authority and power in the past in relation to creation. They desire power now in regard to speaking and healing. Would you say something in regard of that?
J.T. They are not very far removed from Old Testament ground here in their language. They were possessed of the Spirit of adoption, but they are holding it in check. We are in the most urgent need and we are calling upon Jehovah. It is Jehovah, I suppose, now, with the distinction of Master or Despot.
R.W.S. Would it be normal for this kind of prayer to be offered up in countries where there is persecution?
J.T. Yes, the more urgent the matter is the more you would resort to this. It is taking the most abject place before God.
C.A.M. I am glad that came up because in addressing divine Persons sometimes you find that there will be a desire in a brother to bind you down to address Them in a certain way. It seems if you inquire and search into what they have in mind, there is some difficulty in them in regard to the greatness of divine Persons. They are refusing something that has to do with the greatness of the Lord personally, and hence they are not free in such a range of things.
J.T. Quite so.
J.R.H. Do you think they were in the full sense of having received a kingdom which could not be shaken?
J.T. You are taking a place at the footstool. It is one thing to worship at the golden altar or the holiest, but it is another thing to worship at the footstool of God in the abject attitude which God respects. He does not want us to be in a servile position always,
{40}
but it is wholesome to take it in view of the urgency of the need. See the array of power against them, "in this city", too, not at a distance. What is current today is at a distance from us. It is *in this city*, in the very place where they are that this is going on. They are most urgent, God answers them at once (verse 31). The answer was immediate, the result of taking an abject place. We have, in the types, persons rending their garments and taking off their shoes. "But David went up by the ascent of the Olives, and wept as he went up, and had his head covered, and he went barefoot", @2 Samuel 15: 30. All these things refer to emotions and suitable feelings in us in having to do with God. I should not say despot to God in the assembly in worship, but when in urgent need, get down as low as possible.
J.R.H. Do you think in the shaking of the house that He was showing Himself as One able to shake all things?
J.T. Yes, they refer to His power in creation.
J.W.D. You get in @1 Peter 4: 17, "For the time of having the judgment begin from the house of God is come", and then in verse 19, "Wherefore also let them who suffer according to the will of God commit their souls in well-doing to a faithful Creator".
J.T. "Faithful Creator", just so; the everlasting gospel presently will relate to the creation, too.
A.H.P. "The Lord God Almighty", would that correspond?
J.T. Yes, quite so.
Ques. In urgent need one notices the prayers are always short and to the point.
J.T. Quite so. "This kind does not go out but by prayer and fasting", @Matthew 17: 21. It should always be, but especially in urgent matters. I think what we are talking about shows how we merge in the community. What there is belongs to us all. The great servants came to their own company and told
{41}
them what had happened. Then there is prayer. Thus the apostles are all again in evidence. But the Spirit of God is using His own vessels, as we get lower down.
S.McC. Someone must have given utterance to this, but it says, "they said".
J.T. Quite so.
A.P.T. Do you not think that God heard the prayers of the saints recently?
J.T. I am sure He did. They were most urgent.
The brethren in England would get down to any depth to get relief, but why do we not apply it more often?
E.P. They said, "Lord ... God ... who hast said by the mouth of thy servant David" (verse 25). Would it imply an inward knowledge of God?
J.T. Quite so. That brings up another thing, the recurrence of the word 'servant' throughout this chapter, applying it to the Lord Himself. The idea of service in its varied features is appearing in the twelve apostles. It is set here as a precedent for us so that we should answer to that in some little way.
S.McC. "Thy holy servant"; Luke makes much of holiness; that would be important in relation to service, would it not?
J.T. Quite so. The next thing is a very critical question of discipline and would occasion much thought, preserving the assembly from defilement.
It is to bring out that in apostolic times there was power to meet any attack of the devil, even if it were inside. In the case of Ananias and Sapphira, the lesson is how to meet attacks of the devil to defile us in our localities.
A.P.T. Would chapter 4 indicate that the external thing is met by God, whereas chapter 5 shows dangers that are met by the inward side?
J.T. Peter meets it, he knows what to do. There are those who say, The Lord will do it, the Lord will see to it, and things are allowed to drag on and the saints are defiled and the Spirit grieved. We are
{42}
saying the Lord will come in; the Lord would say, It is your matter, I will be with you. Hence chapter 5: 1 - 5, it is a marvellous thing done by a man. Of course God caused Ananias to die. God did that but Peter put the thing before him in an orderly way. It is a great principle in discipline. Let the actual guilt be stated concisely in the assembly; God will act for us.
C.B. Is this really the setting of an assembly meeting for discipline?
J.T. The actual guilt is stated. Peter is an apostle and knows what happened, I suppose, by the Spirit. There are no witnesses called to prove it. It is manifestly so, and he stated the guilt precisely. In our case we would have to bring evidence that there is guilt; but do not forget to state the guilt and prove it otherwise it should not be brought into the assembly.
C.A.M. The man not only had reservations but was deceptive about it.
J.T. He was selfish, pretending to be what he was not in a sacrificial way. We were talking yesterday of pillars of smoke. John says, "Behold the Lamb of God". We are to be sacrificial and wholehearted, and he was not that; he was deceiving, trying to put on a good front with his heart not in it and his wife was with him.
J.R.H. There is an affectionate appeal, something like Joshua speaking to Achan.
J.T. Quite so.
R.A. Does the Spirit reveal the guilt? I was thinking of @Ezekiel 11, where the Spirit reveals the guilt and shows the twenty-five men in the east gate.
J.T. Yes, the guilt is here clearly manifest, known. What Peter says is true and God acted in regard of it.
R.W.S. Would it be right to say the local assembly maintains an emergency service for alarms in the night, so that things are dealt with and not allowed to run on for months and years?
{43}
J.T. There is secret service and emergency service. Our position is secret in this respect. We are with God and get God's mind. God gives us means, and what little information we can get carries its own assurance. God clothes it and makes it clear.
W.L. Would you say that even outside information has weight?
J.T. Not much.
W.L. "A good report of them which are without", @1 Timothy 3: 7.
J.T. That is a question of how they look at us. That does not mean we are to bring it into the assembly. I should not accept their report. I should not base much on it in the assembly. Nor do I think God would bring it in much.
W.W. If we are cast on God He will come in for us.
J.T. Secret service, you know, is for finding things out. If we are with God He will make them known. This is an assembly matter. God has concealed the assembly for centuries, but it is the honour of kings to search things out. There is no need to be in the dark, because the Lord will help. There is secret service as in connection with David, and then the emergency service, Peter is ready for this matter. He is not behind.
G.M. Say a word on the fact this is made so much of by the Spirit at this time.
J.T. There is no one exempt from it. It is very solemn and it really means, as we see in Judas and as we see here, that a place is given to the devil. Peter says, "Why has Satan filled thy heart that thou shouldest lie to the Holy Spirit" (verse 3). What a great advantage he had, in that he was a man in Jerusalem in the assembly; and yet he was capable of this thing, to decide secretly with his wife: 'We will make a show and give so much. It was a good deal, but it is not all. More could be offered but we will
{44}
pretend that is all'. They are opening the door to the devil, to lie to the Holy Spirit in the assembly. It is a challenge to the presence of God in the assembly. That is what the enemy was after. How serious that I should lend myself to anything like that!
W.W. Why should natural relationships be brought in? That should speak to us.
J.T. The husband and wife are in collusion in this serious matter. It is a military matter. Satan is aiming at the great position that God has set up in Jerusalem in the assembly to discredit it, and these two persons are used.
A.P.T. Peter was showing that the foundations of the city were secure. It says, "the street of the city pure gold, as transparent glass", @Revelation 21: 21. What is needed in our local assemblies is transparency. So you can see right through a brother, no dark spots.
J.T. Quite so.
S.McC. "Who is she that looketh forth as the dawn, fair as the moon, clear as the sun, terrible as troops with banners?" @Song of Songs 6: 10. It is important in the assembly, is it not, that in judgment things should be so stated in clearness that there is the dispersion of every element of darkness from the minds of the saints?
J.T. Just so. If the thing is there, there is power to deal with it. "Terrible as troops with banners".
S.McC. Sometimes when the assembly has been together in a judicial way, the brethren do not know what has transpired, issues are not clear. It is important that things should be stated clearly.
J.T. Clearly and concisely as here, a few words; see how simple this speech of Peter's is. That is how it should be stated in the assembly.
E.P. Is there any importance in the thought that Ananias died and was buried before his wife knew
{45}
about it? One thing is being dealt with at a time. Our minds are not confused.
J.T. Very good.
J.W.D. Do you think that the power is left in the system so that anything of this nature in a locality can be brought to light? There is faith in the functioning power of the Spirit to bring rebellion to light.
J.T. Quite so. The indictment of the sister when she comes in is equally clear. "And it came to pass about three hours afterwards, that his wife, not knowing what had happened, came in" (verse 7). She must have been very dull, hardly characteristic of the assembly as the body, or she would have known some sorrowful thing had happened. "And Peter answered her, Tell me if ye gave the estate for so much? And she said, Yes, for so much". He makes her convict herself, he does not make the man do that. "And Peter said to her, Why is it that ye have agreed together to tempt the Spirit of the Lord? Lo, the feet of those that have buried thy husband are at the door, and they shall carry thee out. And she fell down immediately at his feet and expired" (verses 9, 10). God acted again, acted in connection with the plain concise statement of the guilt. Conviction is there.
A.P.T. In these church difficulties, if I have part in a leading way and have caused the saints to be led into error, I should admit it. This woman had an opportunity to admit it. How much did you get? She had an opportunity to speak the truth and clear herself. I believe one of the great difficulties amongst us is that the brethren who have had part in church errors have not confessed the errors humbly before God and the brethren. That is why there is not the same confidence in the brethren who have done these things.
J.T. Nor is there the full result in testimony, because we have the sequel to all this; it might
{46}
appear that the work would be more limited now in such severe discipline but, "great fear came upon all the assembly, and upon all who heard these things. And by the hands of the apostles were many signs and wonders done among the people; (and they were all with one accord in Solomon's porch, but of the rest durst no man join them, but the people magnified them; and believers were more than ever added to the Lord, multitudes both of men and women;)", @Acts 5: 11 - 14. So that we need not be afraid of dealing with evil, stating it clearly and concisely because the assembly must be brought into it. God will work with us and honours that.
W.W. You need to judge the root of the thing; if you are on party lines you must judge the root of the thing. The woman had a chance to judge it.
J.T. You mean this was really a party matter. They were in collusion (verse 2).
W.L. I was wondering why Peter acted alone in this.
J.T. It was to bring out Peter's distinction. We began with that in regard to the twelve, "first, Simon, who was called Peter". He has the leading place and God is recognising that. You can see how well he did it. The point is he did it properly and God supported him. That is what we need in our meetings: a proper and spiritual lead so that things are done right.
D.G. Should discipleship be confined to the masculine side or is there the feminine side also as in Esther?
J.T. Both.
D.G. I was thinking of what you were saying earlier, how that Mary anointed Jesus, how she was used in that particular service.
J.T. Quite so; it says in chapter 2: 17, "I will pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and your *daughters* shall prophesy". We see some of this in the secret service in @2 Samuel 17. There was
{47}
Hushai the friend of David and two old priests, Zadok and Abiathar; their two sons Ahimaaz and Jonathan, and then two sisters, two women, one a maid, who had a lowly place in some house, but who served well in the secret service. There were seven persons, two of them women in this important secret service.
R.A.L. Is it not important to see that whilst Ananias and Sapphira are mentioned first as husband and wife they are not dealt with as such, they are dealt with as brethren?
J.T. He is dealt with first, and she after. It is remarkable they are not dealt with together, to bring them in together would confuse the matter. It was ordered of God that he should come in by himself. They are not dealt with together.
J.H-t. Would you say it is important to see what Satan is trying to get at in the way of evil amongst the saints? To Ananias Peter says it is lying to the Holy Spirit, but to Sapphira it is tempting the Spirit of the Lord.
J.T. The three divine Persons are brought into this matter.
E.P. Is there a kind of root evil in this first thing that occurred in the early church, putting aside a part of the price for themselves?
J.T. It reminds you of the sin of Adam and Eve, the same sort of thing. It is root error; pride must have entered into it. Husband and wife taking counsel together with selfishness to have a show, not really to sacrifice.
A.H.P. The same kind of thing might be seen in a number of brethren, not necessarily related naturally, but agreeing together regarding matters in connection with the house of God, the idea of collusion, tending to darken the fellowship.
J.T. Yes, especially with parents trying to hide things about their children; transparency is the thing.
{48}
R.W.S. In an assembly meeting for discipline, is it generally known who will present the evidence or do we come together just waiting for help as we come? Is it decided in the care meeting who will present things?
J.T. That is a matter of confidence. The brethren have taken the matter up and reached a certain conclusion and present it to the assembly by one or two of their number. Confidence in the assembly would accept that. We must always make allowance for God in the assembly. If a brother is stating a thing, you say That is of God, the Spirit of God confirms what has been said. I look for it in all matters of that kind.
C.B. Why is it in matters of this sort you hear some saying, Peter moved without affection, or he was lacking in affection?
J.T. Well, I do not think he was. He was meeting terrible evil. You can see how God wrought with him. When we have to deal in judgment it is according to the sin; we have to put on judicial garments. You may see the Lord changes His garments when dealing with the assemblies as to sin, putting on His judge's robes, and being girt about the paps with a golden girdle. It is not the time of love, conditions forbad it. It is there but bound up. It is remarkable how Peter is honoured, because in a subsequent passage the shadow of Peter is not the shadow of the judge. The whole history shows he was a feeling man.
J.A.T. The experience of Peter with the Lord in @John 21 prepared him for this.
J.T. No doubt he had been dealt with himself, the Lord looked at him.
A.P.T. Is this judicial side connected with the forsaking?
J.T. Yes; exactly, it is dealing with sin. Why should we spare a christian when he is guilty? God
{49}
did not spare His Son, Jesus, when He took on sin as the sin-offering.
The next point is the care for the poor, for the needy, a very important service amongst us. Chapter 6 shows how the neglect of that may bring in dissension and murmuring in the assembly. So that we have to watch this matter of need amongst us: it should be met. We have seven men here. It is put on the brethren themselves, all this, not to appoint them but to seek them out. "And the twelve, having called the multitude of the disciples to them, said, It is not right that we, leaving the word of God, should serve tables. Look out therefore, brethren, from among yourselves seven men, well reported of, full of the Holy Spirit and wisdom, whom we will establish over this business", chapter 6: 2, 3. The seven men are selected and the murmuring ceases, cleavage is averted and love is active in wisdom in qualified persons.
R.W.S. The trend of the world toward trade unionism makes this matter of the brethren not being able to get employment more urgent as the time grows shorter.
J.T. I think if we challenge this question of trade unionism in our meetings we should be prepared to help our brethren that have to suffer. They cannot take on the mark of the beast; God takes definite issue with it in the book of Revelation. If they cannot take it on they are bound to suffer. It is for the brethren to stand by them. This chapter is to teach us this.
S.McC. I heard of a young man tested as to trade unionism in another part of the country. He came to the brethren after the meeting one night and put the matter before them for help and counsel as to his position. It was said to him, This is your matter, it is according to your faith, you must not expect us to
{50}
support you if you get out of work. You will have to stand to it. Do you think that is right?
J.T. That is altogether wrong, there is no love in it, no sympathy at all.
S.McC. That was actually done and the young brother went and joined the union.
J.T. He should not have done it, but the brethren helped him to do it.
Rem. It says here they had all things in common.
J.T. It does.
C.A.M. I can see that would be giving Satan an opportunity, if you force the thing on someone.
J.T. Quite so. A man becomes depressed; he says, What can I do? I knew a young man who was discharged last May because the workers were on strike and he was forced out. He could not join the union, and he had great sorrow in his family, too, at that time. He had been only nine months in fellowship. The brethren stood by him and helped him financially. I heard a few months later his employers sent for him and reinstated him. God helped him and the brethren in that way. It is our matter, this chapter shows we are in a community. All are brought into this matter, like Abraham looking for the three-year-old cattle. It is really a wholesome thing to look around. Look around for seven men who can be trusted with money matters, who know how to serve in love. It is peculiarly an administrative matter of love. They care for the needy, they settle the matter and the crisis is past. From this point on we get very little about the twelve. We get a great deal about these persons, and how they purchased to themselves a good degree.
W.L. Why are these not business-men?
J.T. Look at the qualifications required; it does not say anything about business-men. "Seven men, well reported of, full of the Holy Spirit and wisdom".
{51}
Why should we look for business-men; they are apt to be very calculating and looking for profits.
A.P.T. They become business-men of a different kind.
C.A.M. An accountant or a lawyer would be the worst man in the place!
J.T. Quite so.
{52}
UNOFFICIAL SERVICE
@Acts 6:8 - 15; @Acts 8:4 - 8; @Acts 9:6 - 19; @Acts 11:19 - 26; @Acts 13:1 - 4
J.T. We have to consider the work and service of persons without formal commissions. Pursuing the book of the Acts, we find Peter finishing his testimony in the opening of the door to the gentiles, the door of the kingdom, in which he did well; but he had to be prepared for it specially by heaven, reminding us that if any work opens up to us different from what we have been engaged in, we need to be particularly concerned that we get the mind of God. So that Peter has a vision, a remarkable experience according to chapter 10, and is qualified, fitted, and set at liberty to do the special work, and this great work opens up to him. At the end of chapter 9 he sets before us a principle, that if we are to be spiritually in the service of God we are not to be out of accord with the change-over in the character of the service.
Paul's conversion implied that the Lord had in mind that he was to do a great work, as an elect vessel, that the assembly should be brought into evidence, and that the economy should work out in localities, not in a central or metropolitan position, but in localities throughout the world. Before the truth given to Paul is developed, but after he is converted, Peter seems to sense by the Spirit what is coming in and is ready for it, so he goes through all quarters in chapter 9: 32, "Now it came to pass that Peter, passing through all quarters, descended also to the saints who inhabited Lydda". That is a great principle in local matters. The thing has to be done by the persons there. Then secondly, raising Tabitha, he "presented her living": there is a sense in the locality of responsibility to do things for God. On the other hand, they are done in a living way, not in
{53}
a mere legal or routine way. Chapter 10 finishes Peter's testimony in so far as Acts is concerned. He is seen again, but in general, that is the great end of the service of the twelve, Peter being outstanding right through.
Then, as I said, we now have to look at service by persons who are nondescript, but still very successful service, first in Stephen and Philip; and then in chapter 11 we are told, "They then who had been scattered abroad through the tribulation that took place on the occasion of Stephen, passed through the country of Phoenicia and Cyprus and Antioch, speaking the word to no one but to Jews alone. But there were certain of them, Cyprians and Cyrenians, who entering into Antioch spoke to the Greeks also, announcing the glad tidings of the Lord Jesus. And the Lord's hand was with them, and a great number believed and turned to the Lord" (verses 19 - 21). So that we see in this section, beginning with the end of chapter 6, how persons without formal commissions may serve and serve effectually, so that their work is taken account of, and is in entire keeping with the spirit of the moment, with the spirit of Paul's ministry, before Paul's ministry came out. It would mean that they were spiritual persons who walked in the Spirit and lived in the Spirit, as we are told to do. So that first of all we should consider Stephen and Philip, then in general the scattered saints, and then Barnabas and Saul.
S.McC. As distinct from the service connected with the twelve, how does this feature of the service in individuals, referred to here, work out in a practical way today?
J.T. It is helpful for young servants, those who desire to serve, to show that they can do it; not wait for invitations to serve, but as they have opportunity, take on service as it opens up. The Lord gives opportunities. Later they will be
{54}
invited to serve by the saints, but initially they have to show that they can. Nobody else can help them. They have to do it themselves. It is obligatory on each to do something himself. He may be appointed to the same manner of service, but he takes on something more as he has opportunity. He begins to show that he can do something, and then the Lord takes him on. You see how Philip, for instance, went down to Samaria to preach Christ; he did not have himself before him in what he was doing, he preached Christ. The appellation Christ means the One who does everything. Let us never forget that! The most unskilled has that light as well as the most skilled. He preached Christ; there were great results. The angel sent him on a great service and the Spirit took him on, told him to join the chariot, and finally raptured him and caught him away, showing that He was so pleased with him. I believe Philip is a model for all young brothers and sisters in regard of service.
E.P. Would this dispute in the synagogue arise on practical lines? Authority in doctrine was vested in the apostles; a new element of authority had come in now dealing with what was practical. I was wondering whether the "freedmen" suggests an attitude, 'we do what we like'.
J.T. You mean that Stephen was moving under authority. Yes, quite so. And the Libertines would not like that, it would not suit them. At first it says, "And Stephen, full of grace and power, wrought wonders and great signs among the people. And there arose up certain of those of the synagogue called of freedmen, and of Cyrenians, and of Alexandrians, and of those of Cilicia and Asia, disputing with Stephen", chapter 6: 8, 9. God gives more grace. It seems a remarkable thing that there should be such opposition from such wide, extended parts against this man. He was himself, I apprehend, a man from
{55}
a distance, a Hellenist, I suppose. He himself was a man of that type, and the enemy, I suppose, senses that this man represents a new turn in the building of the temple, or of the walls of Jerusalem. The twelve are not attacked, it is this man.
C.A.M. It is like the move of an army, Satan is always secondary in his ideas. So the man's name and his setting would make the enemy feel it is going to be on a larger scale.
J.T. You mean his crown?
C.A.M. It is a Greek name.
J.T. It would be, I suppose. Stephanas -- Stephen. The enemy would say, this man is in keeping with it, "full of grace and power". He was doing something, "wonders and great signs among the people". God has victory in mind on another line, not on apostolic lines, but "those who shall have ministered well obtain for themselves a good degree", @1 Timothy 3: 13. I begin to rule over myself, because I shall never acquire a good degree unless I get victory over myself in that sense, "So then I *myself* with the mind serve God's law", @Romans 7: 25. I believe that enters into Stephen's make-up, on the line of victory in himself first.
W.L. Is it good for the young to start serving tables?
J.T. Yes. The next thing -- Am I victorious over myself? I believe that is what Stephen was initially -- one is full, not full of himself but full of grace and power.
C.A.M. It is a great thing to be of value, willing to give your life for a position, so strikingly set forth in Stephen. I suppose a general would promote a man where he was ready to give his life.
J.T. It is a military position. And so in the council, "all who sat in the council, looking fixedly on him, saw his face as the face of an angel". It is glory in a man, glory shining in a man, he is manifestly
{56}
victorious over himself, "full of grace and power". He is showing it in what he is doing. This widespread opposition only brought out the reflection of heaven in judicial glory.
W.W. In connection with what you said about a vessel full of light, no darkness, it only exposed the darkness and hatred.
J.T. He is really intended to represent the Lord in this service, a representative of Christ. He is the first martyr, he has that honour, that is his crown.
-.DeB. He is a sort of a leader in that way. "We ought for the brethren to lay down our lives", @1 John 3: 16.
J.W.D. Do you think all those who embark on unofficial service must make up their minds for suffering of this kind?
J.T. I think they do. In truth you might say all service in these remnant times is of this kind. The Lord is not putting out His hand publicly to honour anybody. The point in Stephen is that he was full of grace and power. It seems very remarkable that the opposition should be so widespread, first by these freedmen -- Libertines, they would do as they liked. But Stephen is doing as he likes, but with liberty in the service of God, that is where his liberty is. He is in liberty in subjection.
E.P. Do you think that the first attack in the early chapters is on the apostles, whereas the second attack seems to be on the ranks, and God produces a bit of quality from the ranks?
J.T. Just so. Taking up the nondescript, although Stephen has a little distinction in being a deacon. He is in mind now to be promoted in the service of God, to be useful in a wider way. Satan discerns that.
A.P.T. The enemy does not like anyone like Jesus. One feels as going back to one's daily employment and household affairs of life, the reflection of the truth of meetings like this would go through, so that the
{57}
enemy is defeated. Is that the way with Stephen?
J.T. He is a reflection of Christ. His face is shining in the council. "And all who sat in the council, looking fixedly on him, saw his face as the face of an angel". It is remarkable. Why are they looking fixedly on a man? There is something in the man, what he is himself.
J.R.H. Why do they bring the same charges against him as against the Lord Jesus? "This man does not cease speaking words against the holy place and the law" (verse 13).
J.T. It is to bring out the correspondence to Christ. The attack on him here is very like what you get in the Lord before the high priest and before Pilate. The same happened before the high priest, "We have heard him speaking blasphemous words against Moses and God. And they roused the people, and the elders, and the scribes. And coming upon him they seized him and brought him to the council. And they set false witnesses, saying, This man does not cease speaking words against the holy place and the law; for we have heard him saying, This Jesus the Nazaraean shall destroy this place, and change the customs which Moses taught us". It is the same spirit that appeared in the attack on the Lord before the high priest.
T.H. What does it mean to be full of grace and power in a practical way?
J.T. If I am full of grace, I am not full of myself. It is what the man is. He must have learned Romans, you know. I believe that is the way, acquiring power over yourself first. "Better ... he that ruleth his spirit than he that taketh a city", @Proverbs 16:32. Complete mastery over myself, that is the secret of promotion in the things of God.
J.W.D. The way Satan seems to becloud the levitical power of Stephen by all these false witnesses is to be noted. There is a great deal of idle speaking
{58}
with regard to those who seek to serve, without being able to substantiate it.
J.T. It fits in here. "And they set false witnesses, saying, This man does not cease speaking words against the holy place and the law". They were false, it is a powerful weapon that Satan uses to discredit the servants. The Lord said, "Judge not according to sight, but judge righteous judgment", @John 7: 24.
C.A.M. So that Satan brings up a religious element to counteract.
J.T. I think it is very striking here, the wideness of the field from whence the opposition came, and then the deliberate setting up of false witnesses. It would look as though Satan saw and knew the turn the testimony had taken, and gathers all his forces against it.
A.P.T. Is the attractiveness of the servant seen, not only in being full of grace and power, but in his knowledge of the truth of assembly matters as chapter 7 shows?
J.T. That is the next thing. Satan did not know the type of man. He usually fails in his calculations in such a widespread attack as this. Stephen was like an ambush. God sets ambushes -- there is unexpected power and ability. Satan did not know in calling attention to Stephen in this way and attacking him, that it would bring out the extraordinary power of the man. Satan never does rightly gauge what is there.
J.R.H. He did not know he was going to lose his best leader.
J.T. He was going to lose Saul of Tarsus. God is a man of war. We are in a military position here. Satan is gathering his forces from all quarters. "And there arose up certain of those of the synagogue called of freedmen, and of Cyrenians, and of Alexandrians, and of those of Cilicia and Asia, disputing with
{59}
Stephen". The enemy is going far afield, as if this is a serious matter in his mind, and he must meet it with all his power. Still he does not take account of what is in front of him, that God is a man of war.
Here is this man, he is of no account, he is not an apostle, but is a man who can do great things. See the indictment he brings forward; God would arraign Israel at this juncture and He had this man to do it. Peter could not have done it as he did it.
G.M. God is greater than all the enemy's power.
J.T. That is the first great sign after redemption the Lord is a Man of war. Every attack only brought out what was there, until finally we have the martyr, like his own Master. He has the martyr's crown.
You could not have a better account of it than Paul gives. "And when the blood of thy witness Stephen was shed, I also myself was standing by and consenting, and kept the clothes of them who killed him", @Acts 22: 20.
C.A.M. I was wondering in connection with our secret history with the Lord, if that baffles Satan. He can see what goes on in the religious world, but I suppose if there is a private matter going on, Satan is liable to underrate that.
J.T. Quite so. He gauges you according to your history, but suppose you go in to God, he has got a different man to deal with, he does not understand that.
J.H-t. When Nehemiah came to Jerusalem to build the wall, he went by night into the valley-gate, and to the dung-gate, so that when the attack of the enemy comes, he has already had secret history with God about it.
J.T. That is a good reference. He went out alone, without anybody, a matter of secret service.
C.A.M. Alluding to Philip, you were going to say more about him? Philip and Stephen were a counterpart
{60}
in some ways. But Philip is a very movable man, ready for any emergency.
J.T. Yes, he is another step in the development of the building of the wall, a turn in the wall, a change of testimony. These are men who have the thing. You cannot say much about them; as in Elijah's case, we do not know anything about their early history; it is what the man is as he stands before you, that is how Elijah comes in. So here these men are taken up with this wonderful development in Stephen's case; what he is personally is very striking, and how his face is capable of reflecting. What is in mind is an angelic thing, it is really judicial glory that is shining in his face, not new covenant glory, but judicial glory.
A.P.T. Is this needed in our localities?
J.T. It is the Lord in judicial glory, one of the main things in the ways of God acting judicially. It is not a doleful thing -- it is a sorrowful thing, of course, but there is glory in it. Whatever God does, there is glory in it.
C.A.M. Something like the glory of the angel at the end of Matthew's gospel. His face is called attention to.
J.T. Matthew's gospel is something like this, it bears on the guilt of Israel.
A.P.T. Is this tenth verse to be noted? "And they were not able to resist the wisdom and the Spirit with which he spoke". When local difficulties are protracted; is it due to the absence of this feature in us?
J.T. Quite so. Matters are not handled with skill.
There is not judicial glory and ability. We had that this morning as to an act of discipline. This is a wider thing. Stephen's address helps us as regards the whole history of the professing body. We are called upon to judge the whole history. "Wilt thou judge them, wilt thou judge, son of man?" @Ezekiel 20: 4.
{61}
That is a word to Ezekiel. The whole thing is judged. Who is able to do it? God is calling on us to do it, and Stephen is the exemplifier of that how to go over the ground, the history of the professing body. See how it has sinned against God! So that we are justified in leaving it, in principle.
H.M. Would the same principle work out in Stephen that worked out in Moses? "When Moses came down from mount Sinai -- and the two tables of testimony were in Moses¬ hand, when he came down from the mountain -- that Moses knew not that the skin of his face shone through his talking with him", @Exodus 34: 29.
J.T. Moses¬ face shone because of the covenant. This is not the covenant, this is judicial glory. Moses¬ face did not shine as the face of an angel, Stephen's did, because this is like Matthew, God coming in to deal with Israel judicially. He fully states the case, plentifully declares the thing. In stating a matter in the assembly, we state it carefully; still there ought to be a full, ample testimony before a judicial action is taken: the matter should be clearly defined, and that is what Stephen's address is.
W.D. I was wondering if the man himself does not suggest the thing? "Full of the Holy Spirit", "full of grace and power". His testimony is full.
J.T. Yes, it is complete. I believe that God has helped in the revival in this way. What we speak of as the 'collected writings', and ministry necessarily took on the form of the indictment of the general public position, because it was a question of, "Come out of her, my people, that ye have not fellowship in her sins", @Revelation 18: 4. Well, these sins have to be declared, they have to be attested. God would have that, we know what we are doing.
C.B. In that way, would you connect this glory with the cherubim?
J.T. It is somewhat like the glory of Ezekiel. It
{62}
was the Shekinah in the temple really, it was the presence of God in the temple in Jerusalem. And the glory departed from the cherub and went on the threshold, and then from the threshold it finally went up to the mount of Olives -- departed altogether; that corresponds with what we have here. I think we should take notice of the angelic shining, that is, angels are instruments of God's judicial dealings.
R.W.S. He addresses them as "Brethren and fathers". Is that the point? He judges it himself.
J.T. Yes, they are still in relation to God, but their attitude towards this final appeal makes them reprobate: there is no more hope. Paul says, "but wrath has come upon them to the uttermost",
@1 Thessalonians 2: 16. Before it is executed, we get this wonderful indictment of the whole position, the whole history of Israel.
C.A.M. So really our position today is in Galilee, because the Jerusalem setting has received this indictment. In the end of Matthew that is the position in which we see the Lord. "But the eleven disciples went into Galilee to the mountain which Jesus had appointed them", @Matthew 28: 16.
J.T. In Luke the city is still recognised, but not in Matthew. In Matthew the meeting place is in Galilee. That confirms what we are saying. Matthew has the overthrow of Jerusalem in mind, and the angel "came and rolled away the stone and sat upon it. And his look was as lightning".
J.H. In dealing with the sin of Achan, "My son, give, I pray thee, glory to Jehovah the God of Israel", @Joshua 7: 19. Is that the judicial glory that you spoke of?
J.T. Quite so. It is a judicial matter. It attaches to everyone as we separate, as we withdraw, from iniquity. Judicial glory shines there. We do not take account of that enough. It is a very important matter, because it strengthens you in your position:
{63}
the glory attaches to you in the position; the withdrawal is based on a clear understanding of the guilt you are leaving.
E.P. Glory comes into view in @Ezekiel 10:5. "And the sound of the wings of the cherubim was heard to the outer court, as the voice of the Almighty God when he speaketh". Do you think that in Stephen's powerful testimony here there is something of that? "The voice of the Almighty God when he speaketh".
J.T. Quite so. What an address it is, beginning with the God of glory and carrying the thought right through until he calls attention to the glory of God on high and Jesus standing there!
J.T.T. Is it not important in going over these matters judicially that we begin at the beginning and come on to the present moment? "O stiffnecked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, *ye* do always resist the Holy Spirit; as your fathers, *ye* also". He brought them forward to what they were doing then.
J.T. Yes. They "gnashed their teeth against him". That is in general the kind of service that Stephen's represents. It arises from a man who purchases to himself a good degree and great boldness in the faith. He purchased it, he acquired it, through self-sacrifice, self-denial. It is what one may acquire in one's way of dealing with oneself.
J.T.T. The Lord in speaking about a disciple, says, "For which of you, desirous of building a tower, does not first sit down and count the cost", @Luke 14: 28.
J.T. Quite so. Philip, as has been remarked, is not a martyr: he is never seen as a martyr specially; he is an evangelist, the only one called that, which is a very significant matter. I think in Stephen you see one line of service and glory attached to it; the other is that of an evangelist, and glory is attached to that, and the Spirit of God makes so much of it,
{64}
not only guiding Philip, but taking him on, rapturing him, and showing how delightful a servant may become who is amenable to the guidance of heaven.
J.R.H. What do you say about his being one of the scattered ones? "Those then that had been scattered".
J.T. The point is he has no commission. As far as facts go he is a deacon, he has no other commission. He also purchased to himself a good degree, and becomes a very attractive man, an evangelist. You get more appellations of the gospel in this chapter than in any chapter of the Bible. I do not profess to understand much about evangelisation; the idea is one of the most delightful to heaven.
C.A.M. One thing is evident, he was not a platform man. He was a very movable man. It says, "How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that announceth glad tidings" (@Isaiah 52: 7); they are not beautiful on the platform, because you are not using them. He moved about marvellously.
J.W.D. There is not much unofficial visiting. Would you encourage our young brethren to move about unofficially visiting the brethren? Meetings for ministry and that sort of thing?
J.T. Quite so. And to places that are not very attractive in themselves; Samaria was a rival to Jerusalem. It would not be attractive, a rival to Jerusalem, as we know from @John 4. So that a young brother, or any brother who visits of himself, might go to a place which hitherto had not been very favourable towards him. That requires self-negation. We must learn to commit ourselves to the brethren, not trust to our attractiveness, but seek to find out how the brethren regard us, seek to meet their wishes and desires.
W.R. Philip would be prepared to come to martyrdom.
J.T. The Spirit of God has already occupied us
{65}
with a martyr. Now I want you to see a man who is very attractive in himself, the only one called an evangelist, so that I may get some idea of what an evangelist is, a man that the Spirit of God loved, He raptured him. What does that mean? He caught him away, we are told. The Spirit of God must have been greatly pleased with him.
S.McC. The idea of rapturing him away, how would that work out?
J.T. "And Philip was found at Azotus". What enjoyment he had in the meantime we are not told. What kind of a time did he have with the Spirit?
S.McC. I would like help on it. Have you ever been raptured away?
J.T. I should not like to say that. There is such a thing as having a time with the Spirit.
S.McC. I was wondering whether it is workable in these days.
J.T. Certainly it is. The Spirit is so pleased with your service. It is a perfect bit of service, an evangelist's service. The word 'evangelist' is written over the whole chapter.
J.R.H. How would you compare this with Paul being taken up to the third heaven?
J.T. Something like that, of course. That was elevation. What a time he had with God then! "Whether in the body or out of the body I know not, God knows". He had to do with God.
A.P.T. Peter had an ecstasy. These men get something.
J.T. What kind of experiences did they have? What experience did Philip have when he was caught away and was found somewhere else, what time elapsed, what territory was covered, what experience did he have? We are left to think of that, we are not told.
C.A.M. The word 'evangelist' has 'angel' in it.
{66}
A remarkable supernatural affair -- he was more like an angel than the ordinary person.
J.T. The point is to get the thought of being with the Spirit of God, of the Spirit of God taking hold of you. What an experience it is! John says, "I became in the Spirit on the Lord's day", @Revelation 1: 10.
C.A.M. I think some of us feel in connection with that, we are often too orthodox, too set, and God does not want us to be like that, do you think?
J.T. I think we are to be amenable to spiritual influence. We know there is spiritualism and we know that its followers are amenable to spiritual influence. The believer is to be amenable to spiritual influence, the Spirit taking hold of him. What an experience that must be! You are outside of yourself.
S.McC. It was not that he was coming down off the platform, it was when he was coming up out of the water, suggesting there would be abnegation of what is attaching to ourselves, to our condition.
J.T. A remarkable thing. He went down with the eunuch, and he began at the same scripture to preach unto him Jesus. "He was led as a lamb to the slaughter, and was as a sheep dumb before her shearers, and he opened not his mouth. He was taken from oppression and from judgment; and who shall declare his generation? for he was cut off out of the land of the living". That is something that could be said of nobody else. Jesus¬ life is unique, by itself, wholly of itself and by itself; there is nothing like it before, or since, or ever. A state of manhood for a few years which never existed before, and never again, that is taken away.
J.R.H. Are you linking up this thought of being caught away with the Lord's life being taken from the earth?
J.T. Yes, I should.
J.W.D. What do you say about the "Spirit of
{67}
the Lord"? Something like the end of @2 Corinthians 3 -- a category of spiritual blessing?
J.T. You are alluding to @Acts 8: 39. "But when they came up out of the water the Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip, and the eunuch saw him no longer, for he went on his way rejoicing". The "Spirit of the Lord" is akin to "the Lord is the Spirit, but where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty". There was authority in it, because he was in service, but it was no less than the Spirit in the sense of the Spirit Himself who did it. There is authority in it. He was found at Azotus and he continued to serve. What an experience this was, to come back out of that state and serve again! 
-.DeB. Elijah became discouraged and he was taken away. He had done a great service.
J.T. He was taken up to heaven, you mean? It is the same idea: he was raptured. We are going to be raptured, too, presently. The point is to be pleasing to the Lord. If I am a Stephen, or a Philip or any of these scattered saints, the point is to be pleasing to heaven. To rapture emphasises what is pleasurable.
W.W. How well heaven is pleased. First the angel and then the Spirit, showing what one taking up that service has at his disposal.
J.T. How well he did it. The Spirit was so pleased with him that He raptures him.
A.P.T. It says of Enoch "he has the testimony that he had pleased God", @Hebrews 11:5.
J.T. He was the first one translated. The idea is that he pleased God. Here it is an evangelist that pleased God. Another thing, he had four daughters who prophesied. They did not sit back and say we are prophetesses, but they did the thing. That is what marks Philip -- he does the thing. He went down to Samaria and "preached the Christ to them".
{68}
These women, his daughters, do the thing, they prophesy.
W.R. Have you in mind that the saints should take on these moral qualities in view of the rapture?
J.T. That is the point the Lord is stressing -- what is to be raptured is what is pleasing to heaven.
R.W.S. We might be pleased if we were asked to preach in a big meeting.
J.T. That is it. He has a big field, he has Samaria; but he is sent to the desert to speak to one man, and that a black man.
S.McC. And he ran there, too.
J.T. The Spirit told him to do it and he did it.
C.B. Would some consider that a reduction instead of a promotion?
J.T. It might appear to be a reduction, but it is a promotion. It is what a man purchased to himself a good degree and great boldness in the faith. "For those who shall have ministered well obtain for themselves a good degree, and much boldness in faith which is in Christ Jesus", @1 Timothy 3: 13. You are not looking to the brethren to make much of you. They will make much of you if you are worth it.
W.L. So that Philip going down into the water with the eunuch is important.
J.T. Very. He identifies himself with the eunuch; he is not a cleric, he is suitable to the Spirit of God.
C.A.M. This is one of the sermons that is printed. He could not have had any idea of it at the time he gave it. The Spirit puts on record a verbatim statement of the preaching. I take it it is a very great distinction.
J.T. Quite so.
J.R.H. What do you mean -- a verbatim account?
C.A.M. To the Athenians there is a verbatim statement in chapter 17. But what Philip said of Christ was all summed up in one word.
J.T. He preached Jesus.
{69}
C.A.M. It was not one of these platform affairs taken down. God is making His own records.
J.T. Philip preached Christ to the Samaritans, but he preached Jesus to the eunuch. He is a true servant. You take a man according to how you find him. What is he occupied with? He is not reading the newspaper, he is not reading a monthly magazine, he is reading the Bible. That is an important matter. Brethren who travel in cars or subways should read the Bible, or something like it.
A.P.T. It is much easier to read now than then. Undoubtedly he would have to unroll the scroll. God has made the Scriptures very easy to read.
J.T. You can put a Bible in your pocket. It is like a flag put up, to read the Bible. And Philip says, "Dost thou then know what thou art reading of?"
@Acts 8: 30. One might ask that of anyone reading the Bible today, it is so little understood.
A.P.T. There was a double portion for God in it. God was so pleased with this eunuch.
J.T. Instead of allowing him to come into contact with what was at Jerusalem, He prepared Philip to meet him. It is the skill of heaven in selecting a man to meet this particular man.
W.W. Would not that work today?
J.T. God is preparing men to hear the word of God, and He is preparing men to preach it.
The next phase of our subject is how a local company can serve a man whom God is going to use in the service; what part a local company has in that. When Paul came to this town, could the brethren help him? He would be ready to listen to them if they had anything to say of any value. So you get with Paul this sort of thing. He listens to Ananias; and at Antioch the brethren let him go, they let him go from the local company to preach, to serve. Then when he is going up to Jerusalem finally, the Spirit witnesses to him in every city -- meaning that in
{70}
every city the saints said something to him. The Spirit had means of addressing him in every city, because the Spirit spoke through the brethren that he was going to suffer in Jerusalem. He was a man of that kind; he would listen to the local brethren as he passed through.
C.A.M. He would gather impressions in the local settings.
J.T. It was all in keeping with his own ministry. He introduced this idea of local companies. Now God is using them to testify to him that he should not go up to Jerusalem. So the Lord, in order to bring this out, goes before Saul to prepare Ananias so that he could speak well, and He is preparing Saul to hear Ananias. I believe this is going on all the time, God preparing men to hear the word of God, and preparing men to speak it at the same time. It is a question of being prepared for the occasion every time you preach.
A.P.T. When you are preaching the gospel yourself, what is in your thoughts from Monday morning to the next Lord's day evening? Are you preparing a sermon?
J.T. Oh, no, I never would do that. That would take the matter out of the Lord's hands. He will prepare you just as you are going, as He did here, He prepared Ananias and Philip. He prepares you for the service.
J.R.H. You prepare yourself?
J.T. Quite so. You do not want to go too far ahead. You had better wait until you are in the assembly and you will get something.
E.F. You would not want to stay away from the Lord's day afternoon meeting to prepare to preach the gospel?
J.T. I should not. I should be ashamed if anybody found me staying at home.
B.M. Is it essential to mention the brother who is
{71}
going to preach so that he is going to be prepared?
J.T. He ought to know before the morning meeting. That is the way things are given out.
C.A.M. Philip could not have chosen his scripture. His scripture was found for him.
J.T. Quite so. I find it very good in a brother's house, or in my own house, before the preaching, to have prayer in the house for the gospel, either at the tea-table or immediately before the gospel meeting. If you are upstairs, you will get a word from the Lord while they are praying. I believe the brethren would do well to pay attention to this. We are all in it. If you go to the room, a few go, but if we have it in our houses, a great many pray.
R.W.S. What would you say to God about the preaching of the gospel in churches and chapels, in systems as we speak?
J.T. We ask Him to do things which are very awkward for Him to do. They are not normal, these preachings, and yet, of course, God uses them. But what we have in all these chapters is what is normal, precedents for us. The book of Acts is a book of precedents for saints, not legal precepts, but precedents. You see how things were done. There is a certain authority about it. Well, you say, look how Philip was, so simple. Look how the Lord prepared Ananias immediately before he served Saul! Why could the Lord not come to me an hour before the preaching? He can do that, He wants us to be with Him in that way.
H.D. Is there any objection to praying both in the house and in the room?
J.T. I think praying in the house is best.
J.W.D. You would ask a brother to preach twice running or three times running. I believe most of us are beginning to recognise that it is normal, but in localities where we are scattered, it is difficult to operate.
{72}
J.T. Why is it difficult? You mean the brethren have to travel too far?
J.W.D. In our own localities, so few can preach well enough to preach three times.
J.T. The general thought of that is Paul at Thessalonica, he went in among the brethren three sabbath days; he opened and laid down the truth, he preached on three sabbaths. It seems to me that is a sort of precedent for us. Three gives you opportunity for complete testimony.
C.A.M. Might I allude to the brother's remark about praying in the house, as you stress it? As Peter set out on that wonderful evangelisation of the gentiles, he went up to the house-top. It is a specific house named of the Spirit -- the counterpart of that was also going on housewise in the way of prayer in Cornelius¬ house, not in the temple.
J.T. There is a remarkable movement going on. Peter went up while they were preparing downstairs, they were getting dinner. That is the setting of the thing. It is all very practical. Household prayer is very practical. Sisters can have part in it. Special prayer meetings in the room are sparsely attended, but in the house we can all join in. I notice the Lord honours it.
-.DeB. It is a day where there is opportunity for obscure service on evangelical lines. We are in danger of giving that up and a little more occupied with preaching in the room. Do the work of an evangelist -- like the little maid in Naaman's house.
J.T. There is nothing about a room in Philip's service, so that young men do not need to wait to be asked to preach. That is the lesson to be learned from this. You can go out in the open air and preach, and preach to individuals as well.
W.L. So Philip went down; he is not asked to go down.
{73}
R.C. Is it right to preach in another locality if you are not preaching in your own?
J.T. Philip did not preach in his own locality. Philip belonged to Caesarea. What is in your mind?
R.C. With regard to the gospel, does it start with the confidence of the brethren in your locality before you go into the service?
J.T. That would come into our next inquiry in chapter 13. What the brethren think of you, there is nothing of that kind raised so far in regard of Philip. We must assume that he was in good standing at Jerusalem.
Now we have already come to Paul, then later in chapter 13 we have instruction in regard of a local gathering of saints in regard to those who serve. Hence the Lord's word to Saul here, "But rise up and enter into the city, and it shall be told thee what thou must do". The Authorised Version has Paul's question as to this, but it is not in the original. In chapter 22: 10 we have Saul saying to the Lord, "What shall I do?" but it is not in this chapter. Because in this chapter, what is to be learned is that if a young man is to serve, the Lord says you must go to the brethren, you must have regard to the brethren. Saul does not ask the question here, "What shall I do?" It is the Lord's own side that is mentioned. He is telling the young potential servant not to neglect the brethren; go to the brethren, they will tell you what to do. You must regard the local brethren.
J.R.H. In that regard, something has been said about having a desire to preach in the open air. Would it not be wise to speak to another brother in the locality, and tell him your exercise and seek his support?
J.T. I think the Lord means in this chapter that the young servant is to be told things by the brethren. First he has got to learn to be subject to the brethren
{74}
and to learn from the brethren. Paul says of some, "who were also in Christ before me", @Romans 16: 7.
A.H.P. Would this guard against independence, so common amongst us, and the assumption of right to move out on independent lines?
R.H. Would you say one who commits himself to the Lord does it also to the brethren? They cannot do as they like; it is subjection on their part.
J.T. That is important. On the other hand, if the brethren say you must not go out to preach until they tell you, that is wrong. If the brethren assume they control the servant, that is not right. The Lord says, "But rise up and enter into the city, and it shall be told thee what thou must do". He does not mention the local brethren, but He is going to see to it that a man should tell him what to do. He is prepared to do some particular service to Paul. Hence, when we come to chapter 13, "The Holy Spirit said, Separate me now Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them" (verse 2). The assembly did not send them out, they laid their hands on them and let them go. There are two sides to Paul's position; the first is he is told what to do -- whatever it was we are not told -- not that you are to preach, or that you are not fit to preach. It was the necessary thing for the moment; it carried with it that Saul must learn from other people.
H.M. There was a twofold service in that way. Ananias learned something and so did Saul.
J.T. Quite so.
R.W.S. A brother was asked to preach in Summit. Because he had not preached locally, he would not preach. Is that a principle -- a brother must be asked to preach locally first?
J.T. Was he able to preach?
R.W.S. We thought he should be able to preach.
J.W.D. In a large meeting, a young brother could get little or no chance to speak, but when he comes to
{75}
a small meeting like London (Ontario), we are glad to open the door.
R.C. It seems a matter of confidence with your brethren. "Standing up with the eleven", @Acts 2: 14.
J.T. It is a question of what a man can do, then the idea of fellowship; we are now *on* the line of the assembly. The first thing seems to me, as to a service, that it is entirely from the Lord in this chapter. Saul is not asking the Lord in this matter, that is Saul's side. This young man must learn from others, great as he is and great as he is going to be, he has got to learn from others. It is a wholesome matter to start with. Then the facts show that he was with them at Damascus. "And he was with the disciples who were in Damascus certain days". That seems to be the order; he is adjusted by what Ananias says to him. It refers to his state of soul. It is not a question of his commission or what he is going to do in service, but to get his soul right, get himself right.
J.R.H. Being subject to his brethren?
J.T. Learning the truth from them about his needs, being baptised and all that. And then he is with them certain days. "And straightway in the synagogues he preached Jesus that *he* is the Son of God". That is the order of the service in relation to the local company.
A.E.S. He preached a good sermon: "Jesus that *he* is the Son of God".
J.T. Quite so.
A.P.T. All this would help us in our relations with the servants; the brethren being greater than the servant. Can you go into a locality and feel you are somebody, and, if the brethren do not ask you to preach, that they are missing something?
C.A.M. I suppose a man coming in like that could not preach the Son of God with any power.
{76}
J.T. It is remarkable comparing this with Philip. Philip preached Christ; that is, the One who does things for God. But Paul preaches "Jesus that *he* is the Son of God" in the synagogues. He does not ask the brethren about that. He straightway went in and preached, but he is with the brethren first.
W.L. It is interesting they both preached about a Person. Paul says, "For we do not preach ourselves, but Christ Jesus Lord", @2 Corinthians 4: 5.
J.T. Quite so. I think it is clear from these facts that the young servant has got to learn from the brethren, be adjusted in his soul, and be with them certain days, however many, and then he enters into the synagogue and preaches. He does not ask them to let him go. I do not think it is ever intended that the brethren are to control servants.
T.H. I have long been exercised why there is so little result from the preaching of the gospel amongst us. Could you suggest any reason?
J.T. There is a good deal of result.
T.H. There is very little apparent result.
J.T. I would not say that. There were two hundred persons blessed lately in Australia that I heard of. The truth of the matter is that the present day work of God is carried on in relation to the assemblies. That is, in relation to what is pleasing to God; they are being added to. I may say that every second letter I get tells of certain ones being blessed. All over the world there is a great deal of work going on, but it is God adding to what there is, as we get here. Fifty years ago there were brethren who went out and broke up new ground; there is not much of that now, not that there is not the ability to do that. It seems as if the Lord is moving and enlarging what there is. There are constant additions: there are more gatherings now than there were fifty years ago, more gatherings and larger meetings; that is the thing to look at. It is a day of small things. Too, there is
{77}
not much energy. It is well to know the facts of the case.
J.T.T. In not attracting public attention to ourselves, increase is more delightful to heaven.
J.T. We get the idea of adding all the way through; first adding (@Acts 2: 41), and then "the Lord added to the assembly daily those that were to be saved", @Acts 2:47. He did not leave one out, you may be sure of that.
C.A.M. I do not think we have any gauge as to what God is doing. As you look along the rows here before you, you see many brethren that were converted recently, many are not very old.
J.T. This is what comes out in these chapters; we have to wait until we come to Antioch before the word 'assembly' is used in Paul's ministry. "And so it was with them that for a whole year they were gathered together in the assembly and taught a large crowd: and the disciples were first called Christians in Antioch". Now we have assembly formation, teaching in the assembly; this is a new thought: we do not get it in Damascus, we get it here for the first time.
W.R. As a result, you might say, of taking on the features of Christ.
J.T. You can see how the matter stood. The scattered ones went there, they preached to Jews only, others went further, there is enlargement; we are told they "entering into Antioch spoke to the Greeks also, announcing the glad tidings of the Lord Jesus. And the Lord's hand was with them, and a great number believed and turned to the Lord", (verses 20, 21). That is how the matter stands now. Paul comes on the scene, and he and Barnabas for a whole year were teaching in the assembly. That is the next part of the service -- teaching in the assembly. I believe it is very largely the kind of teaching we have now; all the ministry is in that
{78}
connection, teaching in the assembly. Some may be present who are a part of the crowd, they have never understood the assembly, what it is to stand in relation to the assembly. The crowd is distinct from the assembly.
R.W.S. In a large crowd there are those called out who would form the assembly.
J.T. Paul is present. A whole year is spent in that sort of service. They were first called Christians there.
W.L. Do you think the teaching carries with it the idea of completing the material being built in?
J.T. Quite so. They were teaching in the assembly. John enlarges on this, calling attention to the Lord who "seeing them following, says to them, What seek ye? And *they* said to him, Rabbi ... where abidest thou? He says to them, Come and see. They went therefore, and saw where he abode; and they abode with him that day", @John 1: 38, 39. Teaching in the place where they abode, teaching in the assembly, would mean they gather up assembly thoughts.
H.B. Like the end of Revelation -- "I Jesus have sent mine angel to testify these things to you in the assemblies", @Revelation 22: 16?
J.T. Quite so. The result is, "Now there were in Antioch, in the assembly which was there, prophets and teachers: Barnabas, and Simeon who was called Niger, and Lucius the Cyrenian, and Manaen, foster brother of Herod the tetrarch, and Saul". That is what they had; what an assembly it was with such men! The year's work was resultful, so that God has something now in a locality far away from Jerusalem; there is no apostle there yet. Paul and Barnabas are not yet apostles. The whole matter is carried on and completed without the help of an apostle. It is a question of the work of God in this way.
{79}
E.F. You remarked that Paul and Barnabas were not yet apostles.
J.T. Not yet.
E.F. When did Paul become an apostle?
J.T. Right here. They are both called apostles. Later on they are sent out, that is the meaning of it; but they are sent out from this place called the assembly, which is there at Antioch.
E.P. The starting point of the apostles would be important. I mean Peter said, "beginning from the baptism of John until the day in which he was taken up from us, one of these should be a witness with us of his resurrection", @Acts 1: 22. That is the basis of their apostleship, whereas Paul gets his starting-point from Antioch.
J.T. It is a question of honouring what he and Barnabas did, teaching for a whole year in the assembly; the word 'assembly' is used in that way for the first time.
J.W.D. Do you think that there is a spiritual arrangement of the names here? The first and the last were selected.
J.T. Barnabas is mentioned first. I suppose he had distinction as sent out from Jerusalem: he is more or less a delegate from Jerusalem, he had that place. Saul is mentioned last, which would mean it was just what he was. Barnabas comes first, it was what he is officially, he was sent out from Jerusalem, he had a certain authority. But in Saul's case it was not that he had any commission from Jerusalem; he had a commission, he understood, from the Lord, but as yet not commissioned in the work. What a lowly man! Wherever you place him, it is all right.
C.A.M. In past history he was always the first named. He was above others.
J.R.H. What do you say about his being now one of the prophets and teachers?
{80}
J.T. Well, he was. He had that place in Antioch with Barnabas. It is to bring out what was there, and the assembly there, how ornamented it was That spiritual personages so qualified that the Holy Spirit could take them and honour them -- "Separate me now Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them". The Spirit had made a selection, the first and the last.
R.W.S. Is that what the cycle of time brings out with this teaching in the assembly?
J.T. Quite so. The year was well spent. Instead of going out preaching further, they were consolidating ground here. Consolidation means the assembly.
C.A.M. The whole year is the entire period, like the acceptable year.
J.T. Quite so.
R.W.S. There is much made of the apostle's time. His life is so many months here and there, eighteen months and three months there.
J.T. I think it is the life of a servant, how it is spent.
R.A.L. "They then who had been scattered abroad", in chapter 11: 19 -- is that the brethren, not exactly in relation to the service?
J.T. It is just to bring out what you might call their accidental position: they are scattered by the devil from Jerusalem, they are not giving up, they are not drooping, they are keeping on with the work of God, to show the life that was there, the energy that was there, and how God honoured them.
J.R.H. In regard of stated periods connected with the beginning of things, you would hardly look for a gift today to stay in a place for eighteen months.
J.T. It is all a precedent for us. Paul was in Caesarea two years a prisoner, and more than that in Rome. His life is divided up as though God was pleased with it, like David's life.
{81}
S.McC. It is remarkable on the whole how much is made of this great vessel -- his hands, his eyes, his bowels, his mouth, his voice; how pleasing he must have been to the Lord!
J.T. Quite so. How pleasurable he must have been! And then the years of his life. David's life, for forty years, three or four great prophets are used to write about it, showing how pleasurable it was to God.
A.P.T. The sacrificial service he mentions in Romans, is that the other side -- what God gets out of the service, a general offering up?
J.T. Quite so. And then the offering up of the nations: that is what he had in mind.
{82}
WALKING IN THE WAY
@Isaiah 30: 21; @Genesis 24: 27; @John 6:16 - 21
I wish to speak about the way; particularly at the outset in regard to this voice the prophet heard behind him: "This is the way, walk ye in it". And in referring to the way one is bound to introduce John's gospel, which is the beginning, we may say, of every divine subject. It presents Christ in the beginning. "In the beginning was the Word", @John 1: 1. It directs everything and gives character to everything. "All things received being through him, and without him not one thing received being which has received being" (verse 3). And so, with regard to the great variety of divine subjects, touching each we have to begin with Christ, and as I said, with John's presentation of Him. In that presentation of Him we have Christ saying, "I am the way", @John 14: 6. Just this afternoon one was impressed with the thought of how many things Jesus is said to be in John's gospel. So that you can understand the exuberance of one who carried the message of Jesus to one sitting under his fig tree. Philip says, "We have found him of whom Moses wrote in the law, and the prophets, Jesus, the son of Joseph, who is from Nazareth", @John 1: 45. And so Nathanael names Him and adds to the already great and glorious list of the titles which @John 1 affords; the titles of Jesus. It is a most luminous chapter in that sense; radiant with the divine glories shining in Jesus. The baptist calls attention to them, as one after another who is drawn to Jesus says something about Him.
And so it is that every one of us, as drawn to Jesus, is to add to the glories already there. Nathanael says, "Rabbi, *thou* art the Son of God, *thou* art the King of Israel" (verse 49). That is the thought just now; to
{83}
go over the ground of how many instances of that kind there are; and what is it but to draw us into the realm of His influence and glory? Not to detract from that glory, but to add to it. So you see a poor outcast woman in @John 4; how she added to that glory! She says, "Is not *he* the Christ?" (verse 30). He told her He was; I do not know that He told anybody else; but He told her. It is most unexpected that she should be selected for that message. "I who speak to thee am he" (verse 26).
And again, He discloses Himself to another outcast in chapter 9 as the Son of God. "Thou hast both seen him, and he that speaks with thee is *he*" (verse 37). He was the Son of God; and as regards the way, He is it. There are many other things that Christ is said to be; but He is the way. It is not that He shows it, but He is it. The idea in John is to draw us to Christ personally, each of us in a personal way, to be drawn out of the darkness into the light of Christ; so that we might see that whatever it is that concerns us, that exercises our souls, will find a solution. The light will shine for us there. So that Martha says to Him, "I know that he will rise again in the resurrection in the last day". But the Lord says, "I am the resurrection and the life", @John 11: 25. It is not 'I shall be' but "I am". So that John would suggest to us, and impress us, that we must be in Christ in our spiritual history. We, as alongside of Philip, have found Him. And so He says to Philip later, "Am I so long a time with you, and thou hast not known me, Philip?" @John 14: 9. This was said because Jesus had said to Philip, "I am the way" (verse 6), and Philip had said, "Lord, shew us the Father". He would have the Father shown, but the Lord says, "Am I so long a time with you, and thou hast not known me, Philip? He that has seen me has seen the Father". He is taken out from amongst his fellow-apostles and brethren; he is just put out,
{84}
as it were, by himself and attention is called to him; he did not know something that he ought to have known. How many of us can stand such a test as that? How much we should know that we have not known, and do not know! And the Lord would, from time to time, call attention to us. We may think we are going on well; but, it may be in a Bible-reading or in an address that one discloses unexpectedly to himself his ignorance; and it is inexcusable. "Am I so long a time with you, and thou halt not known me, Philip? He that has seen me has seen the Father". The Father was there; it was not the Person of the Father that was the point; but all the holy traits and features of the Father were there; they were visibly there so as to be known. So that the Lord could say, "He that has seen me has seen the Father". There are two Persons; but one Person, the Father, is perfectly portrayed in the Son.
Well then, I am speaking about the way. The Lord says, "I am the way". So that John would have us begin with that if we seek to be in the way. So I go on to Isaiah, to point out this verse I read. It really means that whether turning to the right hand or to the left you hear a voice saying, "This is the way". This is important because it calls attention to what is practically visible, knowable, an existent thing. So that no one should be in the dark; no one should be in a bypath or in a blind alley: "This is the way". There is such a thing as that. John calls attention to practical things, knowable things, concrete things that are to be seen and heard and felt. It is a principle with him; that which we have seen, that which we have heard, that which our hands have handled, etc.; that which was from the beginning. That -- the thing. Palpable things were in a Man. And amongst the things is the way. *He* is the way.
This is the way. So that as companying with Jesus,
{85}
the apostles would be able to give you a concrete answer to any inquiry. "We have found him", says Philip. And the woman in @John 4 says, "Come, see a man who told me all things I had ever done: is not *he* the Christ?" (verse 29). It is there; it is this thing, this Person.
Well, is there no application of this today? There is. And anyone walking in the dark is walking in the dark at his own expense. He is inexcusable in it; for this applies: "This is the way, walk ye in it".
This may be enlarged upon. It is Jesus; it is Christ; but it is the Spirit here now. Christ is not here personally; He is above, but the Spirit is here and has taken on the saints, operating in them, bringing out the great features of Christ in them; so that the way is visible, and anyone out of it is inexcusably out of it. There is no excuse for anybody. The matter is insistent: "This is the way". Wherever you turn you hear a voice saying, "This is the way, walk ye in it".
Abraham's servant I have selected as an example for us. The chapter is well-known to us. It is a very long chapter and a very rich chapter. It begins on a high level spiritually, and it ends on a high level, and is maintained throughout on a high spiritual level. @Genesis 24 is typically the great assembly chapter of the Old Testament. There are others; but it is the leading assembly chapter of the Old Testament, and every one of us needs to look into it and spend a good deal of time in it. It is a chapter to roam in; there is scope in it. It begins with an old brother; they have their place. Abraham was old, but he is very spiritual and very definite in his spirituality. He would have all around him as spiritual as he was: his son's wife, for instance. That is a constant concern to fathers and mothers; sons¬ wives and daughters¬ husbands. Abraham is concerned about the prospective wife of his son. She
{86}
was to be spiritual or none at all. Unspiritual wives and husbands are detrimental to the testimony. And hence this chapter, among other things, guides us, parents and young people, too, as to prospective wives and husbands.
Abraham engages the eldest servant of his house. We are not told his name. It is more important that he is the eldest servant. He causes him to swear in regard to the prospective wife of his son; and the servant is equal to the oath. There is no discrepancy in this long chapter in anybody. It is a wonderful chapter to roam about in, as it were. This servant went on his errand. He was in the way; he was definitely in the way. He was under a charge, on spiritual lines. For, however spiritual we are down here, it is well to remember that we are always under a charge. Even if speaking to God in assembly, speaking to Him in the greatest liberty, that of sonship, consciously so, I am always under charge while I am down here. Restrictions above will be different, if there are any; but down here we are always under a charge. This great servant was under a charge, under an oath. Abraham caused him to swear; and he was true to his oath, he was true to his committal. He was under a definite charge from the greatest man at the moment: that is, Abraham. And now we arrive at this verse.
One could say quite a little about the graces of Rebecca. For it is not simply a question of a woman, but a person suitable for Isaac; in the antitype, suitable for Christ. It is a church matter; it is an assembly matter. And if we are not engaged in assembly matters, what are we? Of what interest are we to heaven? The assembly is the great absorbing interest to heaven today. It never ceased to be since Pentecost. Who is there here who is not in it? God would draw us into it -- this assembly matter. And what this servant says is, "I being in the way,
{87}
Jehovah has led me to the house of my master's brethren", @Genesis 24:27. Now I want you to weigh these words: "the house of my master's brethren". Is there not such a house today? There is. The Lord made it His business to find it; to reach it; the first day after He rose from the dead. Some of the brethren were astray that day. Maybe there are some here tonight who are straying. We often allude to those two that went to Emmaus that day. Had you listened to them, ordinarily, you would have thought they were remarkable believers. They were talking about Christ. But they had their backs on the assembly. We may talk about Christ and His things, too; talk very like those who are with Him actually, who have not gone astray; we know their ways and their language, and we use it; but our backs are on the assembly. Such were those two going to Emmaus. The Lord brought them back; at least He manifested Himself to them and they went back. He did not tell them to go; it was the manifestation of Christ. He is the beginning of everything. He is the beginning of recovery if I go astray. They came back to the company and they were talking about Jesus in the company. How different from talking about Him with their backs to the company! What little thought or love or spiritual feeling is attached to any such conversation! People who have their backs to the assembly; maybe talking against those who are really in it -- they may talk well as far as words go, but where is the spiritual power? But now they are back in the company and they are speaking about Jesus as a Person known in the breaking of bread. That is how He is really known. They were now, as it were, in the house of their Master's brethren. That is where they were; in Jerusalem. They were not in the way when the Lord found them; they were out of the way. They were going away from Jerusalem. That was not the way.
{88}
They were far astray. They had no sense of their darkness, or where they were.
When the Lord approached them and asked why they were downcast, they said, "Thou sojournest alone in Jerusalem, and dost not know what has taken place in it in these days?" @Luke 24: 18. These are important people that can talk like that. But are they? They have their backs to the assembly. But now they are in it. They are in the house of their Master's brethren. What a house that is! What warmth there is there! I am speaking from Luke's account now, but if I turn to John what I find is that the Lord came. "Jesus came and stood in the midst, and says to them, Peace be to you", @John 20: 19. It was the house of His brethren. The doors were shut: "the doors shut where the disciples were, through fear of the Jews", meaning legal people; religious people; current religious people. They stood for that. They stood for the current accepted religion of the day. The doors were shut against them; they do not belong to the house of "my master's brethren". No. The doors were shut against them; but not against Jesus. "Jesus came and stood in the midst". What a moment that was! Well, I have to admit there were some not there; one, anyway. The two erring ones were there, doubtless. They had come back. I have no doubt that John's account in chapter 20 refers to the same incident, but the brethren say nothing according to John; nor is there any perturbation at all, but the wonderful fact of the presence of Jesus in the midst.
Why is it? They are characteristically the brethren.
It is the house of their Master's brethren. That is where you will find all the news about the assembly. They are 'in the know' of assembly matters there. Already the message had come from the lips of the ascending Christ: "Go to my brethren and say to them" (verse 17).
{89}
They are restful; they are ready for the visit.
It is the house of their Master's brethren. That is what it is; and He is there Himself. But this man says, "I being in the way, Jehovah has led me to the house of my master's brethren" (verse 27). Why am I not there? If I am not, I am not in the way. Maybe I have turned out of it. We know there were those, according to the gospels, who did leave it. They came into it and left it. If I have turned out of it, the Lord is not leading me in my way. I may think my way is all right. "The way of a fool is right in his own eyes", @Proverbs 12: 15. But it is not the divine way. There is no divine leading; there is no definiteness. There is an uncertainty; there is a want of joy; there is a want of satisfaction; there is no peace. There is no growth; there is no formation according to God. I am losing everything. I am not in the way.
This man was in the way. "I being in the way, Jehovah has led me to the house of my master's brethren". You cannot afford to be out of it. Thomas was absent when the Lord came in. It is a remarkable thing that we do not get any account of his whereabouts in his absence from the company of his Master's brethren. The Spirit of God leaves us with out that. We do get an account of the other two; they went to Emmaus. We get a very vivid and detailed account of them; a most touching account. But we get no account of the whereabouts of Thomas. Where was he? He was a twin. Was he with his brother? We do not know whether his brother was a Christian; we are not told. But his name means 'twin'. Was he with his twin brother? Where was he? I cannot say. I can tell you something about him later, in the next chapter. I can tell you where he was then. He went fishing. He was capable of that sort of thing. But where was he now when all these wonderful things were happening, so interesting
{90}
to heaven? The Lord Jesus Himself has risen from the dead, and moving in His love and wisdom visited His brethren. Where was this one? It does not even say that the Lord missed him. He does not say anything about him. For when the Lord comes into the assembly, whilst He feels the absence of some, still He goes on. Let us never think that He is depending on us to go on.
When He reached the mountain in @Matthew 28, the appointed mountain, some of them doubted. Whether one of them was Thomas, we are not told. Very likely. Some doubted, but the Lord does not stop to settle the doubt; He says, "Go ... and make disciples of all the nations". He went on. Let us never think that the Lord cannot get on without us; not that He does not need us; but still He can carry on without us. He will find others. He does not inquire about anybody. "Jesus came and stood in the midst, and says to them, Peace be to you". There is not a word about Thomas; and yet Thomas was missing that wonderful occasion. Where was he? Was he spending a quiet evening with his twin brother on the line of nature? How often that happens! The meetings are missed because of some natural pleasure. He might tell you he had not seen his brother for some time and he thought he would go and see him; and he leaves the brethren behind; and the Lord comes and never inquires for him. Someone might think that does not speak well of Christ. But it does. Because we are dealing with a certain thing. He is in the house of His brethren and it is not the place for mourning. There is a time for everything as Solomon tells us: A time to love, and a time to hate; a time to cast away stones, and a time to gather stones together; a time to weep and a time to laugh; a time to mourn, and a time to dance. And when the Lord came into the midst of His brethren, according to John, He came into the
{91}
sphere of love. Love was restful there. And so He says, "Peace be to you". There is no perturbation; no fear. No. They were glad because they saw the Lord. Think of that! It is not because they were brethren. Of course, I am glad I am a brother. But not at that time. The point is they saw the Lord. The Lord says, That is the idea. I have brought greatness in; now I want to consolidate the greatness. "Jesus said therefore again to them, Peace be to you"; think of that -- again. Think of missing such a transaction as that! Think of the Lord of glory breathing into you and saying, "as the Father sent me forth, I also send you" (verse 21). Thomas missed all that. It was the house of His brethren, and when He came into it, He came in for enjoyment; and He caused them enjoyment. And Thomas missed it. It is the house of His brethren.
That is what we get in this chapter in Genesis. I could say much more. As I said, it is a chapter to roam in; to move about in. Everywhere you move it is the realm of Christ in the assembly and the Spirit's activities in relation to it. Can we afford to miss this, dear brethren? The Lord is appealing to us. It is the house of His brethren. We belong there; and if we are in the way, He will lead us there. If He is not leading us, and we are not in the way -- we may talk well, but we are not in the way -- and not being in the way, the Spirit is not leading us to the house of His Master's brethren.
Well now, before closing I want to say a word about @John 6. It is another long chapter; the longest in this book. It is a chapter to be lived in, too. It is the great constitutional chapter of John's gospel. It finishes up with the food for a heavenly constitution, the food for eternal life. "For my flesh is truly food and my blood is truly drink" (verse 55). He says, I give those two things. The chapter begins with the feeding of the multitude; the Lord does it
{92}
Himself, although the authorised version would lead us to believe that the disciples were employed; but the better version shows that the Lord did it Himself. He is carrying on; that is John's line.
And so it is a wonderful chapter, opening up the great thought of eternal life and the sustenance for it. So that in the end of it, Peter says, "Lord, to whom shall we go? thou hast words of life eternal" (verse 68), "and we have believed and known that thou art the holy one of God". That is this chapter.
Well now, the verses I read call attention to the disciples going down to the sea. They are going of themselves. I want to dwell on that for a little; how persons in the way move of themselves. You say, The Lord has not shown me to do this, and you sit quiet because of this. But then, you see, there are things to be done and you are not doing them. There is a way to be taken and you are not taking it. The Lord says to the disciples, You give them to eat.
Why are you not doing it? Whatever your hand finds to do, do it with all your might. And if the way is there, why do you not take it and stay in it? You will find that the Lord will lead you to the house of His brethren if you stay in it.
Now we are told that the disciples went down to the sea. The Lord, as it says in verse 15, "knowing that they were going to come and seize him, that they might make him king, departed again to the mountain himself alone". That is what He did. He did that properly. Every movement is perfect. He was going up to pray according to another gospel. Let the Lord take His way. Doubtless the disciples felt that He was not with them; but it says, "But when evening was come, his disciples went down to the sea, and having gone on board ship, they went over the sea to Capernaum" (verses 16, 17). They had something in their minds. What they had in their minds was evidently according to the mind of Christ; and
{93}
they were to find how difficult the way was, and how He would come in and support them in it. They had a definite thing in their minds. Another feature of brethren who are not going on with God is indefiniteness.
So they went down to the sea and entered into a ship and went over the sea toward Capernaum. We are told later, as I will point out, that it is called "land". They were really going to land. It was towards Capernaum, but we are told later in verse 21, "and immediately the ship was at the land to which they went". Land. That is what I want you to keep in mind in the few remarks I have to make. They had something definite in their minds. I would urge this matter of definiteness. Even if the Lord has gone up on high and is not with us, yet in a general way we know the way. It is made clear to us. We are not in any doubt about it. We take it; we struggle in it. It says they rowed twenty-five or thirty furlongs. That was real work against a storm. They had no steam power to help them or electrical power either. They rowed. It was real work. Now, understand what I am speaking of. They are definitely going somewhere; and the sequel shows that it was generally in the right direction. Let us look into the matter. What are we doing? Where are we? They went down to the sea and took ship and went toward Capernaum. A storm arose; it was dark; and Jesus had not come to them. How many of us have been in such circumstances! We get pictures of ourselves in the Scriptures. We are definitely going somewhere; we have no doubt about the way we are taking; thank God! But still, things are not clear. It was dark and the Lord had not come. They are going at their own charges. But they are rowing.
They are making headway. I can always tell where I am spiritually if I examine the facts of the case.
What was I a year ago? What headway was I
{94}
making? Have I made any since? If I look into the facts I can see whether I have, or otherwise. If you have made twenty-five or thirty furlongs, you have done something. The Lord is going to accredit you with it. You will notice what it says, "the sea was agitated by a strong wind blowing". Why was that? Satan's activities. He will not let us alone. If we are in any way moving in the right direction, he is against us. Let us not give way. They kept on rowing. It says they rowed twenty-five or thirty furlongs. The Spirit gives full credit. "Having rowed then about twenty-five or thirty stadia, they see Jesus walking on the sea and coming near the ship; and they were frightened. But he says to them, It is I: be not afraid. They were willing therefore to receive him into the ship" (verses 19 - 21). What a scene this is! "Coming near the ship"; not yet coming into it; but He says, I am with you; keep on. You are in the right direction. Things are dark and difficult, but I am coming toward you. It is the Lord in the distance; He is coming. He is not very far from any of us under those circumstances. How the Lord is looking down at every dark moment. You are making headway, that is the point. It is real work rowing against the storm. The Lord says, I like that; I am going to help you.
You have often observed what is depicted here. How the Lord comes in when things seem at their very worst. He comes in and all is changed. And now He says, "It is L" They were afraid. He was drawing nigh to the ship and they were afraid, but He says to them, "It is I: be not afraid". How restful they would become! One knows it well; better than one can express it. What restfulness! It is the Lord! It is all well now. There may be adjustments needed, but *He* is here. It is Himself. What can we do without Him? We may row twenty five or thirty stadia, but can we go forty? Maybe
{95}
not. He comes in when we need Him most. "It is I: be not afraid. They were willing therefore to receive him into the ship". They were not too jubilant about it, which is in keeping with the circumstances. They were under great pressure, and you have to make allowances for brethren when they are down a bit. They are under great pressure. It is the Lord. There is faith there; there is belief there. It is Himself and they are willing; they belong to His willing people. We read about that in the Canticles. He was upon the chariots of His willing people. Let Him in the chariot and you will see how smoothly things will go. It is the boat of His willing people here. They were willing to receive Him. And so we read, "and immediately the ship was at the land to which they went" (verse 21). How speedily we reach the end when we let Him in! They were willing to receive Him. It is not quite the same feeling we get in chapter 20, when they were glad when they saw Him; but still they were willing. Our salvation lies in being subject. They were willing to receive Him, and immediately the ship was at the land to which they went. The point is, I am with you. You are in the main right. I have joined you to get you to the end, and you are at it now. The point is being in the way; being led in it. And if there be toiling and anxiety, the Lord will not fail us. He will come in at the right time and we will be at the land to which we go.
{96}
PILLARS
@Exodus 24: 3, 4; @Luke 22: 26, 27; @Galatians 2: 9; @Revelation 3: 12
I have in mind, dear brethren, to speak a little about pillars, or in other words, conspicuousness in the things of God. It is the divine thought that there should be persons of distinction in the divine realm as there are in man's realm. They mark man's realm in a striking manner, as we know. The desire for distinction amongst his fellows marks, I may say, all men as they are in this world. And, of course, there is much distinction in the different sub-divisions of the world. There is room for distinction. We find, too, that the offices or places of distinction are usually well filled. And this comes into view in the final issue between God and this world. In one respect the issue is closed, for the Lord Jesus says, "Now is the judgment of this world; now shall the prince of this world be cast out", @John 12: 31. That "now" runs on, but it contemplated finality as to the issue between God and the world. Much detail has to be worked out; different phases of the working of sin have appeared since the cross; but the cross was final. Everything came to light there.
But in working out the detail we find, for instance, seven thousand names of men; names! They came in for special judgment according to the book of Revelation, which is the book of finality in detail. So that God takes account of men in their distinction or distinctions. Seven thousand names would indicate a large number. I suppose it is symbolic, as is "seven" in Revelation, and therefore would contemplate a large number. They were slain, it says; as if such men came in for special notice in the retributive dealings of God.
{97}
These names may include religious distinctions; for the world has its religion, and we do well to take notice that the names and distinctions acquired in the so-called world of religion are on the same footing. There is that kind of religion that is free from such names: "Pure and undefiled religion before God and the Father is this: to visit orphans and widows in their affliction, to keep oneself unspotted from the world", @James 1: 27. That religion admits of no such names as have come under the judgment of God specifically. These seven thousand names clearly allude to what the world is characteristically in its distinction.
We know how that developed. Indeed, the suggestion of the devil to Eve, and put into Adam's heart, was to make men equal with God: "ye will be as God", @Genesis 3: 5. That would be distinction developed in this world by the promptings of the devil, by the help of the devil. For the devil does help men who lay themselves out to be characteristic men of this world. So we find Cain and his world, men of distinction. Coming down to the political side we find the Nimrods, and myriads of others since, existing today. And no doubt, what is prevalent today is in the mind of God particularly in the book of Revelation in the seven thousand names of men slain.
I mention all that as over against what I have especially to say, that we may be free from the spirit of an Adonijah, who said, "I will be king", @1 Kings 1: 5. That is according to man; according to the spirit of this world. As I have been saying, the poison injected through Eve and Adam, and which remains, will find full development in him who is designated in Scripture as the "son of perdition" and the "man of sin"; "who opposes and exalts himself on high against all called God, or object of veneration; so that he himself sits down in the temple of God, shewing himself that he is God", @2 Thessalonians 2: 4. He
{98}
is the full expression of this ambitious effort that is prevalent in the world. He is not slain; he is cast alive, we are told, into the lake of fire.
So that, dear brethren, the Lord, I am sure, would speak to us as to this, that we may see the kind of distinction that belongs to the divine realm. I am not now speaking of what we shall be, but of the distinction that is now. We do not know exactly what the distinction will be then, but we do know we shall be like Jesus. That is a precious thought "and what we shall be has not yet been manifested; we know that if it is manifested we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is", @1 John 3: 2. And what is involved in that is an eternal weight of glory -- a remarkable expression -- "an eternal weight of glory". It grows out of our light affliction, as the apostle says. Affliction is the order of the day; suffering is the order of the day for the followers of Jesus. "For our momentary and light affliction works for us in surpassing measure an eternal weight of glory", @2 Corinthians 4: 17.
What distinctions are these we shall have! I am sure that everyone there will have an individual distinction, a name. I want now to trace in these passages read how divine distinction, distinction in the realm of God, the divine realm, is developed. It has its place in the Pentateuch. The Pentateuch although divided into five books is one book really. The writer is one; the subjects are one: co-related, but one. And amongst them is this thought of distinction, of conspicuousness.
I am not going further back than the sons of Noah. I believe that Shem stands for this conspicuousness in the things of God. Amongst other things he was a man who had regard for his parents, for his father. He had reverence for his father, not simply as a young man, but as a developed man. But his name signifies what I am speaking of: it signifies 'renown';
{99}
and, as the history would show, renown according to God.
There were giants on the earth in those days. They were the offspring of a mixed parentage. They were giants; they were men with a name, but not the kind of name Shem bore. That is what I wish to inject into our minds. "Blessed be Jehovah, the God of Shem", @Genesis 9: 26. He is the God of Shem; the God of those who are spiritually of Shem's line. And so we have in Jacob for the first time the introduction of this thought of pillar. It is he who introduces the thought; it was so in his mind that the stone that had been his pillow was used to be a pillar. And it was not simply to mark the spot of the house of God; it was to *be* it. There can be no distinction unless room is made for God. In man's world God has been renounced. Man made room for himself. "And according as they did not think good to have God in their knowledge", @Romans 1: 28. But Jacob takes the opposite view, and he *did* retain God in his knowledge; and not only that, but in principle he made a house for God. "And this stone, which I have set up for a pillar, shall be God's house", he says; @Genesis 28: 22.
I hope that is understood. It is very simple, but very important. As over against the rejection of God in this world, men not liking to retain Him in their knowledge, we have a Jacob under orders from his parents; for this thought of respect and subjection to parents is greatly stressed throughout the history. No one can have distinction such as I have in mind aside from it. Children are enjoined in the epistle of epistles by the apostle Paul, the epistle to the Ephesians, to obey their parents in the Lord. It is the first commandment with a promise. And the promise of God is sure to make something out of us. "Children, obey your parents in the Lord, for this is just. Honour thy father and thy *mother*, which is
{100}
the first commandment with a promise, that it may be well with thee, and that thou mayest be long-lived on the earth", chapter 6:1 - 3. How are these days to be employed? Not in obtaining conspicuousness in this world in any of its departments or sub-divisions, but to have long life in the service of God, developing from subjection to parents. It is "the first commandment with a promise". One rejoices at the young people coming in and out amongst us, seemingly enjoying the things their elders do; but it is constantly needful to remind them of the importance of subjection to parents and respect for parents.
Jacob was a developed man, a man up in years, as we speak, when he went out under orders to seek a wife; and this is the result. On his way he erected this pillar, and it was no less in result than that God should have a house. One of his line had it in mind; the spiritual family thought runs down in this connection, when he says, "I will not give sleep to mine eyes, slumber to mine eyelids, until I find out a place for Jehovah, habitations for the Mighty One of Jacob", @Psalm 132: 4, 5. "The Mighty One of Jacob"  -- it would suggest that the children take on the thought from their parents, for they come into a great heritage as the descendants of Jacob; and the evidence of the true Israel of God is seen in those who are sleepless for the sake of the testimony, for the sake of a dwelling place for God, "habitations for the Mighty One of Jacob". May we not say that this is taking root in the dear young people amongst us?
I am sure it is. They are learning to find a place for divine dwelling, and to see that they are a part of it and contribute to it. And subjection is the principle. And so, as I said, the Pentateuch is one; and so Jacob introduces the thought of distinction in this sense, conspicuousness. And he anoints the pillar.
God reminded him of it. It is a very happy thing to have a divine reminder. In our Bible readings, and
{101}
in our family readings, and in our private readings and meditations of the Scriptures, the Spirit of God has opportunity to recall things to us. It may be to remind us of vows made earlier, that we have either forgotten or neglected. The Spirit of God would recall to us distinct things. Every little bit of spiritual gain, spiritual attainment, and spiritual growth should be discerned as part of our constitution and added to.
So that Jehovah said to Jacob, "I am the God of Bethel, where thou anointedst the pillar, where thou vowedst a vow to me", @Genesis 31: 13. Go back to that. It is very often necessary to be reminded, and God does remind us, of earlier gains spiritually, that have been forgotten or neglected: not added to, not utilised. And so Jacob would go back; and in going back his conspicuousness would be not on the line of a man such as Cain or Nimrod, but as a cripple. He was made to limp before he returned to Bethel; he went back limping. That is, he came back to it under the discipline of God, the severe discipline of God having had its effect upon him.
And that is what is current, in all that is going on physically, and economically, and socially; things that are happening governmentally -- they are disciplinary and all to the end that we might accept that the flesh profits nothing. That is only reached as God takes us in hand and breaks the will, the natural energy, and makes room for the Spirit. That is the principle.
But while Jacob was crippled in the wrestling, he was made a prince. He was empowered spiritually, so that he could come into the house of God in a spiritual manner; under the reproach, doubtless, to the natural mind, of limping where he was once agile. But there it was; as you all know, or as most of us know, he got his name changed. I mean to say the fulness of the change is depicted in @Genesis 35 not @Genesis 32. He was crippled according to chapter 32, but God
{102}
appeared to him in Bethel and changed his name. And then Jacob pours a drink-offering on the pillar. That is to say, I am conspicuous. I am a God-made man. I am conspicuous as a God-made man, not as a man-made man, not as a university-made man. They are the bane of the saints, these higher educational efforts for worldly distinctions. Many young men and young women are ruined by them. In the house of God we are God-made men. That was Jacob. God came down and stood beside him. He stayed above in the earlier visit, but He came down and stood beside him and talked with him and gave him to understand that he pleased Him. As was said of another, "he has the testimony that he had pleased God", @Hebrews 11: 5.
That is the point, dear brethren. I may displease my employer; not, indeed, that God would not help me to give him good service. I believe He does. I believe God helps young people in every detail in their employment if they look to Him instead of trusting themselves. Bring God into it; He does help us, but not to make us distinctive, or men of this world with a name. As in the house of God, we are God-made: not only God-helped, but God-made.
So that Jacob had the sense in Bethel in his second visit that he pleased God. He poured not only oil, but a drink-offering, which means that God is satisfied. For what does it matter, dear brethren, if God be satisfied, what others think? Not that we do not do our best for our employers; God helps us to do what is right. I believe it is a point of importance that we should be employed; and employed in a lucrative way. God would bless us in all this, not to make much of us, but in order that we might have to give, to furnish what is needful, and to give to him that needeth. That is delightful to God. A man that works with his hands or with his mind in order to be able to give a little to the need of God's people is
{103}
delightful to God. God is pleased with him and his offering.
I refer to all that because Jacob, as I said, pours the drink-offering on the pillar. I want to run on to the millennial side of the Pentateuch to show how it is all a question of being God-made through circumstances, through the operation of the Holy Spirit. Moses is man-made in Pharaoh's house. He was a leading man in all the wisdom of the Egyptians; mighty in word and in deed. He was a distinguished man. No doubt his name would have come down to us in the annals of Egypt had he continued, but he resolved to suffer affliction with the people of God, to identify himself with those called Hebrews. And then he fled Egypt, and instead of relying on his natural ability that he had acquired in Egypt, he sat by a well. And when it came to the fulfilment of his official service in Israel, he used the word 'hyssop' for the first time; @Exodus 12: 22. He is the first to use it. Jehovah did not tell him to use it, but he used 'hyssop', which means smallness in this world. It grows out of the wall; it grows out of hard circumstances. No doubt the Israelites themselves were growing out of such circumstances, out of hard circumstances; but they grew.
Let us not be afraid of hard circumstances. Use hyssop when you are using the blood, Moses says; it is in keeping with the blood. When you are sprinkling the lintel and the door-posts, use hyssop; which is one's sense of one's own worthlessness, and having the ragged edge of everything, but growing Godward. That was Moses¬ idea.
The book of Hebrews tells us more about the hyssop: Moses introduces it into @Exodus 24 and uses it and water there in sprinkling the book and the people. Dear brethren, the point I am making is this: conspicuousness is in that character. All that is merely natural is put out of the way, disallowing
{104}
the flesh, for it profits nothing. God is working in that wherever it is found; God is working in that attitude of soul. So that the book and the people are sprinkled beside the altar; not only with blood but with water, too, and the hyssop is used in sprinkling.
And so it is in this connection that we get the twelve pillars; persons brought under the power of the covenant of God, disallowing the flesh as profiting nothing, and professing, as they did, to obey everything that God had said. Moses read to them all that God had commanded, and they professed to accept His word and obey. That was the ground they took. God always accepts us on our profession. History will show how real we are. We may not be real, as in their case, but still they were accepted on their profession; as if Moses were to say, I can well afford to build twelve pillars for there is plenty of material; all Israel is going to be obedient. And it is on that principle that we are made conspicuous in the service of God.
So Moses builds twelve pillars. I will go on to the New Testament, because the time is fleeting, briefly to show how the Lord in these few words in Luke indicates how this conspicuousness is to develop. The most honoured of all men were the twelve apostles; but they were vying with one another who was to be the greatest, just after the Lord had introduced His Supper, which was through the ages to bring before the affections of His people His unselfish sacrifice, His sacrifice of love in His death. They were vying with each other who should be greatest. That was the world's way: who should be greatest? It is common in man to want to be greatest. We cannot throw stones at each other. As men in the world, we are all alike, as natural men. Who shall be greatest? The Lord calls attention to what was going on in the gentile world among the kings of the earth, and
{105}
says, 'It is not to be that way among you; you are going to be distinguished; I am appointing you a kingdom; you will sit on twelve thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel'. Think of the distinction they are coming into! But for the moment He says, distinction is not in that connection; it is rather in service. So He says, "But *ye* shall not be thus; but let the greater among you be as the younger, and the leader as he that serves. For which is greater, he that is at table or he that serves? Is not he that is at table? But I am in the midst of you as the one that serves", @Luke 22: 26, 27.
There is the pattern, dear brethren. That is the pattern. All that we get in the Pentateuch and throughout the Old Testament merges into this; it is all the spirit of Christ; it is the spirit of Christ reflecting backward. Now that He has come into manhood, here it is -- infinite perfection. "But I am in the midst of you as the one that serves". Not, I may say, that He would do it casually, or that He would show His condescension in doing such service as washing their feet; but He says, "*I* am *in the midst of you* as the one that serves". That is, the attitude of His mind was that. The attitude of His blessed mind among His own was to serve. He was surely the greatest!
According to what He says here, He exemplified what He said; so that it is, "but let the greater among you be as the younger, and the leader as he that serves". That is distinction. What a sight for heaven. The angels saw all this; they were cognisant of it all; they were witnesses. Gabriel had to do with the birth of Christ; he knew all about it. Other angels celebrated it: a multitude of the heavenly host celebrated His birth. They saw all this. They saw the Babe; they saw the holy Boy in the temple. What a thought to attach to a boy of twelve -- holiness, subject to His parents, sitting in the temple of God
{106}
in the midst of the teachers, hearing and asking questions. What a sight for angels! They gave vent to their appreciation of it, as I have said before, of what had happened: "for today a Saviour has been born to you in David's city, who is Christ the Lord", @Luke 2: 11. And then the multitude in that chorus, blessing God and saying, "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good pleasure in men" (verse 14). It is not only in man, in that Babe; but multitudes of men will come in on that same line for God's pleasure.
That is what is going on in young people, developing out of this principle of subjection to parents, and to the Scriptures, and to the Lord, and to the brethren. So that men are being developed: "good pleasure in *men*". What a sight for angels, as one and another came and attached themselves to Jesus in those wonderful days of His sojourn here below. Angels watched it, and today they are watching the assembly; however little it appears in the general profession, the angels are watching it. For it is said that the all-various wisdom of God is seen in it; portrayed in the assembly at the present time. What an incentive for young people to develop on these lines, throwing to the winds all thought of being great in this world for the greatness of the assembly, the distinction that is proper to it.
And so the Lord is speaking now, not to young people, but to grown men, the apostles themselves; and He is telling them about His service, what He was among them, what conspicuousness. How the archangel Michael would speak of it! Think of the humanity of Jesus among His own! I believe He would do anything at all, taking up the attitude of a servant. I believe the blessed Lord Jesus, the Lord of glory, was in that attitude amongst His disciples.
And what for? To bring out love in Him, but also as a pattern of conspicuousness. He was conspicuous
{107}
in that, that He served; that He was content to do anything, any kind of service. As the great servant that followed said, "Yourselves know that these hands have ministered to my wants, and to those who were with me", @Acts 20: 34. Not only that, but he would put wood on a fire to replenish it. He would do anything. As his Master was, so was he. And what is it for? It is exemplary for us, especially for young people growing up in the truth, to delineate the life of Jesus. As was said to the apostles, "Go ye and stand and speak in the temple to the people all the words of this life", @Acts 5: 20. The whole life of Jesus in detail was to be spoken so as to be taken in, and assimilated, and developed in character: the constitutional character.
That is all I have to say here; just to pass on now to Revelation, to see how all this is working out. The Lord Himself is speaking again, in His message to the assembly in remnant times. Now He is speaking to the overcomer in Philadelphia. Some here may not be conversant with these matters as some of us are. It is well to read the Bible. The Bible is no tale at all; it is divinely inspired. The enemy is assailing it in every direction in order to dishonour it and undermine it. It is the best book for sale; it has by far the largest circulation of any book. That is a remarkable thing. We may thank God for it. I believe that God is honouring those that are reading it, reading it in a genuine way, according to what is said of it: "Every scripture is divinely inspired, and profitable for teaching, for conviction, for correction, for instruction in righteousness; that the man of God may be complete, fully fitted to every good work", @2 Timothy 3: 16, 17.
It works out thus. And I believe God is honouring those who love Him in the reading of the Scriptures in Bible readings, household readings, and private readings, and who cause the Bible to be honoured.
{108}
It will not be honoured under antichrist, you may be sure of that. Let no one think that antichrist exists. There are many antichrists, but not *the* antichrist. What exists is to educate us, and show us how he will come and so that we can read the number of the beast. We can learn to read it.
But I am speaking now of the use of the Bible by christians. It is painful to observe how some christians neglect it; but it is delightful to heaven to see how others pore over it, and get understanding from it; and God is honouring that very thing, and causing the Bible to hold its ground against all attacks.
So the Lord here in this book of Revelation is speaking again. Not as He was here on earth, as we have been reading in the gospels; it is Christ come down in a wonderful symbolic way, as depicted in the first chapter, and He is speaking to the assemblies one after another. Now He has come to the last one but one, and that is Philadelphia, which assembly means in the title, 'brotherly love'. It is not an accident, be sure of that. It is those who have brotherly love, as loving God first, and Christ, and then loving one another. They will understand what the Lord says to that assembly.
He says, "thou ... hast kept my word, and hast not denied my name" (verse 8). Why should I take on any other name than Jesus? Disciples were first called christians in Antioch. Why should we not be content with that? Or the name of 'brethren' which is given to us in the Scriptures? Brotherly love is what is meant in this church, which is called Philadelphia; the word means that. The Lord is contemplating someone who is overcoming. You may say, 'What is there to overcome where brotherly love predominates?' They are still in this world; they have to overcome.
An overcomer is of great interest to heaven. In every one of these addresses we have the thought.
{109}
It is an individual that is overcoming. There might be hundreds and hundreds of them, but one at a time. It is a question of each one doing it. Each one has his own difficulties to meet, and the Lord is watching him, and He is seeing him overcoming. He is not caught in the current of this world, he is overcoming. He is manifesting the spirit of Christ, able to express positively what it is.
And so the Lord says of this overcomer, "He that overcomes, him will I make a pillar in the temple of my God" (verse 12). Think of the greatness of that thought! It is really carried down from Jacob, as I have been showing. It is a question of the house of God. Only now it is the temple; and the Lord Jesus says here, "the temple of my God"; not simply God, but "my God". So that the overcomer, dear brethren, according to this, is privileged in that way; he is a distinguished man, a distinguished person, made so by Christ Himself. He is made a pillar in the temple of His God. There is no greater honour conceivable than that.
It is not simply a public building: it is a secret thought. It is a secret thought, and a sacred thought; it is a holy thought, to be a pillar in the temple of Christ's God. You love the thought of being conspicuous there. 'You want to be like Me in serving the brethren; being in the midst of them, you served them to the limit of your ability. I know you value that thought and I will make you that eternally in the temple of My God'. That is all, dear brethren. May God bless these thoughts!
{110}
INAUGURATING CHRISTIANITY
@Acts 8:36, 38; @Acts 22: 10
J.T. My thought in turning to these verses, which I hope will be enlarged on, is that they speak of inaugurating christianity, so to say, they speak much of doing. It is not a book of precepts but rather of practices or doings, and the eunuch furnishes a good beginning. He is only that -- he is only an example of those who, as coming into the truth, are on the line of doing; if a certain thing was to be done, why should he be hindered? If it is clear that I should have a certain part and the doing of it is not marking me, why so? The word here is "What hinders my being baptised?" It has been remarked this runs through the book; the book opens indeed with the statement that Luke makes: "The former treatise have I made, O Theophilus, of all that Jesus began both to do and teach". So the doing is in mind: teaching, too, but doing and the spirit of that is implied to be amongst those who have the Spirit of God; and if there is that which I should have part in, what is hindering? If I should be doing something and am not doing it, why? The Lord in converting Paul according to chapter 9 takes the lead in suggesting this to the convert, telling him without his asking, according to the better version. The idea of Paul's asking is not stated in chapter 9, but the Lord has in mind that he would have part in the economy he was brought into, and he would be told what to do and he would be doing something; and a later account says he asked the Lord what he should do. As I said, this thought is found running through the book, and evidently it is intended to lay hold of us that christianity involves mutual feeling and mutual service. That is what I was thinking, and I just suggested these few verses because they present the thought clearly.
{111}
J.S. Had you at all in mind that there should be a contrast to what christendom is, to the way certain people carry on the doing and the rest miss the great thought in this book and do not function?
J.T. That is exactly what I was thinking of. Moving about one observes some who do not function at all, and who have, to some extent, come under paralysis, or stoppage of normal exercises of service.
J.F.P. Would the more excellent way enter into this?
J.T. Well, it would indeed; it is underlying it. The desire for gift is alluded to there, but this way that you allude to is the thing that underlies all service -- that is love -- and on that basic position the Lord furnishes what is needed; and the way of ability follows on that. So that every one of us is given grace according to the measure of the gift of the Christ; and there are special gifts so that the service should go on, and why should anyone exempt himself and be out of it; and if anyone is out of it, why should he not ask himself the question, what is hindering?
E.J.McB. It is evident that the converts of Peter raised the question, what shall we do?
J.T. I was thinking of that as one of the instances; and how intelligent they were, as if they were in the current of things; and Peter and the other apostles were evidently men that could tell them what to do. It seems to be a thought running through the early period of christianity, this thought of doing and regulation. So that the Lord puts His claim in at once in regard of Saul, "Arise, and go into the city, and it shall be told thee what thou must do". He was told.
E.J.McB. Of course, there is much to be done, is there not?
J.T. Well, that is what I was thinking; and especially in the service of prayer and the assembly
{112}
service, breaking of bread and all that enters into it. If I am not taking part in all that, what does hinder me? Others are free, why not I?
H.A.H. Does the secret of it lie in baptism?
J.T. Well, that is the beginning; the thought evidently was imparted into the eunuch's mind by what Philip was saying -- he preached unto him Jesus. We are not told that Philip had spoken to him about baptism, but the thought came into the eunuch's mind. Philip does not urge it or draw attention to the water; the eunuch saw it and he would not say to Philip 'Why did you not tell me about this?': he saw the water himself. You get hold of what is current in the way of instruction -- the spirit of things -- and you grasp the thing yourself. What is hindering me? Water is involved and why should I not be baptised; so that would run through in that man's history.
J.S. Philip took the opportunity of going down with the man.
J.T. He offered no objection. Verse 37 is left out in J.N.D.¬s version; it is not in the original according to best manuscripts. Philip took that man as he was wanting to be done. He offered no objection at all, but goes down with the eunuch; he goes the whole way.
Rem. He would not have lost by that, he was free.
J.T. Philip -- I think so. He went down into the water, he was not a cleric, he was not a one-man minister. I suppose the idea would be that he would show the eunuch how it should be done -- he went down himself. It says, "They went down both into the water, both Philip and the eunuch; and he baptised him". It is a joint affair; if the brethren are to learn anything from you it must be a joint matter, you get to a person as your own equal, you are not looking down on them.
Rem. Does @Romans 12 suppose everyone is doing?
J.T. Exactly. Peter in @Acts 10 went down to Cornelius who would have worshipped Peter; but no,
{113}
he said to Cornelius, "I myself also am a man", and they went into the house together; so the minister does not make himself great, he is alongside those who are to be taught, and it will soon come out what he is: he does not need to make himself anything. This principle of showing the way and being with the brethren on the same level, is often quite manifest in a meeting. Well, some are holding back, what is hindering? Why is it?
H.A.H. If baptism is rightly accepted and the truth of it applied, would it set us free for this doing, like Israel, in @Exodus 15?
J.T. Yes, but the thing was in the eunuch's mind before he was baptised; it is a spiritual thing, he is moving in that direction, what hinders me?
J.F.P. He does not say I ought to be baptised, it is, what hinders.
J.T. That is what I was thinking, the use of the word 'hinder'. A brother came tome sometime back and said, 'I never can speak to God'; well, what hindered that brother? 'I never have any spiritual liberty to speak to God in the assembly', he said. Why not?
J.S. Paul said a serious thing in writing to the meeting at Corinth that some had not the knowledge of God, because the knowledge of God sets a man's soul aglow.
J.T. Quite so, anyone who is not participating in the assembly, it is obvious he should make full enquiry before God and before his brethren as to what is hindering him.
Ques. Would it be right to connect it with the way of righteousness?
J.T. Quite so. The Lord evidently had it in mind that Saul should be doing something and he says, "I was not disobedient to the heavenly vision". The Lord says it is not what you want to do now yourself, you have got to go into the city. Saul might have
{114}
questioned it in his mind but the Lord took the initiative, according to chapter 9; He would that he should go to the brethren and learn how they did things, and he would see how they did things and follow suit and he went further. You will surely go on if you start like that.
J.S. Would you say these verses almost suggest the start in the young convert's heart, and He sends him to a company who are on that line?
J.T. It is so according to chapter 22; Saul did ask apparently but the Spirit of God does not mention it here. It is not an optional matter, the Lord is bringing the matter up with this convert: you are to do things and you will be told how to do them and you are to go into the city and will be told, which I suppose would be a real test to a man like Saul.
A.W.P. Would you say underlying this is the thought of authority -- "I say unto one, Go, and he goeth ..."?
J.T. That thought runs through concurrently with what we are saying; the spirit of control runs through this book, the Lord is introduced to us as doing and teaching -- He assembled with the brethren and told them things. Everything points to that; He is expecting them to go on, "Remain in the city till ye be clothed with power from on high". Starting in the service involves that you must have the Holy Spirit, and it may be that many who do not take part have not the Holy Spirit; it may be that a man who is constantly dumb in the assembly has not the Holy Spirit.
C.L. I suppose it is true to say we are under one control or another.
J.T. Well, a man may not have the Spirit, and he may not be under the control of the devil; but he is very near it, because we are told about the Lord being in a certain place and one of the disciples said, "Lord, teach us to pray". He was thinking not only
{115}
of himself but of a locality -- us. A spiritual man would say to the Lord, 'We want all the brothers here to pray'; he says, "Teach us to pray", that is, let nobody be silent in the hour of prayer; and the Lord went on to say how he should pray and enlarged on the urgency of prayer and to be instant in it. Then He goes on to say, "How much more shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him?" I believe we are to be urgent about our brethren taking part in the meeting; the next word is that He was casting out a demon: the Lord was doing it after that instruction, and it was dumb. It seems to me the suggestion is that the enemy might be working even in the very meeting where persons are not using their tongues, and not using what God has given them. It might be the enemy has come in and is doing that; it is not have you done it; He was casting out a demon, He was showing them how to do it. Find out from the Lord how this thing is to be met.
J.S. Would you say there might be one that has not the Spirit and that would be the cause of the dumb state?
J.T. Well, it would give the enemy the opportunity. The Lord says, 'Wait until you get Him' as though the service could not go on without the Spirit; and therefore it governs the position if I have not got Him, I must get to God about it.
J.S. That would throw great light upon the preaching we have; Peter said, "Repent, and be baptised, each one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for remission of sins, and ye will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit".
J.T. Yes, "in the name of Jesus Christ".
F.V.W. Earlier in chapter 8 it seems remarkable that although many believed it was not until Peter and John were sent down and they prayed for the Holy Spirit, that He was given to them.
{116}
J.T. Well, that is a remarkable thing in this chapter; there could never have been an assembly in Samaria if that had not happened. The whole matter of the supply of the gift of the Spirit brings in authority, and therefore if it is apparent that the meeting is suffering from some not having the Spirit, the thing is to get to the Lord. The devil comes to our meetings, you know, and the thing is to keep him out, and you can only do it really by the Spirit.
E.S.H. Would it be abnormal for Satan to come to our meetings? "Having ascended up on high, he has led captivity captive, and has given gifts to men",
@Ephesians 4: 8. Is that the normal condition?
J.T. It is "for the rebellious also", according to @Psalm 68, so that the gifts which come from above involve the Spirit.
F.E. Might some sin or some enemy cause dumbness or silence, as in the case of David?
J.T. Yes, that is true; one sin not repented of or anything like that, the Lord will not hear me if I regard iniquity in my heart; there are so many things that might hinder: we might have the Spirit and be hindering Him. David prayed, "Take not thy holy spirit from me". We have no need to pray like that, He is given to us, we are sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise; He may be grieved through some happening that has not been thoroughly judged, that may be the case.
J.S. One has thought of what you have been speaking of, for those who have not the Spirit, it would be a very exercising thing as to door-keeping. We read in Scripture the priests kept the doors.
J.T. You can see that illustrated in chapter 8; Peter and John came down and the Spirit had not been given to the converts; that is a matter that ought to be observed -- they were actually believers and yet they had not the Spirit, but Peter and John prayed for them and they received the Spirit.
{117}
Then there was one man that did not, that was Simon. If he had been allowed in, there would have been some trouble in the meetings; that is the point -- door-keepers -- watching to be sure that young people have the Spirit.
Ques. Every believer you would say is sealed by the Holy Spirit, but is it to say he has received the Spirit?
J.T. Well, I would not say every believer is sealed by the Spirit because at Samaria they were believers, but they had not the Spirit.
Rem. "After that ye believed, ye were sealed with that Holy Spirit of promise".
J.T. *After* -- it may be a month or an hour or a day; it is not automatic -- the gift of the Spirit, it is a gift. A very precious thought, I think, that I receive the Spirit from God; it does not come in automatically as I believe, and we must leave it with God when He does it.
A.S.K. There seems to have been some considerable period with the twelve at Ephesus.
J.T. They had believed and in this case, especially, those twelve indicate what is current today: the teachings are so bad, the Holy Spirit could not go into such a position. Hence you have, Jesus began both to do and to teach.
A.S.K. So that in the local gatherings you would look that doing and teaching were hand in hand.
J.T. Quite so.
A.W.P. Are you suggesting that while the Spirit is a gift, yet to receive it there has to be a condition?
J.T. The moral condition.
Ques. Why do you think the Ethiopian eunuch had not the Spirit?
J.T. I think he had, he went away rejoicing; the Spirit caught away Philip after the baptism. Well, you say, it does not say He entered into the eunuch; but I think the teaching is sequential. The thought of
{118}
the Spirit is clearly put in the book and the Lord would not let that man go without the Spirit because the condition was obviously there; he went away rejoicing. You have got to see that in regarding this matter the Spirit of God has put it so that you could see the Lord needed him.
Rem. In principle he was in the kingdom.
J.T. Quite so.
C.L. A trustworthy man.
J.T. Just so. I think the way it is put is to convey that position; the Lord would not let one go off in these circumstances without the Spirit.
C.L. I was thinking of the door-keeping; are we entitled to discern whether a person has the Spirit, on the line of door-keeping?
J.T. Certainly, it is a question of getting near people, you would hear them pray. There is something about a truly converted person, one who is sealed by the Spirit; there is something about him that attracts you, there is such a difference not only in word but in countenance and in his way -- he loves the brethren.
C.L. He would not be independent.
J.T. Quite so. So in regard to the eunuch I think we ought to take account of all the facts, the great activities of the Spirit in that case. The angel told Philip to go down to the desert and he went; and while he was there the eunuch came, and the Spirit says, "Go near, and join thyself to this chariot", and he did, and Philip says to the eunuch, "Understandest thou what thou readest?" The eunuch says, "How can I, except some man should guide me?" Then we are told the part he was reading and it was opportune: it was not an accident, it was apropos to the moment; Philip begins at the same scripture. He did not turn out one of his old sermons, he took the scripture that the man was reading; it was just the one for him and he preached unto him Jesus -- the
{119}
Person. Philip is in thorough accord with the whole position, he did not provide the chariot, he did not provide the scripture, he did not provide the water; so that there were other items beside Philip and so it is today the preacher is not everything. So he preached unto him Jesus and the water comes into view; evidently they were moving and the eunuch suggests this, the eunuch notices it and they went down together; and then it says, "But when they came up out of the water the Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip, and the eunuch saw him no longer, for he went on his way rejoicing". Can anyone say that man had not the Spirit? Heaven would not leave the work unfinished; the Holy Spirit says, Go by yourselves -- "For he went on his way rejoicing".
E.J.McB. His joy evidently was in the Holy Spirit.
J.T. Where else could it be? The whole case would not be mentioned like this if it were not a real thing. Then this word -- for, that is over against that, he saw Philip no more, he does not need Philip; Philip might have been inclined to go with the eunuch but the Spirit of the Lord takes away Philip, He is delighted with his work.
H.A.H. The eunuch had seen a man who was prepared to do what he was told.
J.T. Quite so.
J.S. You cannot part with one man until you have Another, would you say?
J.T. Yes -- he had the Lord with him.
F.V.W. Is the remarkable transposition of this quotation to be noted? Philip almost appears to misquote it.
J.T. It is quoted from the Septuagint, I suppose; it seems to be just accepted from the Bible from which he was reading, no doubt a copy from the Septuagint. It conveyed the truth and the truth thus affected that man.
{120}
F.V.W. I was thinking the intensity of the scripture would come home to him; the lamb being shorn here, not the sheep as in Isaiah. It would have an effect upon this man.
J.T. It would; and His life was taken from the earth.
T.R.J.H. The Lord had taken account of the secrets of his heart.
J.T. Quite so, it was a very fine day for heaven and Philip was told to leave a good work and go down there to a desert place.
J.F.P. So is the basis of the principle to which you have called attention in the individual?
J.T. I thought so; it is a very great thought in a man who is still unbaptised that the work of God is there, why should I be hindered, this is a thing that evidently ought to be done, why should I not be baptised? There is no suggestion that Philip told him about the water, he saw it himself; it is a feature of the work of God: he sees what ought to be done to him, and he says, "What doth hinder me?" So if I am dumb in the meeting -- why is it? Others are free.
J.F.P. Going on his way rejoicing, there is the basis there for liberty in the company.
J.T. Yes, the Lord had full confidence in him.
E.S.H. It says, "*He* that fixes his view on the perfect law, that of liberty, and abides in it, being not a forgetful hearer but a doer of the work".
J.T. Exactly, and so as has been remarked these converts in chapter 2 are all on this line; they are not drags on the meeting, they speak to the right men, not only to Peter but to the other apostles. Bartholomew and Matthew could answer like Peter, it is the effect of the work of God in the assembly, and therefore they want to know what to do and as having done it they are added to, as much as to say that is the idea, they can be incorporated in the new
{121}
system, they will never be drags, they will be active as they should be, so we are told later they persevered in the apostles¬ teaching. They are in the assembly enjoying the wonderful conditions that prevail there -- how happy they all were.
H.A.H. Is there something in that -- fellowship before breaking of bread?
J.T. Quite so, the teaching first, then the fellowship, breaking of bread and prayers -- they are not whipped into it.
H.A.H. Can we be in fellowship without breaking bread?
J.T. Breaking bread is the expression of fellowship.
E.J.McB. Do you connect the thought of the doing of Paul with the fact of the assembly in the place, it would be appointed to him what he was to do?
J.T. I thought so; the Lord does not point out the persons, where they live, but just says, "Go into the city". Remarkable thought, I think, that the Lord had some there; it certainly did not mean that he should go to the Mayor or the Alderman, it meant there were some in the town who would teach him; it showed that the work of God would work itself out, there would be no miscarriage in the thing at all. He was led into the city, and in it the Lord tells Ananias where the man is, which house he is in.
E.J.McB. I was wondering whether the Bible Reading ought to be more instructive on that line as to what to do.
J.T. I am sure that is what it is intended for.
E.J.McB. Not a mere study of Scripture.
J.T. No, saying right things. If I were resident in this town the Lord might use what was said in the reading; but then we are to "Reprove, rebuke, exhort with all longsuffering and doctrine". We are to realise why the brethren do not function, so the thing is to speak to them about it.
{122}
A.A.G. So Ananias would say to Saul, "Why lingerest thou?"
J.T. I suppose Saul was hesitating about baptism  -- a serious step for him.
J.F.P. And may it be the incapacity to receive food? It says, "Having received food, got strength. And he was with the disciples who were in Damascus certain days".
J.T. He could see how things were done; not only be told, but see.
H.A.H. If you spoke to one like that, you would have to have in view getting with him, not merely to get him to speak but getting to the secret of what is hindering.
J.T. Quite so, it requires priestly discernment; I think Philip's example is excellent, he went down with the man, not above him.
Then there is more than that, there may be those who function too much, say too much, give out too many hymns or give out a wrong hymn at a particular time; such are not only being hindered but are hindering. If there is a hindrance enquire into it what does hinder me?
A.S.K. Should the priestly element deal with such a position of one of whom you speak as being too prominent?
J.T. Yes, we are obligated to one another; if we let them go along we are suffering instead of endeavouring to correct -- in grace, you know. "Reprove, rebuke, exhort with all longsuffering and doctrine", if you are doing it properly and according to the truth.
Ques. Would that be one feature at Corinth, they were too wordy?
J.T. Well, it seems so, so that the fatherly qualities are needed; we have only one Father.
C.L. The Lord saw with these two cases that they had a good start.
{123}
J.T. Yes, I think they are exemplary cases, characteristic cases, too. In this book you get many instances as requiring what is to be done; these two are representative, particularly Saul; he had to begin with the Lord, as it were. According to the first record it is as much as if the Lord says, 'there is a great deal to be done and I need you; you are an active man but you must be told what to do and I am telling you where to go', so Saul has to learn that if he is to be active he has to be told.
J.F.P. So that his doing might be regulated.
J.T. Yes; he might say to the Lord, 'Why do You not tell me Yourself?'but the Lord says, 'You must learn from others'.
C.L. So the Lord would be gracious to anyone coming in in that way by allowing the brethren to handle the matter.
J.T. Quite so, he would learn his place amongst the brethren; that is just the case, you have got to go into the city. He does not even tell him where to go; you have got to learn from others and you have got to find them. The Lord does not say I will go before you; it is put into his mind that he must learn from others. The Lord saw to it that Ananias went to him.
C.L. Would the grace of the Lord flow through the service in that way?
J.T. Quite so.
F.V.W. So that Ananias puts his hands on Saul and says, "Brother Saul". We do not read that the Lord told him to say it, his own action would encourage this convert.
J.T. That is a good thought. Very often converts are misrepresented in the way in which we deal with them and the Lord is very concerned that it should not be; they have to learn from the brethren. So Philip places himself alongside the eunuch, Peter
{124}
places himself alongside Cornelius, and Ananias places himself alongside Saul, "Brother Saul, the Lord, even Jesus, that appeared unto thee in the way as thou camest, hath sent me, that thou mightest receive thy sight, and be filled with the Holy Ghost". Well, that ought to break his heart, to know that the Lord was thinking of him; and it did, Saul learnt.
E.J.McB. Do you not think that raises a very serious exercise that he would not have Ananias concern Saul with his past history or failure but with the work of God in him?
J.T. We begin from the bottom in that way. Paul later was much greater than Ananias but he knew Ananias was greater than he was once; he says, "By the grace of God I am what I am". Ananias was what he was by the grace of God. Paul says of someone, 'he was in Christ before me'; well, that is something.
T.R.J.H. You have the suggestion of a praying man.
J.T. Quite so, "Behold, he prayeth", that is the point for us; the Lord puts everything on that. We are acting, you know, for the assembly. It is not the Father in heaven, but of heaven; the gift of the Spirit is to bring us into accord with heaven, so if the Father is of heaven, you are of heaven, too.
R.H. Would the thought of appointment apply in some measure?
J.T. Yes, it is definite; there is an appointment for you.
F.E. Would the very beginning of his doing be to know His will, to have the knowledge of the will of God?
J.T. Quite so, for he says, "I was not disobedient to the heavenly vision".
F.C.R. I was thinking of Habakkuk in regard to the hindrances.
{125}
J.T. Quite so, he says, "O Lord, thou halt ordained them for judgment; and O, mighty God, thou hast established them for correction". Then in chapter 2, "I will stand upon my watch". He begins low down and he reaches up to the highest thing. He takes into account what his business might be, his cattle, vegetables and the like, but it does not matter now what happens, "I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation". It is a rising position: he goes on to say, "The Lord God is my strength", and ends with this, "To the chief singer on my stringed instruments". A perfect thing for the assembly when I can hand it over to the Lord, to the chief Musician on my stringed instruments; it is stringed instruments, not the one he began with. I think we often allow our goods, our sheep and our business to come in and hinder, and that is exactly what he would help in.
F.C.R. This concern in the service of God must go on.
J.T. That is right, and it should not be any mythical thing. "He will make my feet like hinds¬ feet, and he will make me to walk upon mine high places". He is not a stranger in the highest point reached, he is at home there.
H.A.H. So the psalm would enrich the praise.
J.T. That is the idea, that is really what it is; it is an experience. As it says, "Each of you has a psalm". I heard of a brother bringing the fruit of an experience, in a psalm, to the meeting for ministry; and it was very good, I think.
E.J.McB. Very good.
J.T. It is not one of *the* Psalms.
E.J.McB. Is not David remarkable in that way; on certain days when he had certain experiences he wrote Psalms?
J.T. Quite so; that is most instructive -- some unique history, some unique instruction. The one in
{126}
@1 Corinthians 14 is evidently a characteristic experience, a spiritual experience, so that we are to speak to ourselves in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs.
Ques. Would liberty with the brethren help to release that amongst the saints?
J.T. Just so, mutual feeling, that is the basis, I think, of the service of God -- plenty of spiritual liberty.
{127}
DIVINE MESSAGES
@2 Samuel 19: 11 - 15; @2 Samuel 7: 4 - 13, 18; @John 20: 17 - 23
Each of these scriptures affords a divine message sent. The first is to the fathers of Judah as being slow in bringing the king back; the second to David by Nathan delivered to him as to his service; and the third to the disciples of Christ to elevate them, to raise them to a higher level than that which they had hitherto enjoyed. We may see that what is to be said should be progressive, the first having application to persons -- some such may be here tonight -- who are slow in according Christ His due. It was a very critical time; although the main crisis was over in the destruction of Absalom the reconstruction period had begun. We may say that we are in the reconstruction period, especially in view of the great breakdown in the history of the assembly. God has come in in reconstruction, but many are slow to go the whole way and accord the Lord His due. He is King -- God has made Him Lord and Christ. There has been a great revolt from Him; but the crisis was reached, as ever, for God never lets matters go entirely out of His hand. He lets evil go a long way at times, yea, even orders evil; it says in one scripture He creates evil, which scripture has to be understood in its context. We have a concrete example of it in David himself; one passage says that the Lord moved David to number the people, and another says that Satan did it. Both are true, but the first is more solemn because it is God's ordering on account of the state of His people. So it is that a great revolt was allowed, if one may not say ordered, because of the great declension that arose in the early history of the assembly. It was allowed to go on for centuries, but the crisis came and Christ triumphed -- not that all
{128}
were restored, but the principle of triumph was there, and it is here now. But many are tardy in recognising the full result of the triumph. It implies acknowledgment of the whole truth, that we are to come to God's choice -- He has made Jesus Lord and Christ, and the triumph in the recovery implies that this is owned, believers are marked as keeping His commandments. No one has any claim to christianity really who does not keep His commandments; and the keeping of His commandments implies that He is acknowledged as in the place of command. God has made Him both Lord and Christ. The term 'Lord' is authority, 'Christ' is operative or constructive. We must acknowledge the Lord before we can come into the constructive services of Christ. He is the One that does all God's will; and if He is to do all that is necessary for me there must be the unreserved acknowledgment of His authority, so that the convert says 'Lord', as Paul (Saul of Tarsus) did. Now there are many, I fear, who are tardy in going the whole road involved, the unreserved acknowledgment of Christ's authority; whether it be general, or broken up in detail in specific demands, the test is that I keep them; otherwise I have no claim at all, no right to claim to be His, or at any rate to love Him, for He says that is the evidence of it. In a crisis, peculiarly so where a revolt has taken place, our state is disclosed, our rebellious state; and the only hope of being acknowledged now as one that loves Christ is by the evidence of keeping His commandments. That will bring in Christ as operative. Christ dwelling in our hearts is the supreme thought of that, that He has a place in our hearts as the Christ. The heart is the very centre of operations, and it is on the principle of faith -- a great universal thought, "That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith", @Ephesians 3: 17. It will be operative in relation to others, too, as the Christ dwells in their hearts, and great things will come
{129}
about. That is what is going on, but some are out of it. The young people here -- or many of them -- I am afraid, may be out of it, and this first scripture is for you particularly. So I may say I am here with a message -- there are three messages implied in what I have read, and this is the first. The word 'messenger' has a great place in Scripture -- it is applied to the Lord Himself -- and one may humbly say that one has a message for the young people, and that message here is, "Why are ye the last to bring the king back to his house?" That was the question. The house, for the purpose of the present moment, must be taken to be one's heart, so that we must look into our hearts and see how they stand in this matter. Are others keeping them, or is there another keeping them, besides Christ? Why then should I be the last? others are ahead of me. The king says, "Seeing the speech of all Israel is come to the king, even to his house", meaning that there was a great movement in the reconstruction period. If I am not keeping the commandments, I am out of that. It is a reconstruction period now and construction requires material; and material in the sense in which I am speaking of it requires absolute obedience to Christ, otherwise you are out of it, you are unfit for the structure. So that the word, the message, is very plain and simple why are you the last? -- putting it off maybe for some period of time which you have in your mind that you will reach. But how can you tell that you will reach it? You may, in the goodness of God; for He does promise long life to young people. It is not that He means to make us earthly or earth dwellers, but it is natural in young people to see good days, to live long in the earth which the Lord our God gives us. It is quoted in the epistle as cited in the Old Testament  -- the epistle that affords us the greatest principles, the most exalted truth, the heavenly side of the position -- the epistle to the Ephesians; and yet the
{130}
young people are promised to see good days, to live long on the earth. It is a blessing. God is always ready to take account of young people, to encourage them. In that section the word is, "Children, obey your parents in the Lord"; that is, godly parents would bring their children up not only to obey themselves but "in the Lord". So that as the light of the epistle to the Ephesians comes into the soul of a young person he is ready for it on account of having been brought up in obedience. But then the question is, why are you behind? why are others ahead of you in bringing the King back to His house? Notice that the King sends spiritual men with this message he sends Zadok, pre-eminently the priest of those days, a man that reappears in the millennium according to Ezekiel, the priestly head because of his faithfulness. This is a most faithful message; as it were great pains are used so that the bearer of the message should not antagonise us in any way. A priestly man will not do that, he will exercise grace, and so there is not only Zadok but Abiathar also. It is a priestly matter and the young people need it. They are so easily offended, turning away like a child because something has happened, even going so far as to say, 'I will not remain in the fellowship any more'. They do not know what they are saying; they think these matters are optional, whereas they are not optional. Easily offended, and hence these messengers, Zadok and Abiathar, would rather allay all resentment and say, Now why are you delaying, you men of Judah? You know you are nearer to David tribally than any. Is there anyone here that says, 'I am not as near as that to David'? Then you are eliminating yourself from the heritage. That is the position, you belong to the tribe of Judah, for it is to them the message is sent, and why should you be below your tribal position? You have great advantages in that the King is of your tribe, and He is
{131}
ready to say "I am bone of your bone and flesh of your flesh". Why should I throw that away for some paltry thing in this world, why should I be the last, for some paltry hindrance, to bring Him back to His house? He is regarding us in that light. No doubt the house was in that tribe, although primarily in the tribe of Benjamin, it is regarded as being in Jerusalem, belonging to Judah. Think of what was involved in not making way for the king to come back there. Well, thank God, the message was successful: the messengers were successful, David was successful, Zadok was successful, Abiathar was successful. The message bowed the hearts of the men of Judah; in fact it was David, he did it. The whole matter reverts back to Christ, for it is He who is doing it. Whatever I am doing here tonight, He is the Operator -- for Christ means that. He bowed the hearts of the men of Judah, and as you will observe, it says, "Even as the heart of one man; so that they sent this word unto the king, Return thou, and all thy servants". That is a very thorough thought. If you profess to love Christ and have Him back in His house, you will not omit His servants; you will have them back, too. It is often the test of our genuineness as to how we regard the Lord's servants; or the Lord's people even, extending it further. Some of us were speaking this evening of the marriage in Cana of Galilee; Jesus was invited to it and His disciples. Simon, the Pharisee, did not invite His disciples; he only had the thought that Jesus was a distinguished Man and he would honour himself by inviting Him -- many do that -- but His disciples are not mentioned. Here there is true recovery. True bowing of the heart to Christ, to the message and to the messengers, as I may say, will lead you to receive not only the King but His servants, for He needs servants. What can any king do without servants? You do well to let them all come, because they will all serve you. Do
{132}
not omit any of the Lord's servants; if you receive Him receive them, because He works through them. He has made a careful selection of them and they are all for you, as Paul says, "Whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, ... all are yours". Why should I shut them out of my house? they are appointed of the Lord to serve Him.
Another thing it says, "The king returned, and came to Jordan". That is the next thing. You say, 'To Jordan? what does that mean?' You have never broken bread, we will say; you have never committed yourself to the fellowship; well, the King is saying, That is the idea, it is My death. The Lord is saying it. You have to go there. The King is coming back, He is coming into your house; but then if there is any movement at all, any love, any genuineness in your profession that the King is coming back to His house, you must move, too, and move in the direction that the flesh abhors. The King came to the Jordan. Now it is your turn to move. "And Judah came to Gilgal, to go to meet the king, to conduct the king over Jordan". A fine move! They were to march down from Jerusalem to Jordan. What glory shone in them! It is from glory to glory when we are on the return to Christ, when there is a move back to Christ; it is the work of God. It would be glorious to see those men going down from Jerusalem. 'Where are you going?' 'We are going to meet the king. We have already sent word to him to return, and his servants; we are going to meet him'. There is something on now. The brethren are rejoicing when they see young people moving that way, going to Gilgal, where the flesh is rolled away, the reproach of Egypt, to meet the King. And not only that; He would be ashamed of them if it were otherwise. Christ has no pleasure in the flesh at all, He has died to put it away from the face of God. He would honour going to Gilgal. It is really where
{133}
all the reproach of Egypt that attaches to us had to be rolled away, and so we can take the King back to His house.
The next thing is in chapter 7. David himself had received a message. It is now a question of a servant being limited in his service, which most of us do not like. We like to have a free hand, but God reserves His right to say, 'I have other servants, and other thoughts. You are only one'. David was the king and had a good desire in his heart, as of course anyone serving the Lord would assume to have, but let us never forget that God has His thoughts. How great are His thoughts, they cannot be numbered or counted; He is God and I am man, limited of necessity. God is God. How great a thing it is to have to do with God at all. He says to David, You were only caring for the sheep when I took you up.. It is well to be reminded of this, that God takes us up as He pleases. You were following the sheep; you are now a great man, like the kings of the earth; you have a great name. You want to build Me a house but I have other thoughts. The message implies all this, so that the point, dear brethren, in this message that each of us who is seeking to serve has to recognise is that God has His own thoughts. What I am doing does not cover all that God has in mind. Even what Paul did, did not cover all that God had in His mind. God has a right to reserve His own thoughts, the eventuation of His own thoughts, and to use whom He will, lest any servant should assume that he is essential, that God cannot do without him. No doubt he is essential -- everyone, such as David, that God takes up is essential -- God would not have taken him up otherwise; but he is not everything, great as he is. God has other thoughts and He is waiting to let them come out, and one of the greatest of these thoughts is sonship. This message was carried by a man whose name signifies Gift. He was a worthy man. This is
{134}
the first time he is mentioned; of course he had a place with David before, but the Spirit of God waits to mention Nathan in this connection. He is a reserve man. That is another great thought in the service of God, that God has reserve men and they come out when they are needed, according to what God has in His mind. Nathan was needed at this time, he was the man for the moment. He failed at the beginning, he told David to proceed and do what he had in his mind to do. He was wrong in that, but he soon corrects himself. God corrected him, He spoke to him that night and said, Deliver this message to David. As I am speaking, dear brethren, I would take it for myself; God has other thoughts, thoughts that I may not understand. He has reserve people, whether they are already in the field or otherwise.
He knows them and He may have other thoughts to set out. Peter laboured very much as an apostle, the leading apostle, but the time came when God took up another: He took up Paul, and immediately Paul is on the ground he preaches the Son of God. That was a great thought. It was the thought that Nathan had, it was involved in the message. We never hear of Peter preaching the Son of God; he knew about the Son of God but we never hear of his preaching the Son of God, but Paul, as soon as he is on the field, is preaching the Son of God, and we may say thankfully that Peter is in accord with this immediately.
He is not resentful. We are told that he went everywhere, went to all quarters, meaning that he is not any more centring in Jerusalem, but that there is a new holy current flowing that is in connection with the sonship of Christ, and it implies that the economy is given into His hand, as John says, "The Father loveth the Son, and hath given all things into his hand". That economy means that there are to be assemblies in different cities of the world and that the administration of heaven's bounty is to flow out
{135}
through those cities, those meetings, those assemblies, and Peter is not behind in this. It says he went to all quarters, and he comes down to Joppa, and there is a man there who is paralysed and he calls him by name and says, "Arise, and make thy bed". That is Paul's doctrine, although Peter did not understand it. Learn to do things for yourselves, in your own locality; the principle of sonship, rightly understood, will enable us, however small, to go on, to carry on; the principle of sonship is enough to enable us to carry on, the Spirit of God enables us each one to do his part. That is what Peter has in mind. He is abreast of the times, so to say. If he is to be superseded or eclipsed he is ready for it, and that is the attitude of every servant. In sending this message to David God is most gracious. I am going to build you a house, He says. I have settled the matter for you for ever; you have no need to be anxious, I have settled your place for ever, and David goes in and sits before the Lord without an atom of jealousy in his heart, he is full of worship. This is an important matter for any of us who may be serving. God may need someone else to do it, anything He has to stress; but we can be sure that God has spoken of our house for a great while to come, the matter is settled for ever -- "For ever, O Lord, thy word is settled in heaven", @Psalm 119: 89. His counsels are settled; not only are they going through in a general way but for each of us. And so David goes in and sits before the Lord; he is perfectly happy, never more intelligent. He never used such a list of holy, divine appellations as in these few verses; he is perfectly restful. That is the effect of this message.
The final thought is in John's well-known verses. My one thought now, dear brethren, is to show that this message is to elevate us in a moral sense, because we are apt to be very small at all times in our thoughts, and to use terms of abnegation in regard to ourselves
{136}
which sometimes we do not mean, and I do not think they are of any value at all if they are not genuine. How Paul could say that he was "less than the least of all saints" it is not easy to say, but he said it, and you may be certain he spoke the truth.
How could he say that? I am sure it was in the light of the great elevation that he understood himself to have in the counsels of God. He understood the Son of God. Association with Christ as Son settles the whole matter. I can well afford to be little in my own eyes, and it is needful that I should be because the flesh is so assiduous in its prominence in the most spiritual of us. It is needful that one should maintain the level that divine purpose has given in Him. In the power of that Paul could speak of himself as little. Paul said what was absolutely true from his point of view when he said I am "less than the least of all saints". There was some sense in which that was absolutely true. Paul says that he knew a man in Christ who was caught up to the third heaven. That was true, too, and it gave him a lower status than that man in that sense. It is well to recognise it.
Whilst following our status or calling according to the purposes of God, we must not forget to reckon any disadvantages that mark us according to the government of God. The government of God may mean disabilities in me or in any of us, and if I am an honest man I shall observe them. God intends us to observe them; anything that detracts from me as a man in this world I must observe it; but never lose sight of the counsels of God. That is what this message means, the greatest of all messages, I suppose, at least in the sense that it gives the saints their divine calling. For you will find what eventuates in the passage -- and that is why I read it right down -- is that I am sent. The Lord says, after coming in amongst the brethren, "Peace be unto you", and they were glad to see Him; but then He says, "Peace
{137}
be unto you" again, and He says, "As my Father hath sent me, even so send I you. And when he had said this, he breathed on them, and saith unto them, Receive ye the Holy Spirit; Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained". This is a most important thing -- that we are trustworthy. The elevation is for the moment, to make us trustworthy, to make us representative of God, of the Father, and of the Son, and so trustworthy that the Lord can say to us, "Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted". It is confidence. The Lord does not trust the flesh in any of us. Take a man like Samuel, he failed as an old man, he would have anointed another than David, so that no one is immune from the enemy's suggestions, however spiritual. Even Joseph failed, he would have the wrong man promoted. So that confidence implies that I identify myself wholly and solely with the work of God in me. This is an abstract view. There is nothing wrong with the saints in this view; it is the abstract view and I am entitled to take it, to regard myself wholly and solely in relation to the work of God, and the Lord says, You can be trusted. Nothing but the work of God in us can be trusted. That is why, I believe, we get this abstract view in this message, that we may treasure it in our hearts, that we are identified with the work of God. Nothing else will stand, all else is untrustworthy and will break down. "As my Father hath sent me, even so send I you ... . Receive the Holy Spirit". So that, dear brethren, you can see how this last message is the greatest of the three. It is most essential for our testimony here, for our place in heaven by and by, for our place in the assembly, too, and the service of God. To forgive people is a hard thing, I mean if you have to do with them every day and there are transgressions upon transgressions, it is hard to forgive,
{138}
but the Lord is trusting us to forgive. He says, whom you forgive heaven will forgive, and you do not want to be out of accord with heaven, and the only way to be in accord with heaven is to identify yourself with the work of God, the abstract thought, and then rely on the Spirit's power -- "the Holy Spirit" it is here"Receive the Holy Spirit", so that there is power to hold myself in relation to the work of God, and I am trustworthy.
{139}
RENEWAL
@Romans 12: 2; @Colossians 3: 9 - 11; @2 Corinthians 4: 16 - 18
J.T. It is in mind to speak together about renewing; firstly, with regard to the mind; secondly, renewal in knowledge, and thirdly, in the inner man. It is desired that the subject thus divided may be used of the Lord to help us as to the necessity for freshness in the things of God. The mind, it seems, comes first in order if the truth before us is to be understood. We have an added thought in @Ephesians 4: 23, to what is said in @Romans 12, namely, "renewed in the spirit of your mind". But the mind itself is in view in Romans as initial; Romans is foundational as to every feature. What underlies chapter 12 is the statement at the end of chapter 7 by the writer of the epistle, as to what he had reached through the analysis described in that chapter. He had reached control of his mind: "I *myself* with the mind serve God's law" (verse 25). The believer is in deliverance as that verse indicates; he is in control of his mind. There is always the danger with us of being controlled by our minds, whereas the believer is viewed as in control himself, being viewed in a way, as an institution of which he is in control. "I *myself*" he says, will serve God's law. We know how man naturally is swayed by his mind. It serves the enemy, Satan; but as a responsible being enlightened of God, he begins by controlling his mind and using it to serve God's law. He thus becomes law-abiding, corresponding with Christ who had the law of God in His heart. We come into that by renewal. The principle of new birth must enter into all our faculties, but for renewal, we need the Spirit which is given us, which the believer characteristically has. In @Titus 3: 5 it
{140}
speaks of the renewal of the Holy Spirit which God has shed on us abundantly. So the presence of the Holy Spirit implies renewal in every sense in us; but first, in regard of the mind. The danger of conformation to the world is in mind in @Romans 12, and the corrective for that lies in the renewal of the mind. We are transformed by the renewing of our mind.
H.P.W. What is the main thought in renewal?
J.T. It is a word which denotes both freshness and what is wholly new; something entirely different from what has been understood before. It implies initially, as in Romans, a radical change in our mental outlook, involving transformation. 'Conformation' is used as to the world, but this is a stronger word, 'transformation', that is a complete change, and it takes place by the renewing of our mind. I suppose no one would undertake to define the process of being wholly spiritual, yet it is a process of which we are conscious; it is a change of outlook. If it is not so with any believer, he had better see why it is not so.
H.P.W. You said it was by the Holy Spirit, so that the Holy Spirit serves us in this way as we are subject to the Lord?
J.T. That is what I understand. The word in @Titus 3: 5 - 7, is very full and covers all this; it speaks of "the washing of regeneration and renewal of the Holy Spirit, which he poured out on us richly through Jesus Christ our Saviour". There is no lack on His side.
F.W.W. Where does our having the mind of Christ come in?
J.T. It is very much in line with what we are saying. The word'mind'there refers to the thinking faculty; our minds take on that character which is consequent on their renewal; for no one could have that mind apart from the Holy Spirit.
F.W.W. It is evidently a new kind of mind.
J.T. It is the very opposite to what is in the world.
{141}
Man left to himself did not like to retain God in his knowledge, and God gave them up to a reprobate mind. It is the very opposite to Christ; His thought was to make everything of God, so the renewed mind brings God in, and how important that He should be brought in!
C.H.B. Is the service of God in mind in this chapter, in presenting our bodies a "living sacrifice"? Would the mind be in keeping with that?
J.T. Quite so. We are to present our bodies "a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which is your intelligent service". That word 'intelligent' involves our minds. Then this matter of renewal is brought in because of the danger of the world. It involves our being transformed by the renewal of our minds. Intelligent service would denote priestly service. The priest knows what to do.
H.B. What is the bearing of the body on it?
J.T. The body is the vehicle of all this. It is a substantial thought, a concrete thought. The apostle's desire was that our whole spirit, and soul, and body should be preserved blameless at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ; @1 Thessalonians 5: 23. We cannot be in the service of God in a practical way apart from our bodies. We need them in fact for everything the service of God requires. The point is our attitude of mind in the presentation; the attitude in which we hold our bodies, as already presented to God, never to be recalled. Our baptism sets it out. Our bodies are called 'living', they can only be living as Christ is in them, and the Spirit has scope in us. "If Christ be in you, the body is dead on account of sin, but the Spirit life on account of righteousness", @Romans 8: 10. Here, it is a "living sacrifice".
W.G.L. Is it seen in the book of Job that there is a conflict with the mind? He was suffering in body and mind.
J.T. Yes; it may be that discipline is needed, but
{142}
that in itself would not do. The body is not made alive by discipline, but by the Spirit. The discipline Job went through set him free, but the body is set free by the Spirit. Our bodies are still mortal, but living as we have the Spirit.
Ques. Should our thinking and outlook be secured in relation to God's outlook?
J.T. Yes, the body is brought into activity by Christ being in us. The body by its natural appetite and feelings is rendered dead, but the Spirit is life, because Christ is in us. The Samaritan woman in @John 4 is a good illustration of it. She had a body that had been discredited, but the Lord instructed her as to the use of her body; it was to be a vessel of living water. She takes that in, and leaves her waterpot, the natural thing, understanding that her body was a vessel. But how could that body become dead? The later statement, that she went to the men, means that she was in deliverance; she was immune from their influence. She influences them for Christ, saying, "Is not *he* the Christ?" The secret of that was that Christ was in her.
Eu.R. Would it mean that He was in her affections?
J.T. Yes. She had not the Spirit yet, but the light of living water; her body was to be the vessel of it. The way she speaks of Christ (and she is the only one to whom He communicates that He is the Christ), was because He was in her, and she could present her body a living sacrifice, and her testimony was effective on these lines.
H.M.S. The renewing of the mind here has a very definite object, that we might prove the will of God; is that not to be proved apart from this renewal?
J.T. Apparently not: "that ye may prove what is the good and acceptable and perfect will of God" -- "to your proving" it means; it is an element in the
{143}
proving; it is taken in by our minds, but the proving it lies in a renewed mind.
H.P.W. Supposing the gospel really lays hold of a person, there is from the outset a completely different outlook; this is a process that goes on from that time, and works out a transformation in the believer
J.T. That is how it seems to stand. It is a process: "to your proving", that is, you are in the process. In chapter 7 we have the remarkable account of the proving our inward state, and how one gets out of it by the process of having the mind under control. Then the next thing is that the mind is to be renewed to the proving of "the good and acceptable and perfect will of God"; every moment we realise that the will of God is good and acceptable and perfect in itself.
J.T.Jr. Is this an appeal to us on the responsible side? If so, where does the work of the Spirit come in?
J.T. The work of the Spirit is contingent upon our acceptance of responsibility. Man is a responsible being, and as indicated earlier in the book, scope is made for the Spirit. The Spirit is here in abundance, but our wills interfere; the un-renewed mind would interfere. The truth is progressive; the more we advance in this, the more rapid will be the vessel's formation for the will of God -- that "good and acceptable and perfect" will of God. It arrives at what Christ loved.
Eu.R. Does it involve that the Spirit is free in an experimental way? The princes digged the well at the direction of the lawgiver -- as in subjection to the law.
J.T. Yes, it was at the direction of the lawgiver. We have in Hagar, for instance, the thought of responsibility accepted. She cast her child away, relinquishing responsibility, as much as to say, My case is impossible, I cannot go on. She cast the child
{144}
under one of the shrubs, but the angel says, "Arise, take the lad, and hold him in thy hand", @Genesis 21: 18. 'Hold him in your hand' is the acceptance of responsibility. Then the angel showed her the well. The well is available as I accept my responsibility. So when you come to Moses, he sat by a well; he had not given up his responsibility. In Egypt he went out to visit his brethren, that was responsibility accepted; he knew it. As a child "fair to God" he was to be for God. His mother had that idea. There were three women engaged in his salvation. But when he came to years, he relinquished his place in Pharaoh's house, and went out to see his brethren. They did not accept him; they did not discern what God had put upon him; he went and sat by a well; the fulfilling of his responsibility depended on that well. There must be the acceptance of responsibility, and moving on that we get the Spirit. Moses¬ mind must have changed for he was a great man in Egypt, brought up in Pharaoh's house. He told Jehovah he could not speak. There was a change in his outlook, but forty years were needed before he became the great vessel we read of in Scripture. Anyone could see what a change had come about, and that is the idea in each of us.
Eu.R. Is @Romans 12: 3 a little like that -- "not to have high thoughts"?
J.T. Quite so. He is controlling his mind, for the mind is very variable unless kept in control. The control makes it subject. So it says, "Through the grace which has been given to me, to every one that is among you, not to have high thoughts above what he should think; but to think so as to be wise, as God has dealt to each a measure of faith". That is how we come into the service of God: each learning his measure.
H.M.S. Can you tell us what is available for this  -- we want some substance for renewal?
{145}
J.T. Well, it is the Spirit. It is a question of the action of the Spirit on the mind. You cannot define the mind; it is a faculty the Spirit can act upon. It involves the person -- spirit, soul and body. The mind there would be associated with the spirit. Man being a tripartite being, spirit, soul and body; his spirit is himself, it includes the mind and soul; but it is the higher part of man, that in which he is in touch with God. The spirit returns to God who gave it; @Ecclesiastes 12: 7. The mind is subservient to it.
H.B. So God is mentioned four times in these three verses. Does what you were saying in the beginning come in here -- the compassions of God, acceptable to God, the perfect will of God, and, as God hath dealt to each a measure of faith? Would that be in contrast to the world?
J.T. Very good; verse 1 speaks of the compassions of God, and you can see what the gospel has done for man, so complete is the change. Naturally, left to himself, man shuts God out; he did not like to retain God in his thoughts, but how different this is! These compassions are presented in the teaching of the book; it is putting you almost in a bond although beseeching you, but morally you are under a bond by the compassions of God.
Ques. Would the Spirit of God represent the fine feelings of God? The Spirit of God moving over the face of the deep -- would the compassions of God be in line with that?
J.T. I suppose the Spirit of God is God Himself. In that way He is distinct, as the Father and the Son, but expressive of divine feelings and sympathies; hovering over the face of the deep and then striving with men.
H.M.S. We are to think so as to be wise, what are we to think about?
J.T. You are to do it; wise,"that is the believer; to" think so as to be "I myself". It is not
{146}
simply 'I', but myself in consciousness, intelligently. Now what are you going to do with the mind? To serve God's will. It is a question of the attitude in which you hold it, so you are thinking in order that you might be wise, and there is exercise in every difficulty. That is how to develop wisdom. God gives to each a measure of faith, and I want to understand that, so that I am not inflated by anything; I think so as to be wise.
Ques. Would a measure of faith be given in relation to verse 1?
J.T. Yes. You reach the body that way, the one body in Christ; wise thinking leads us to that. It gives us no status in the world, but outside the world. On the line of thinking wisely, we look at the brethren in that way: others have the Spirit as well as I.
W.G.L. Would this be seen at the end of Exodus?
J.T. Quite so. The idea of wisdom runs through Exodus, especially as to building.
S.C.T. Do we come into this in @Philippians 4: 8, "Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true ... think on these things"? Is this something for the mind?
J.T. That is good; it is quite a field for the mind. The mind is occupied with what is positively good; you become nourished in that way.
H.M.S. Can we not say that the will of God which is to occupy our minds is of great variety, and we are to understand there is plenty to think about?
J.T. Yes, indeed. Man shut God out of his world, but here you come into God's world. The newspapers show every day how much there is to think about in man's world, but this line of thinking brings us into God's world, which is infinite.
Ques. Would you say that the instructions given here are a regulation of the mind, so that we do not overstep the mark with regard to spiritual matters?
J.T. I think the one body in Christ would put us
{147}
in relation with one another on the line we are speaking about -- thinking of others.
C.H.B. Is the contemplation of Christ according to @Philippians 2 a governing principle? This mind being in Him.
J.T. Quite so; that rule of which we are speaking brings us on to that. We can understand Philippians is in advance of Romans, but the same thought runs through, and Christ is the expression of it all. "Let this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus;"
@Philippians 2: 5. That is the readiness to descend. It is a mind free from rivalry and division. He thought it not robbery to be equal with God, but emptied Himself, taking a bondman's form, and being found in fashion as a Man, He humbled Himself "becoming obedient even unto death, and that the death of the cross". It is the descending mind that Philippians treats of there. Every man, beginning with Adam, had an ascending mind; Satan put that into his mind, "Ye will be as God". The Lord Jesus is the opposite to that. It is our salvation, for naturally we rise in ambition, but the mind of Christ is descending. He ascends, too, and rightly, for He is divine; He ascends to His Father; but this is to bring out the kind of mind there is in Christ.
F.A.P. Does the beginning of @Colossians 3 suggest the course the renewed mind would take when it says, "Have your mind on the things that are above"?
J.T. Exactly; it shows you have authority over your mind and can set it where you please.
A.T.S. Would this bring in the recovery of man for God? We read of men's minds being blinded by the god of this world; @2 Corinthians 4: 4.
J.T. Yes, making room for God; in chapter 1 He is shut out, but here He is brought in.
F.A.P. "Going along with the lowly" (verse 16), is that definitely moving along to God?
{148}
J.T. Yes, like Jesus. He is found in figure as a Man (@Philippians 2), "taking his place in the likeness of men", that is not simply in man's race, but in what men are ordinarily, apart from sin. There was no attempt to better His circumstances; He came in a Man among men, holy, harmless, undefiled, but a Man amongst men, making no attempt to be superior on human lines.
J.T.Jr. Will you say a word on transformation? What is the idea of it?
J.T. It is a substantial thing -- a more substantial thought, corresponding to what we get elsewhere, "transformed ... from glory to glory", @2 Corinthians 3: 18. It is a real change.
J.P.H. We get help as we commit our minds to these things; it says, "that ye may prove what is the good and acceptable and perfect will of God". Is there any proving unless we commit ourselves on this line?
J.T. Well, you can see what a great man a christian is, what a victorious man he is! He is in control of himself. The demoniac would be the extreme opposite: he was a man out of control, he was under the control of the devil. All the efforts of man's world failed to keep that man right; his name was Legion. But he is delivered, and found sitting at the feet of Jesus, clothed, and in his right mind.
What a victorious thing that was! "Sitting ... at the feet of Jesus". What will not Jesus make out of such a man? He is one of the parts of the assembly. Romans builds up assembly material. @Luke 8 shows us the component parts of the assembly in the man in his right mind; the woman who told all the truth, and then the girl raised up by Christ. These are the component parts of the assembly: the man, the woman and the child. The man is in control of his mind, he is "sitting, clothed and sensible, at the feet of Jesus". "God has not given us a spirit of cowardice,
{149}
but of power, and of love, and of wise discretion"  -- that is, a sound mind. So it is complete victory; one moves about here in this world for God with the mind in control.
F.A.P. Would sitting at the feet of Jesus, as the demoniac was, be in contrast to Eve, who came under the influence of Satan by way of aspirations?
J.T. Quite so. Then Corinthians links the assembly and the thought of wisdom: "Christ Jesus, who has been made to us wisdom from God",
@1 Corinthians 1: 30. That is what He is towards us taken in by the mind; we develop on these lines by the Spirit.
Now the next point is renewed knowledge according to @Colossians 3: 10, "having put on the new (man), renewed into full knowledge according to the image of him that has created him". We are here evidently in advance on Romans, for it is the kind of knowledge that is renewed: "renewed into full knowledge according to the image of him that created him"; that is, he is to be in the image of God.
Ques. This would be the very opposite to @Genesis 3?
J.T. "God created Man in his image", we read in @Genesis 1: 27, "in the image of God created he him". He lost that through his mind and went so far as to exclude God from his thoughts, a terrible thing! But the new man is *fresh*, like a young man; it is not aged, and never will be. In the knowledge there is the representation of God; it is "him that created him" so the new man is a creation, as the old was. Our Creator would have us to represent Him permanently; hence the importance of controlling our minds in order to develop in this knowledge.
H.M.S. What a great height and dignity attaches to the Christian life -- the image of God.
J.T. How important in any of our localities is our representation of God in our knowledge. The Lord
{150}
speaks in @John 10 about knowing the sheep and the sheep knowing Him, as the Father knows Him and He knows the Father (verses 14, 15). That is remarkable. It is an elevated kind of knowledge into which we come.
Rem. You are brought into something, that is, full knowledge according to Christ; you are brought 'into' something that is already there.
J.T. Quite so: that kind of knowledge. It is the complete victory of God on the line of knowledge in man.
S.C.T. In @Jeremiah 9: 24, we have "Let him that glorieth glory in this, that he understandeth and knoweth me".
J.T. It works out that way; it is a question of the new man here, young, and fresh and delightful to God. It is said of the Lord Jesus in @Mark 10, that He looked on the young man and loved him. How difficult it was for that young man to leave all; he had much wealth and went away grieved. The Lord could not look on him again and love him; he had turned away from the best possible portion. But the new man is delightful to God; you want to be in that. There is only one new man.
C.H.B. Is power for service found in God's knowledge?
J.T. It is quite clear that we must know God to worship and serve Him. Paul said at Athens where they had an altar to the unknown God, "Whom therefore ye ignorantly worship ..."; therefore their worship was derogatory to God. The new man is renewed into full knowledge. The word new in 'renewed' is different from that used of the new man; it means different from any other knowledge; it is "renewed into full knowledge according to the image of him that has created him" -- that is, made entirely new, not like anything that has ever been before. It is to bring us into the greatness of the
{151}
position in the assembly, as renewed into the kind of knowledge that is in our Creator. The Lord puts it in @John 10: 15, "As the Father knows me and I know the Father". @John 17 tells us "that the love with which thou halt loved me may be in them and I in them". So all this is to bring out representation of God in the sense of knowledge; we are like Him, like our Creator.
Eu.R. "Where there is neither Greek nor Jew ..."
J.T. You can scarcely find the Greeks today, the Jews are the same as they used to be, but verse 11 shows such nationalities from the highest to the lowest in the scale, from the standpoint of knowledge; they do not appear in the new man; they appear in this world, but not in God's world. This is knowledge after the Creator.
J.T.Jr. Is it distinct from "Ye have an unction from the Holy One, and know all things"?
J.T. It goes with this; it is from "the Holy One". The point in renewal here is that it is made different; "Having put on the new, renewed into full knowledge according to the image of him that has created him"  -- the image of God, whether it be God or Christ. John would link both. So in his gospel in chapter 20, we have the idea of representation. Throughout the gospel we have confirmation in the position taken up by the believer; the Lord would hold Nathanael in the position in which he has come out to Him; and again in chapter 9, the man is held in the knowledge of the Son of God. We are held outside the world by the knowledge Christ gives to us. In chapter 20 He comes and stands in the midst, and all is well; there is no complaint: the disciples say nothing; Christ says everything, but they are to be held in that joyous state. The Lord confirms them, saying, "Peace" twice. Then He says, "As the Father sent me forth, I also send you". They are to be representative here, and as representative they have got His
{152}
Spirit; He breathes into them. Every representative of Christ must be like Him by His Spirit; our administration for the assembly lies there: "whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted to them; whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained". He is represented, as the Father was in Him, so we are representative of Him.
F.W.O. Is that why this section begins with lying, which brings in misrepresentation?
J.T. Quite so; no liar can represent God. Satan is a liar, he is against God; and all lying is a misrepresentation of God.
F.W.O. I suppose the kind of person who has put on the new man, and is renewed, is still capable of acting so as to misrepresent, unless he is under control so as not to do so?
J.T. That is an important matter. The new man is under God's eye down here; we have put off the old, and put on that which is new and fresh. There is only one new man, but everyone that has part in it has Christ in him; Christ is "everything, and in all". What a renewal! What a world where Christ is everything! He is all in all. We all love Him. These traits are seen in us; He is all to us objectively, and He is in us subjectively.
Rem. Is not the great point, therefore, to get our minds off things here, and on to that Person?
J.T. That is just what it is. All ministry has this in mind. Christ is presented and becomes more and more to you, and then He fills you. I suppose that was so with the woman of Samaria, Christ was in her -- He was filling her, so she says to the men, "Come, see a man" -- and they recognise her saying and come to Him themselves. Then the Lord abode there two days in answer to their request. She had said He "told me all things that ever I did: is not this the Christ?" But they say, "We have heard him ourselves, and we know that this is indeed the
{153}
Saviour of the world". They get a greater thought of Him; He is everything.
H.M.S. Is all this involved in the renewal of the inner man?
J.T. That is the next thing. In @2 Corinthians 4: 16 we read, "Wherefore we faint not; but if indeed our outward man is consumed, yet the inward is renewed day by day". It goes on to say, "While we look not at the things that are seen, but at the things that are not seen". The 'looking' here corresponds with the word in Colossians, "Have your mind on the things that are above"; here we are looking at the unseen eternal things.
H.B. Why is this put at the close of the chapter?
J.T. I think the apostle is coming on to dissolution, coming on to death if necessary. He has already said our bodies are mortal; that means we are liable to death at any time, according to the will of God. This section should be read by the elder ones, but by all, so as to see what we are building up and what provision we are making. Are we making provision for a proper exit either by death, or the Lord's coming? Unless we are, we shall not care to leave this scene; if we are not looking at unseen things, we shall not be ready for them. The renewal of the inner man would prepare us for that -- for the crossing of the Jordan. It is well to ask, "How wilt thou then do in the swelling of the Jordan?" @Jeremiah 12: 5. It is an important matter to lay up in store on the banks of the Jordan. There is the building up of the inner man. We all experience as we get on in years, that death is working in us more and more.
Eu.R. Colossians says, "Have your mind on the things that are above, not on the things that are on the earth". We look here on the things above, keeping constant control of our minds, "while we look not at the things ... seen".
J.T. The "inward man" being renewed day by
{154}
day, makes it a daily matter. Can I discern that freshening of my inner being, governed by what one is spiritually?
J.T-r. Is it by the work of God in us, or is it by way of responsibility?
J.T. There is the idea of responsibility going right through all this. It is put, "Wherefore we faint not; but if indeed our outward man is consumed, yet the inward is renewed day by day". But then there is a 'for'. "For our momentary and light affliction works for us in surpassing measure an eternal weight of glory; while we look not at the things that are seen, but at the things that are not seen". It is very much in line with the end of the previous chapter; our transformation is by looking at the glory of the Lord, but it is "by the Lord the Spirit": He has to do with it. The renewal is by God, and evidently because we are looking. It is the way we reckon things and look at things -- eternal things.
F.A.P. Would not Jacob be an example of this? There is the evidence of the outward perishing; he worshipped leaning upon his staff.
J.T. That is a very good illustration; leaning on his staff suggests experience gained. How are we developing? What have I got at the end of my days to lean upon? The Lord, of course. This building up of the constitution by renewal of the inner man, would make one conscious of power in the soul.
H.P.W. No doubt many of us are greatly challenged, as to whether we really understand the renewal day by day, governed by the outlook of the soul.
J.T. What would help is the daily offerings in @Numbers 28, the morning and evening lamb. The evening lamb would mean that I have lost nothing, possibly there is more than I had in the morning. Renewal must have gone on during the day, or I should be drooping in the evening and unable to rise
{155}
to the height of my calling. The evening lamb would keep me balanced day by day. These offerings come daily in our worship and soul experience. Then, too, there are the weekly and monthly offerings.
H.P.W. The apostle speaks of our "light affliction"; the enemy would use the sorrows of the saints to drag down their hearts; he is making an attack on the joy of the saints.
J.T. There is a great deal of death and illness and the like -- how are we going to meet it? If we are looking at seen things we are not meeting it at all; but looking at the unseen, there is the renewal day by day of the inner man; so that whatever may come, even dissolution, I am ready for it.
Eu.R. Would you say a word as to what is involved in the "inward man"?
J.T. I think it is what you are in faith, grasping the divine idea in Christ; we are to be like Him. It is the outlook we have as to the divine thought for us. So it says, "For we know that if our earthly tabernacle house be destroyed, we have a building from God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens". That is God's mind. It is not exactly material, for it is not a body coming down. We get the thought of resurrection, meaning that we come out of our graves, but you grasp what we are going to be in heaven. That is what is coming from heaven. Think of what I am going to be! This chapter, @2 Corinthians 4, shows I am mortal actually and accept it. "We who live are always delivered unto death on account of Jesus, that the life also of Jesus may be manifested in our mortal flesh" (verse 11).
That is the reflex really of what I am above. "We shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is",
@1 John 3: 2. That enters into my inner man; that is what I am in my inner thoughts. All else is disappearing. This "inward man" means I will hold all things by faith and the power of the Spirit. It is
{156}
only a moment and this shell will disappear, and death will be swallowed up in victory.
W.G.T. Would Gideon's three hundred men give the idea; the vessels are broken that the light may shine out?
J.T. Yes; the more the vessels are broken the more the light shines out.
S.H.G. Do we gather that the inner man referred to in @Ephesians 3: 16, is one and the same thing with this?
J.T. I think so. The word 'house' is an allusion to our bodies; but the inner man is the grasp you have of God's mind for you. Christ is the model Man.
{157}
THE LORD'S SERVANTS LEARNING TOGETHER
@Mark 3:13 - 19; @Mark 6: 30 - 32; @1 Samuel 19: 19 - 24
J.T. These scriptures speak of the Lord's servants learning together -- learning under His influence. Firstly it is the formal selection in the mountain. It is said of them He appointed twelve that they might be with Him and that He might send them to preach with power to heal diseases and to cast out demons. Then in chapter 6 we have them as servants returning. It is said the apostles are gathered to Jesus, and He would have them to depart into a desert place to rest a little. That is, that they might be with Him and it is that they might rest with Him in a desert place. Then finally the actual service of prophesying carried on typically under Christ, for it is said that there was a company of prophets prophesying and Samuel standing as president over them. That is what is in mind.
F.I. You mean that the servant is presented here as not taken on exactly in an individual way, but taken on as moving in relation to others under the Lord.
J.T. Yes, that is the thought, no doubt, in Mark. We only find them in this company in Mark. The Lord intends that there should be unity of the faith in serving in this way. They serve unitedly understanding the truth. There would be no diversity. Servants should take on the character of Christ. They should be with Him, and with Him they take on His spirit. There should be no independency amongst those who serve. If there is cleavage among them, there will soon be cleavage amongst the brethren as a whole; so that in a locality such as this, with the brethren in subdivisions, it is important to observe the whole and to come under the influence of Christ.
{158}
Subdivisions should not make for independency or cleavage.
The position is morally elevated -- that would be the thought in the mountain. He goes up into the mountain and calls whom He Himself would. They went to Him, it says, and He appointed twelve so that they might be with Him that He might send them to preach and to have power to heal diseases and to cast out demons.
F.I. What you have in mind is that although there may be three subdivisions the thought is that they should move as a whole.
J.T. That is the thought -- whether those who lead amongst them or the saints as a whole. Those who lead, in general, give character to the saints.
The Lord prayed to His Father that they might be one, as He and the Father are one. The great thought of oneness proceeds from God the Father. There is perfect unity in the divine Persons -- the Father, Son and Holy Spirit. Unless those who are leading are united, the saints will not be.
-.M. So that recognition of divine sovereignty would help us to move together as one?
J.T. You are honouring Christ if you are honouring His selection in moving with others He has called.
It all refers back to God. There is no divergence as referring to God and to Christ and the Spirit. The unity of the Godhead works out in us by the Spirit, so we are enjoined to keep the unity of the Spirit and also to keep the unity of the faith. The unity of the Spirit is to do with the affections. The unity of the faith has to do with what we hold as teaching.
E.H. Would the unity of the faith work out in all saying the same thing?
J.T. That is good. It is a remarkable statement in @Philippians 2 -- united spirit and mind. So known to each other that we discern each other's minds --
{159}
thinking the same thing -- not only saying but thinking.
A.H. Do you think that Mark presents this with a view to helping in the service?
J.T. I think he intends to show the ground upon which we are. All are called at the same time and have the same advantages. All had been there with Christ upon the mountain and all are sent out by Him, knowing each other and under the influence of Christ. We are like each other in the service, each having his own distinction, of course. The distinctions here are brought out -- Peter and Boanerges. There are distinctions, but all coming out from under the influence of Christ together.
A.B. Is there any reason why the Lord chose twelve?
J.T. It is a numeral that has a great place in Scripture. It is the most divisible of all numbers. It would allude to what we are saying, the prevalence of love as under the influence of Christ. We are to love one another, and as thus divisible we see how the Lord can link us for service according to His thought without any danger of rivalry. I think that is the thought in the twelve. So the Lord can use us together or singly without any danger of envy or rivalry.
-.G. Is that a reflection when Paul says, "Are ye not men?"?
J.T. Yes, it is what marks the world -- partisan associations. So we always want to read Scripture in its context. In that scripture it is what marks men commonly in the world, whereas later on Paul says, "Quit yourselves like men". There it is developed christianity.
E.H. That they might be with Him. That would bring us under His influence?
J.T. That is what is in mind -- companionship with Him. He would take care to influence them as
{160}
with Him in this exalted position on the mountain.
A.H.H. So that they all take on His ways. Is that the thought?
J.T. You can see how it would be, how they would observe the Lord. Every moment would bring out some new feature in Him, and He would show Himself. We have in the beginning of Acts how He showed Himself or presented Himself. It would mean that He intended to be known. So that on the mountain He would disclose Himself according to what He intended to produce in them. They would be impressionable and He would appear before them so as to impress them. Hence the importance of being observant when in spiritual surroundings, for He expresses Himself in His people now. A large company or a small company of spiritual persons engaged in this way, the Lord shows Himself to. He has means of expressing Himself to those who are spiritually together.
-.P. These apostles would see what was in the Lord's mind in having them with Him? He called them and they went to Him.
J.T. I think that. How the apostles, particularly James and John when speaking together with one another would say, 'We had a good time today'. The Lord would make a point of showing Himself in some particular way. He wished to convey some particular thought that He intended ultimately to be set out in testimony in them. They would say to each other, 'I never saw the Lord like this before'. This would be needed for them in their service. It was the making time for them.
H.L. Would the power of the call be seen in the united movement to Him?
J.T. Very good. They had Him before them. 
-.M. It would suggest that they would be detached in that way from all that was current and recognised?
{161}
J.T. Quite so. What was current at the bottom of the mountain did not hold them.
A.L. Is there the thought of gift as associated with Christ as the ascended Man?
J.T. Quite so. According to the Psalm He received gifts in Man. They were in Him first so as to be expressed and then given. The Lord would have them all in Himself. He received gifts in Man for men, so as to distribute them for men, but He would express every gift.
A.H.H. So that He would have us with Him first and then distribute.
J.T. That is right. The first thing is to get to know the Lord. I must get to know the Lord so as to use the gift. It would seem from Ephesians that whilst He appointed the apostles here according to this chapter, yet they were all, as it were, confirmed from heaven by Him as ascended. All power comes down from above but the important thing is the vessel in which the gift is to be. In Ephesians the gifts are in men. That is, the gift is the vessel. Elsewhere the gift is in him. So that the vessel must be brought under the care of Christ. Otherwise there would be great discrepancy between the power of the gift and the vessel and therefore the vessel is not a model.
The idea is that the vessel should be a model.
A.H. Is the Lord stressing that in chapter 9, when the disciples ask why they could not cast him out and He says, "This kind can come forth by nothing, but by prayer and fasting"?
J.T. That is the vessel -- prayer and fasting is what belongs to the vessel. On the mount here the Lord was not ministering, it was a question of personal touch, to see the kind of Man He was. We are linked together and therefore in all our meetings we move together and we are able to maintain practical unity in the Spirit and in the faith, and the saints are kept in unity.
{162}
A.G. Is there anything to be learned from the reference about Judas?
J.T. He is never to be allowed to escape. When there is an unruly person the Lord will never let him off. It is remarkable what hints there are as to Judas from the outset.
F.I. It appears here there is preaching with power. Does the power depend to a great extent on being together as a whole? We often do a lot of preaching without success or little result in evidence. Is that because we are not together?
J.T. It may be. Success in preaching depends upon the unity of the local brethren, not only on the preacher but the state of the brethren. Power should be there and if a good condition exists you will have support in preaching, power to heal diseases and to cast out demons. Diseases would be moral conditions amongst the brethren. Only with power can you meet this, not simply in what you say.
Ques. Peter could say, Look on us, in the beginning of Acts. Is that the thought?
J.T. Exactly; not so much the gift -- they were personally united. As contrasted with the Beautiful gate, here was something more beautiful.
A.H.H. Preaching is a question of gift?
J.T. Quite so; of course there is power in preaching but there is the additional power of healing diseases and casting out demons. These conditions might exist in the locality.
A.H. What you are implying is that if we do not get good results, we should all take it to heart.
J.T. Very good. Diseases are common in localities. Diseases would imply that they are catching  -- infectious things brethren catch on and suffer from.
Ques. What is the thought in some getting a surname?
J.T. I think it is the mind of the Lord to distinguish
{163}
them, because there are distinctions -- so that Peter is always first.
-.G. What is the thought in the sons of thunder?
J.T. It is remarkable that John should be called one. Some take it to be objectionable, but I do not think it would be mentioned in this way if it were.
I think it must be spiritual power. Elihu speaks of the thunder of God's power.
A.H. Do you think John's ministry in Revelation would have a bearing like that?
J.T. It might. Thunder is a very overwhelming thing.
A.H. Might it mean the very definite assertion of the mind of the Lord?
J.T. It might. In @Job 37 Elihu says, "my heart trembleth at this also", and he speaks of lightning and "God thundereth marvellously with his voice; great things doeth he, which we cannot comprehend".
So that evidently thunder has a place in testimony.
A.H. Would the word in Joel have any bearing on it? It says, "Jehovah will roar from Zion".
J.T. The Lord comes down in @Revelation 10 and roars as a lion roars.
We have had, I think, the general thought in the first scripture. Then the second scripture refers to the return of the servants. It says they are gathered together to Jesus -- a very beautiful touch -- and related to Him all things. They rightly put the doing before the teaching. It says in the Acts that "Jesus began both to do and to teach". Doing would be more general and the teaching would confirm what was done, because if there is no practice, the teaching cannot be effective.
H.L. Would the thought of the word 'apostles' here suggest that they had been qualified?
J.T. This is very clear. They are not called apostles in John at all. Paul says, "Am I not an apostle?" but they are not ministering here. They
{164}
are gathered together to Jesus and have the sense of need of coming to Him and telling Him what they are doing. It is a good thing after an address to go to the Lord and tell Him what you have done and said. You will be sure, if you are honest, to say what a poor effort and you would like to do better and He would make you do better next time. That is how progress is made.
Rem. It is a remarkable thing that, although they went out two by two, there is nothing to adjust between them as they come back together to Jesus.
J.T. They were separated in their service but they related all that they had done to the Lord, and they would all be there. He probably would have to correct them and they would all get the gain of it, but here it is to bring out how true they were to their commission.
F.I. Each gets the benefit of the adjustment of each as being together.
J.T. That is it. You can understand He would not send them all out on one day. There is careful deliberation. Mark says He is sitting at the right hand of God. It is a deliberate position. So that these were sent out two by two, but as they come back to Jesus, it would be very interesting to hear them tell what they had done and how they had done it. They would learn from one another for the Lord would not let anything pass.
A.H.H. Would they return in the gain of the companionship of Christ?
J.T. Yes, and then they would have the companionship of one another. That is important also, although we may go out one by one -- but we are told two are better than one.
A.H. Do you think that great importance should be attached to the desert place?
J.T. Quite so. There is nothing of the world there. The service of the Lord precludes all sightseeing
{165}
and that sort of thing. It is not a sideline. The work of the Lord is exclusive of all, never a sideline. It is to be carried out by itself. I have to earn my living -- that is another thing.
F.I. It is not to be part levite, part tourist.
J.T. You can see that here. It says they went away into a desert place by ship and many saw them going and recognised them. Part-tourist would almost disguise a levite. If you had tourist clothes on you would be hardly recognised as a minister of Christ.
L.M. Would this show that we are to have sympathy in one another's service?
J.T. I think that. It would be a learning time. There is nothing to divert you at all in the desert. There might be hardship in a desert, but apparently there was not here. It is a resting place. In telling the Lord you would get good, and if anything is not just right I would get the benefit of your adjustment.
L.M. Peter related in @Acts 12 how the Lord had been operative and he asked them to relate it to others also. Is there not a necessity for affectionate sympathy among the Lord's servants in view of all that which the Lord is doing?
J.T. In @Acts 4 it was more evident. Peter and John return after the sufferings. The early chapters of Acts are like Peter and John chapters but in chapter 4 they come to their own company and relate the things that have happened to them and then there is prayer, and the apostles have increased power after the prayer. The prayer shows how subject they were.
H.L. Is there any particular reason why Mark refers to this after the beheading and burial of John the baptist?
J.T. It suggests suffering. Something very solemn indeed had happened to John the forerunner of Christ. I suppose that would enter into the moment. If anything happens in this way -- anything of a
{166}
solemn nature happening to one of the Lord's servants, it should sober us, especially if we may have known him.
-.M. Is this being called apart and resting in view of maintaining the tone in the service?
J.T. I feel it is. We get jaded and fagged spiritually if we do not get some rest. We have to lie fallow in the presence of great things and absorb them. The environment is full of rich thoughts for us to absorb and become more fruitful. The Lord does not say 'go and rest'. He says "come". They would have a very interesting time.
-.R. Is there any link with @Matthew 11, "Take my yoke upon you"?
J.T. There is. "Learn from me" -- that is as a Model and He is teaching all that He is Himself: "I am meek and lowly in heart".
W.L. He says, "Give ye them to eat".
J.T. They are scarcely ready for that service.
They should be, but it is very touching that the Lord thinks of us in that way. Perhaps we forget too often and do too much and become stale in our ministry.
Finally the passage in 1 Samuel shows in type how the Lord is over us in the work -- as President, as Samuel is called. It is a unique passage in this sense and the great effectiveness of the service is seen.
How powerful the prophesying was! It was told Saul that David was at Naioth and he sent messengers to take David and they saw the company of the prophets and Samuel as president over them and the Spirit of God came upon the messengers of Saul and they also prophesied, so that the enemy's messengers have been absorbed, themselves taking part in the service -- there is remarkable power under the presidency of Samuel.
A.H. Is this like the power to heal diseases?
J.T. Well, it is. The enemy's messengers are taken on in the service and are actually in it. It is a
{167}
great triumph. Jehu said to the messengers of the king of Israel, "Turn thee behind me". The enemy's servants became part of Jehu's cavalcade, God taking over the enemy's workers. It is a great matter because you will bring down the enemy's power in that way.
A.H. This all depends upon the presidency of Christ?
J.T. That is what I was thinking. He intends to be in the way in which He has them on the mountain and then in the desert to rest awhile. This is all unifying. Now they are all working under His control and it is most successful. They want the enemy's messengers absorbed in this system of things and even the enemy himself is overpowered. We are under the influence of Christ.
F.I. I was wondering if we could not apply this to our meetings for prophetic ministry. You would be under the presidency of the Lord and there might be that amongst us which needs adjustment, and this would be overcome by the ministry.
J.T. Yes, take the thought of the first one mentioned in @1 Corinthians 14. If an unbeliever comes in he is convicted and judged and falls down and worships God. He is renouncing the enemy and recognising God amongst His people.
E.H. Things are secured in each of our localities if these things are worked out. We would desire this to be worked out in each locality so that the whole locality is affected.
J.T. So that cases which we have to deal with are not left. Of course there are incurables. We read of Homes for incurables -- very humbling. There is power to heal diseases; why cannot I get it in a spiritual sense?
H.L. Are you suggesting that this kind of presidency would entail the truth of a system that will never come down?
{168}
J.T. I think that is it. You can see the most murderous man, after all his servants coming, he comes himself -- not to get under the power of it but to take David, but he comes under the power of it.
This is the system we are brought into.
H.L. We used to be afraid of the word 'system', but we *have* come into a system; Christ is the Head of the system.
-.P. God has been working that He might undo the works of the devil.
J.T. That is it, so that it is very humbling if we cannot deal with cases.
-.M. Is that why it says in @1 Corinthians 13, "Love never fails", and in chapter 14, "Follow after love, and be emulous ... that ye may prophesy"?
A.H. It is very exercising what you say about incurables.
J.T. Very exercising for those classed as such.
A.H. Would Saul be one of them?
J.T. I think so. It is said of him, Is Saul also amongst the prophets? But it is a derision -- he is the same as ever. He is not in it in a spiritual way.
It is terrible not to be curable. It is because my will is working. Why have the physicians no balm?
It may be in them and it may be in me. In all probability in me.
Ques. The enemy is very persistent -- he sends three times.
J.T. God is more persistent. Christ is in heaven and the Holy Spirit down here -- there is infinite power.
S.K. Does Paul fit in here -- persecuting the assembly and then being overcome by the power of it?
J.T. A very good illustration of what we are saying. Saul was breathing out threatenings and slaughter but the Lord brought him down. He did not destroy him, He cured him.
{169}
A.L. Stephen says he saw Jesus standing at the right hand of God.
J.T. There He is ready for service. We have spoken of Him as sitting, which would be more permanency or careful consideration, but when Stephen sees Him He is standing, and at the end of the scripture He is ready to serve. He brings Saul down. Paul says later on to the Lord, 'When Thy martyr Stephen was stoned I was holding the clothes'. He calls Stephen a martyr in speaking to the Lord Jesus -- a very touching matter.
-.C. What are we to learn from the great well?
J.T. I suppose it suggests the Spirit. It is used in this way from the outset. Hagar is the first reference. It was the Spirit of God in freshness. It is mentioned several times -- Hagar, and Isaac himself is seen coming from the well when Rebecca is coming to him and Saul should have been reminded. If he had read the Scriptures he would know. I think it is remarkable about this well. With Hagar it was not that God had not provided for her. She had not seen the well but it was God's provision. Isaac is seen in relation to it later, showing it is the Spirit, so that we as saints in the assembly are supported by this refreshment. Saul is incapable of taking it in.
E.H. There is grace for recovery in the saints, but if a person is not recovered, would you say that God is not granting repentance for some reason?
J.T. It may be. It does not seem that Hagar is ever restored yet God is certainly looking after her and her son and the well is very strikingly connected with faith. Saul is a similar case.
-.G. In connection with sin unto death it is said that request should not be made for that.
J.T. Very good. John saying request is not to be made for him shows the attitude towards such a one, but James says, If any one is sick, let him call the elders of the assembly and they shall pray for him
{170}
and the prayer of faith shall heal the sick; and if he have committed sins they shall be forgiven. That is the other side. There is power in the assembly. James gives us the gracious side and the residence of power in the elders.
A. H. Does that show some movement on the part of the one who sins?
J.T. That is it. The thing is how to get right. If he has a disease, how is he to get cured, not that we do not need cures from the divine side, but James says let him send for the elders of the assembly.
A.L. Do you think these two elements are necessary in all our meetings? I thought that David and Samuel would supply power in our companies -- David in the way of the kingdom and Samuel, it says, judged Israel all the days of his life.
J.T. I think David would represent the kingdom of Christ and Samuel would be prophet here. So that Christ is Prophet, Priest and King.
-.G. What is the connection between the sick man asking for the elders of the assembly in his faith and the faith of those who bore the paralytic man to Jesus?
J.T. One is individual but the other is the saints having sympathy to pray for him. We carry to Christ now as praying for persons. Not only that some have sympathy but it is universal.
H.L. Is this typically the Lord's own house?
J.T. Just so. He dwelt in Capernaum so that it represents the house of service.
{171}
THE SPIRIT IN RELATION TO OUR RESPONSIBILITY
@Genesis 21:14 - 21; @Genesis 26:23 - 33; @Romans 8: 1 - 5
J.T. It is desired to show how the Spirit of God is seen in relation to the responsibility of christians. Hagar is thought to present those who are in responsibility, she is responsible for her son. She failed in her responsibility, as we are told: "She cast the child under one of the shrubs. And she went, and sat her down over against him a good way off, as it were a bow shot; for she said, Let me not see the death of the child. And she sat over against him, and lifted up her voice, and wept. And God heard the voice of the lad; and the angel of God called to Hagar out of heaven, and said unto her, What aileth thee, Hagar? fear not; for God hath heard the voice of the lad where he is", @Genesis 21:15 - 17. She was giving up, casting her son under a shrub to die, that is failing in responsibility. The word is, "Arise, lift up the lad, and hold him in thine hand; for I will make him a great nation. And God opened her eyes, and she saw a well of water; and she went and filled the bottle with water, and gave the lad drink", @Genesis 21: 18, 19.
Then in @Genesis 26 Isaac, the type of a believer in the position of testimony, is concerned about wells as it is essential to him in testimony, and we see how, although there was contention for the wells, he found one for which there was no contention. Then he comes to Beer-sheba and his servants came and told him they had found water; "And he called it Shebah therefore the name of the city is Beer-sheba unto this day" (@Genesis 26: 33), which would mean the place of God's faithfulness.
{172}
Then Romans shows how these types point us to the Spirit as the power for the righteous requirements of the law: "That the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit", @Romans 8: 4.
Hagar is an outcast, hardly representing a believer in the full position of testimony, but responsible and not cast off by God, but her continuance in salvation would depend on the Spirit, she is to accept responsibility, to take up the lad who is in her charge and hold him in her hand. Her responsibility is there and the well is there to support her; responsibility does not cease with a person under discipline, she is still responsible and she is directed to take up the child and hold him in her hand. God had thoughts about him, great thoughts, and He was ready to aid him, ready to help him and her, but there must be the acceptance of the responsibility.
A.H. What do you take the lad to represent? Is it a question of what is potential?
J.T. Well, just for the moment, whatever one's responsibility is, whatever the obligation resting upon one. Were Hagar to be challenged she would probably say much against Sarah and Abraham, too, but the point was to look after this child, which she was not doing, she cast him under a shrub and left him to die, she was not unfeeling, but still she was wanting in the acceptance of responsibility.
F.I. Does that correspond with the "righteous requirement of the law"? Is that our responsibility being fulfilled in the Spirit?
J.T. Yes, that is what I thought, the righteous requirement, not the letter of the law, but the spirit of it. Christians are exponents of it, that in which Israel failed, they must take up, because they have the power to do so in the Spirit, but this power is only realised as we accept the particular responsibility attaching to us.
{173}
E.S.H. "*I myself* with the mind serve God's law", @Romans 7: 25. Does that come into taking up your responsibility, whatever that may be?
J.T. Well, that is exactly what governs this passage in Romans, the believer has arrived at that point during exercise and the process of chapter 7; whatever God's law may be bearing upon him, he serves it -- a very great moral triumph.
Ques. Would the woman in @2 Kings 4 be one who was exercised to fulfil her responsibility?
J.T. Yes, she knew where to go, she went to the right man and he told her what to do and she accepted the responsibility, she was not putting it on others. The prophet did not give her anything, the light referred to was in her own soul. The believer must see what the Holy Spirit is, how He may use me, we are to get blessings not a few and the more scope we give the Spirit, the more power there will be.
A.H. So it says, "God opened her eyes ... and she went and filled the flask" (verse 19).
J.T. Yes, and gave the lad drink.
J.T.M. Is that why the thought of God comes in? In taking note of the position, is it to encourage us in taking up responsibility -- "God heard the voice of the lad: ... And God opened her eyes ... . And God was with the lad". Is that all encouragement God would give us to take up responsibility?
J.T. Very, very striking how heaven is brought in, too; she and her son were persecuting Isaac, Ishmael was mocking. It is generally the case when there has been disregard of Christ, not now in heaven, not now personally; we may speak well of Him there, but we may persecute Him in His people, the Spirit of Christ in His people may draw out our despisal and yet it is on account of that Person whom we are despising in that sense that heaven intervenes. Saul of Tarsus was persecuting Christ in His people, "Why persecutest thou me?" (@Acts 9: 4); it was not Christ
{174}
personally in heaven but Christ in His people, and that is what Ishmael was doing and yet his very life and salvation depended upon Isaac typically, for heaven is only active here in the light of Isaac having been born, Christ typically already on the scene and heaven is acting because of that. Both Hagar and Ishmael depended upon Isaac, in that sense our salvation depends upon the Christ that we are persecuting in His people. We may speak well of Christ as in heaven and yet be persecuting Him in His people and refusing to recognise Him in His people.
A.H. God sees to it that our eyes should be opened by the voice from heaven as to what is there.
J.T. That is what happens afterwards, the first thing is to take up the lad. "Arise, lift up the lad, and hold him in thine hand; for I will make him a great nation" (verse 18). God had good things in mind for him and He had heard the voice of the lad, He has His eye on the matter, but it is Hagar's responsibility.
N.K.M. It does not say that He heard the voice of Hagar.
J.T. The lad was the point, I suppose, he was Abraham's son and he would come in for the promise because he was Abraham's son, it is all in connection with Abraham. She was not without concern about the lad, but she left him to die; that is what happens today, do you not think, especially where people are under discipline, they go away and put the blame on others and never take it home to themselves?
N.K.M. Reference has been made to @2 Kings 4; the woman there was very concerned about her two sons, she was accepting responsibility for them, was she not?
J.T. She becomes great, moving in the direction given, she pays her debts and lives on the rest, that is to say, such a one could fulfil every righteous
{175}
obligation and the woman of Shunem continues on that, she is a great person and provides for the prophet, she is able to discern that the prophet is an holy man of God; not speaking against the saints, she values them.
Ques. Would the woman of Shunem be one who saw the features of Christ in others but had no features in herself? The servant of the prophet pointed out that she had no son. "And he said, about this season, ... thou shalt embrace a son", @2 Kings 4: 16.
J.T. Well, so far she had moved, you may say, in the light of Romans. She views the continuance of the widow, she becomes great spiritually through the selling of oil, that is making room for the Spirit, making use of the Spirit. She certainly has progressed and she makes room for the prophet in her house and regards him as an holy man of God, but as you say, she had no child of her own, not that she asked for one but it would seem as if that would be the normal result -- as if God would grant such a feature.
Ques. Is acceptance of responsibility incumbent on each one in a local company?
J.T. Well, each one certainly has it. Even if one is under discipline he is not relieved of his responsibility, in fact it is accentuated, and if there is that which is the object of his affection and he or she is suffering, well, it is a responsibility. Still the thing is to take on that before God and He will not fail us, even if we are under discipline and rightly under discipline. God will not fail us and it is well that Hagar was in the vicinity of Beer-sheba; it says, "she ... wandered in the wilderness" (verse 14), but still she was in the vicinity of divine faithfulness, that is what Beersheba means, whether she understood it or not, she was in that position. If one is under discipline, he comes under the faithfulness of God, the discipline may be the very expression of God's faithfulness and it will do him good. The point is you are in the
{176}
region of it in the wilderness of Beer-sheba, the thing is therefore to accept responsibility, not put it on others.
N.K.M. Is that why Paul refers to the faithfulness of God on two occasions in 1 Corinthians?
J.T. I think so, also in the second. God is faithful at all times, wherever we are, whatever our circumstances, even if we are under discipline, God is God, especially the God of Abraham.
Rem. "If we are unfaithful, *he* abides faithful", @2 Timothy 2: 13.
J.T. Quite so.
Ques. What is the connection between the faithfulness of God and the Spirit?
J.T. The Spirit is the means by which God carries it out, the Spirit is down here, actually, of course, God is here by the Spirit. So that I suppose it is the means whereby God carries out His faithfulness. If you are in the wilderness as Hagar was, what is more needed than water? Because the bottle had become spent. Abraham had made some provision but it was soon spent, now the well is provision. I think the thing is for all of us to make room for the Spirit, whatever the circumstances the Spirit is here and will not fail, "The Spirit itself maketh intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered", @Romans 8: 26. But what is in view in the well is refreshment.
A.H. Do you think that God might open eyes in a meeting like this and now it becomes a question whether I am prepared to go and fill the flask?
J.T. Yes, that is it. Turn to God and get support in your soul; Hagar is mocking or persecuting the people of God, you may be sure where there is anything like that, that the Spirit of God is not operating in me at all, He is grieved.
A.H-s. Do you think the exercises of @Romans 7 are alongside the wandering idea, the soul arrives at
{177}
the thought that "For to will is present with me; but how to perform that which is good I find not", @Romans 7: 18?
J.T. Yes, the man in @Romans 7 is accepting the responsibility, he has arrived at that point definitely. Hagar is not doing that, she has put Ishmael under a shrub, she is not going to die, she thought she could manage by herself.
A.H-s. She did not want to see him die.
J.T. No.
A.H.B. Why does God answer the lad? It does not say in regard of Hagar, God heard her.
J.T. I think it is because he was Abraham's son, the link is with Abraham. The promise made to Abraham stands in that relation, she is in that setting, where the promise attaches.
A.H.B. Did God show her the well to meet the condition she was in?
J.T. Exactly, to meet the condition righteously. God is thinking about the lad, she is going to rob God, she is going to let him die and he was connected with Abraham. No doubt if you were to talk to Hagar she would blame it on to Abraham, she did that before when she fled from Sarah.
A.H.B. She had not come to self-judgment.
J.T. That is the idea. @Romans 7 is to teach us how to come to that, "For I know that in me (that is, in my flesh), dwelleth no good thing" (verse 18). It is a real test -- "in my flesh".
A.H-s. So that God Himself would open her eyes to see the well and all that is available.
J.T. Quite so.
J.T.M. Is there any analogy between this and the woman in @John 4, one who had failed in her responsibility?
J.T. Just so, it is the same principle running through this matter of the well, it is a very important line of thought, God's provision for them. Typically
{178}
it is the teaching of Acts, the Holy Spirit came down -- this is their provision.
F.I. God came in because of what He had for Himself; Ishmael, being a mocker, comes under discipline, and as the discipline is effective God comes in. We may get out of the way and not come under the discipline of the Lord and not know what is available, and not have sufficient intelligence to know where we stand in relation to the things of the Spirit.
J.T. Just so. We will never come into the gain of the Spirit unless we judge ourselves, so the word is "For what the law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh: that the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit", @Romans 8: 3, 4. God has dealt with the flesh and it is for us to deal with it, we come into the gain of the Spirit as we do.
F.I. It seems to me to make it simple for us to understand that there is that which is required of us, the fulfilment of these things, and we can only fulfil them as under the hand of the Spirit and that would lead to the spirit of self-judgment in us, so that we may have the Spirit as available to us.
J.T. He can help us much better than the brethren, we may appeal to the brethren to help us, but the Holy Spirit is the real help; only there must be self-judgment, the Spirit is not going to support me in the flesh.
A.H-s. Why does it speak of the "law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus", @Romans 8: 2?
J.T. It is transferring us to a new position -- in Christ Jesus, not through Christ Jesus, but in; it is a new position that we are in, it is a principle working in us. Romans speaks of the "law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus", it is a subtle thought, it is the
{179}
Spirit, of course, but working on the principle of law, it must be so -- the Spirit is true to Himself.
A.H.B. Is that what governs us, the principle?
J.T. That is the idea, it sets us free from the law of sin and death, it is the principle working inside of us.
A.H. It seems that where there is a refusal to accept responsibility affections become lacking, she cast him under the bush. Do you think coming into the recognition of the Spirit that affections become produced?
J.T. They would be. @Romans 8 is to show the great result of the Spirit; it is very like Beer-sheba because it is the Holy Spirit of promise and I think that is why the idea of a well is so much connected with Beer-sheba. What would man ever be aside from the promise of the Spirit? Beer-sheba is the promise, it is the well of the oath, and so in the case of Isaac we have the thing carried through, he is concerned about the digging, about the wells, his father had them and he would unstop his father's and dig new ones himself, but particularly this one at Beer-sheba; it says, "Isaac's servants came, and told him concerning the well which they had digged, and said unto him, We have found water" (verse 32). An actual thing, not a potential thought, the water itself was there. Hagar is a person under discipline, but still an object of divine faithfulness, and the same provision made for her is made for Isaac; and there is only one provision in that sense and that is the Spirit, everyone has the same provision. Isaac respected the well afterwards, as Rebekah is coming on the scene, he is seen coming from this well in chapter 24. The same power that Hagar could have had Rebekah is to have. It is the only power for the assembly, indeed for the whole universe, it is the power for bringing about conditions answering to the death of Christ.
{180}
J.T.M. Does not that make it very solemn that it is said of these wells "for the Philistines had stopped them" (verse 18)? Is that what has happened historically in the church's history?
J.T. Just so. Isaac is Christ typically, not only in heaven, but in the assembly here, Christ in relation to the assembly as seen to be in the testimony, that is Rebekah is seen to be in the position of Sarah's tent; she has left there according to chapter 26. The well that Hagar had to do with is there, it is enough to maintain even Rebekah, it is Christ in the assembly in testimony, it is the same power as there was for Hagar. So every christian has the same power as the whole assembly, the whole universe is dependent upon it. Well, why should I not avail myself of it, how great a thing it is! Hagar was not thinking of a well, she is a person under discipline, with a will acting. God had made promises to Abraham in relation to that boy and this well is at her disposal for him.
Now we come to Isaac. He understands the thought; typically, of course, it is Christ and Christ is operating through the Spirit down here, so as Rebekah comes upon the scene Isaac is seen coming from the well, according to chapter 24. Isaac understands it, the position is very great and every servant of the Lord should understand it, that the Spirit is the alone power for the testimony, and if the Spirit is stopped there is no testimony, and so Isaac is very concerned about these wells, he grows greater and greater through it.
E.S.H. They are digging in chapter 26: 18, that is an advance on Hagar, is it not? "Isaac digged again the wells of water" (verse 18). Then his servants dug a well and water is found.
J.T. Digging refers to self-judgment -- self-judgment is the accompanying element. @Romans 7 is that you arrive at this, "That is, in my flesh, dwelleth
{181}
no good thing" (verse 18). Making room for the Spirit, that is the idea of the digging, dealing with oneself, the believer is himself the well, according to @John 4.
Ques. Is that the way that you arrive at the good of the position that is ever available to you?
J.T. Quite so, the Spirit is the alone power for that; that is what @Romans 8 teaches.
A.H-s. Could we count upon an appearing as we move towards the well?
J.T. "And he removed from thence, and digged another well" (verse 22). These others had been contended for but they did not strive for this one, the enemy has come up, we are to persevere in our digging, in our self-judgment. The enemy comes up but it is when we do not judge ourselves that the enemy gets success. He calls the name of the well Rehoboth, which means 'room', plenty of room. He says, "For now the Lord hath made room for us, and we shall be fruitful in the land" (verse 22). It is a great point; @Romans 7 shows that I have reached the point of control of my mind, "So then with the mind I myself ..." (verse 25). I do not let my mind control me any more, I am going to control it and that makes room for the Spirit, so in chapter 8 one has plenty of room for the Spirit's activity and that is what Isaac's position now depends upon. @Romans 8 makes room for the believer, he can now become out and out a testimony man.
So in verse 23, we come to another movement, he went to Beer-sheba, he is to rest now as having come into the region of divine promise, so that I am fortified now for ever, I can go on in the testimony. Why should any believer be outside of the testimony? God has made provision that I should be in it, not to judge other people but myself.
N.K.M. Is it a great point you have referred to when the enemy comes up and there is room, everything
{182}
is attributed to Jehovah: "For now the Lord hath made room for us" (verse 22)?
J.T. Quite so. The next thing at Beer-sheba, is that the enemy would come. On the line of self-judgment Isaac has judged himself, he has plenty of scope spiritually now, the only way the enemy can overcome him now is on the social line so that he should become worldly. The Philistine came with his friend and with his military man, his visit to Abraham was with the military man as much as to impress him with his military power, but this time it is his friend and he will overcome Isaac on the social line, so if Satan ceases to attack us on the line of self-judgment, he will next attack us with wily things, so that we are not to go on with the world or the things in it.
N.K.M. This is a more settled thing, is it not?
J.T. It is, indeed. Some neighbour comes in for a cup of tea and introduces the young people and your young people and so forth, and presently Satan gets influence, that is the section we have read. It says, "Let us make a covenant with thee ..." (verse 28). Then we see, "He made them a feast, and they did eat and drink ... and Isaac sent them away"
(verses 30, 31). That is the finish of that, he is not going to make conditions with them, the point is now God is with me, I have come to Beer-sheba, that is, I am under divine promise, and I am trusting in the faithfulness of God which never fails. "God is faithful"; He is faithful and He never fails, that is the position of this section, God is with you, God is with me. If I am in the company of the Philistine, God will not be with me; better be with God and God with me than with the captain of the army or the king himself, they are not equal to God.
A.H-s. Would what he does at Beer-sheba all make him sensitive on this line: "And called upon the name of the Lord, and pitched his tent there" (verse 25)?
{183}
J.T. The position is really very fine, impregnable really, he is under the wing of Jehovah's provision and now he can afford to be gracious to the Philistine. You do not want to make social links, that is the danger.
N.K.M. It says, "he made them a feast" (verse 30).
J.T. He made them a feast and sent them away, he has power.
E.T.E. Does he state the truth of the position in verse 27, they really hated him?
J.T. Just so, they really hated him. If this thing carries on, God says, 'I will not be with you, Isaac'; but he did not, he worships God. Now the well in verse 32 is, in a way, God's answer to all that, he found water, not a potential thing but the thing itself; the Holy Spirit is active -- the water.
A.H. So as we are governed by the Spirit we are not deceived by the world.
J.T. Well, exactly, the Colossian danger was the world.
A.H-s. Would the world come in principally on the line of patronage?
J.T. Well, that is the idea of the three men coming, why did not the king come himself? No, he must make a show, they support this, the world will always do that. If the next-door neighbour comes in to tell you about the car, what they paid for the carpets on the floor and this and that, all to make a show and you begin to say the same thing, well, you are on the same line and God does not like that.
A.H. Do we not have to be careful about that amongst the people of God?
J.T. Yes, comparing ourselves with ourselves, because you may develop a social condition in the meeting.
N.K.M. Overcoming that, it says, "he called it Shebah: therefore the name of the city is Beer sheba unto this day" (verse 33). It is an established position, is it not?
{184}
J.T. An established position now; in chapter 21: 33, it was just a place, it is only the place, there is no city, but now we come to the centre and, of course, for a believer that would be the assembly or the spirit of it.
H.A.H. Would these exercises often have to be worked out in a meeting, first the quarrelling spirit to be faced, then opposition until there is room?
J.T. I am sure there is often this sort of thing, the working of the flesh against the Spirit and finally you arrive at plenty of room. Room for the Spirit, that is what is meant and from that point you come up to Beer-sheba, which is a city, that is the assembly becomes a sphere of order and government. Is that what you thought?
H.A.H. Yes, there may be a new meeting and the brethren have to go through these exercises before there is room for the Spirit in freedom.
J.T. Quite so, I suppose they may have to go through it here and one would hope this meeting would help. It is spiritual room we need and Rehoboth is spiritual room -- wide spaces -- plenty of room.
A.H. Do you think the main conflict in this regard is to be in ourselves?
J.T. Yes, exactly, the Philistine element in ourselves contending with the spiritual.
E.S.H. Isaac was not a quarrelsome man, he just went on digging wells. Is that the way in our local meetings if there is the quarrelsome element, those who are on the line of the Spirit would just go on digging?
J.T. That means you go on judging yourself. Some of us were looking at 1 Corinthians and noting the number of times the word 'judgment' occurs in this epistle and so as to bring out that every person in the assembly should be judging, the apostle says, "If then ye have judgments of things pertaining to this life, set them to judge who are least esteemed in
{185}
the church", @1 Corinthians 6: 4. He may not be the least, the brother who is called the least may be more than is apparent, so that we are delivered from the world, from the law courts.
F.I. This last thought in Beer-sheba brings in a collective idea, does it not, the servants dug it and they said, "We have found water" (verse 32)?
J.T. Quite so. I suppose the idea is that Isaac is a man of affairs, he is typically Christ, but I think he is more typically a believer here. He is in the very height of his testimony here, he fails in the next chapter; he is seen here at Beer-sheba, the well of water to support him in the city. We have to face all these elements of chapter 26, the spirit of contention and the secret of success; and in these circumstances go on judging yourself, see to yourself, do not blame anybody but yourself, that is what digging means, making room for the Spirit and it is as sure as possible we shall arrive at plenty of water and the city. The city means we can deal with evil, it is a place of order and light and government.
A.H. It says in verse 18, "Isaac digged again the wells of water", as if he were the only one. If there is one in the locality exercised like this, let him take it on.
J.T. Yes, quite so. I suppose you can see that at Corinth, take a woman like Chloe, she must have been a person who judged herself; the house of Stephanas would be another case, too.
W.H.J.P. There is an association between Isaac and his servants, they say, We have found water.
J.T. Quite so, it would show that he represents the governing principle in this situation, it is Christ, of course, in heaven who governs. There is the element here who governs in your meeting, for instance, the element in persons, that is what Isaac represents, he is dealing with the matter of the Philistines, the servants are digging and they are
{186}
successful, so that we arrive at plenty of water and the city; the city means that we can deal with evil; Isaac has already dealt with it, because he sent the Philistines away.
Ques. Would Beer-sheba suggest that you arrive at a position where you have the whole scope of the land before you? It is a southern point.
J.T. That is it, you are under the protection of God's faithfulness, the Spirit is God's faithfulness, the Spirit is the promise.
A.H-s. When it says "the mind of the Spirit" (@Romans 8: 6), is that still in me?
J.T. "The mind of the Spirit life and peace", that is in you, of course.
N.K.M. What is the significance of the last two verses, coming in after what you have referred to?
J.T. You mean Esau -- "Esau was forty years old when he took to wife Judith the daughter of Beeri the Hittite, and Bashemath the daughter of Elon the Hittite: which were a grief of mind unto Isaac and to Rebekah" (verses 34, 35). That is an element that is apt to spring up in spite of these wonderful conditions under Isaac, he is Isaac's son. A brother in the meeting may spring up like that, that is one of the great troubles that I see among the brethren -- mixed marriages -- and also radios, trade unionism and, of course, general worldly links. These are the main things that we have to contend with. This is an out-and-out bare-faced mixed marriage and in the presence of such a word, too.
N.K.M. Hence the necessity of arriving at the water you have referred to and the city so that conditions may come to light.
J.T. That is the idea, and it is a hard struggle to contend with these evils.
J.T.M. Does the digging dignify us? The princes digged the wells in Numbers.
{187}
J.T. Quite so, that would bring in personal dignity among us.
A.H. Would all this lead on to sonship being known as seen in @Romans 8?
J.T. That is one of the great features of @Romans 8, the Spirit of adoption. You see what wealth there is here in Beer-sheba.
{188}
HOW TO DRAW NEAR TO GOD
@Hebrews 6: 13 - 20; @Hebrews 10: 14 - 22
J.T. These scriptures teach us how to draw near to God. That is why they have been suggested. Indeed the epistle in a general way has this particularly in mind, for it is addressed to believers who are on comparatively low ground spiritually, and some indeed are in retrogression -- indeed have retrograded, so that the need was stimulation to go forward, not to draw back. So we have stress laid on promises and covenants; unbelievers maybe, believers of small stature, all, of course, need these special features. God is pleased to come down to us and swear to us and promise us -- furnish us with promises and even with the covenants so that we might be assured, and thus go forward.
Another element that is stressed, as most of us know here, is the position of Christ as High Priest above. As is said in chapter 4: 14, "Having therefore a great high priest who has passed through the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast the confession. For we have not a high priest not able to sympathise with our infirmities, but tempted in all things in like manner, sin apart. Let us approach therefore with boldness to the throne of grace, that we may receive mercy, and find grace for seasonable help" (verses 14 - 16). It is thought that the two scriptures read will furnish us with a sufficient basis for profitable conversation as to drawing near to God.
F.W. Would you say that the promises and the covenants, and Christ as High Priest, are fundamental as to drawing near to God?
J.T. Well, that is what is apparent. We have Jewish terms here. What has been read deals with fundamentals, as Romans deals with fundamentals,
{189}
but in terms proper to gentile believers. This book applies Jewish terms because it is dealing with Jewish believers. We are entitled to use these terms as christians among gentiles, but it is well to be sure in using them that we know what they mean according to the light of Romans.
W.T. Have you in your mind that the promise made to Abraham which has to do with the earthly people, is supported by the oath and by counsel -- counsel especially?
J.T. Well, that is the way Scripture puts these facts. Were Abraham an Ephesian christian, so to speak, as one would hope some of us here are, he would hardly need an oath. That is, if we really know God, we do not need an oath, nor even a covenant, but God took account of Abraham's condition, and confirmed the promise by an oath. So that, as it is said, we might have a strong consolation or encouragement, and He has engaged Himself to certain things, by promise and by oath. It is said that it is impossible for Him to lie in any way, without the promise or the oath, but He condescends to promise things to us and to swear to us that the promise will be fulfilled, so as to assure us, taking account of our feebleness of faith and confidence.
J.M.D. Is it your thought that if we know God in His unchangeableness we will go forward in those thoughts of what is seen inwardly -- the greatness of Christ in glory, and Christ inside the veil?
J.T. Well, that is what is in mind -- the hope enters inside the veil. "Entering into that within the veil", it says, that is the hope itself (chapter 6: 19). We are to enter into it, too, inside the veil, but the hope enters in. That is an additional thing. This is a state of soul. It is what the hope is to you "who have fled for refuge to lay hold on the hope set before us, which we have as anchor of the soul, both secure and firm, and entering into that within the veil, where
{190}
Jesus is entered as forerunner for us" (verses 18, 19). That is, we have a footing inside the veil. Our hope enters in there. Jesus is there personally. The hope is not a person. It is furnished there in an objective way, and as laid hold of, it enters in and strengthens us in that way in entering in, but there is a Person there, even Jesus, who has gone in there not only on His own account, but as Forerunner and as Priest of the highest order. So that there is every reason why we should go forward inside the veil.
Rem. He is revealed in Christ first.
J.T. Well, He is, but there are various gradations in that knowledge. If Paul were writing to Peter, he would not bring these things forward, for he and Peter themselves knew how to enter. It is because he is writing to such christians, that is Jewish believers, who were in great danger of going back to Judaism, that he has recourse to these methods, bringing forward Old Testament scriptures to encourage them not to go back, but to go forward.
Ques. Is the service of God in view and all this brought in by the writer to set them free in view of that service, so that it is God they know and serve and praise?
J.T. Well, just so. We are told in chapter 13, that we are to serve. "We have an altar ... therefore let us go forth to him without the camp, bearing his reproach ... . By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise continually to God, that is, the fruit of the lips confessing his name", chapter 13: 10 - 15.
That is the practical injunction to us, to carry on the sacrifice of praise, confessing His name, but these instructions are essential to have so that we are at liberty, our footing is inside. The intervening scriptures, that is chapters 7, 8 and 9 and part of 10, are to establish us on this footing, inside the veil. We have access, boldness of access, to enter the holiest.
That is a plain statement, which is based on the teaching
{191}
of these scriptures. The teaching is to be laid hold of in our souls. Facts presented doctrinally are to be laid hold of and when the time for formally entering comes, we are ready for it.
J.H.T. Would the Lord's service, as seen in Luke, help us? In the first chapter, all the people are praying without (verse 10), and then in the last chapter, they are in the temple praising and blessing God (verse 53).
Is the transition seen there in Luke? I wondered if Luke had the moral side in view.
J.T. I am sure that is good. The passage in the first chapter of Luke shows that the service was being carried on according to the priestly order; the priest himself was unbelieving, as you have noticed. I am sure there is much of that occurring today among the people of God. Certain services are proceeding, and even the right order, and hence Gabriel appears on the right of the altar of incense, as much as to say that although the service is going on formally, it is not reaching up to God. It needs divine help. So Gabriel, the angel, has to do with the priest afterwards, and tells him that things that he prayed for are about to happen, and the priest does not believe it. So I suppose the teaching here in our chapters will be what would help us on these lines. The priest we have seen, like Zacharias, or perhaps like some of us at times in our participation nominally in the service of God -- there is often such unbelief in our hearts, but Hebrews shows that the real Priest is above -- the High Priest, even Jesus -- Jesus the tried One. Luke fully sets it out, and consequently the disciples are serving in the temple, praising and blessing God. I am thankful you brought those two scriptures up. As a matter of fact in Luke, even the disciples themselves after all the tuition they had with the Lord and the priestly service on His part, when He came into their midst, after rising from the dead, they were not ready for Him. They were not ready to serve,
{192}
but as you say, He had the full thought in mind, and it was reached. He made them ready. He adjusted them according to chapter 24, so that as He comes up He leads them out as far as to Bethany, and then they know what to do. I believe the gospel of Luke helps greatly in the understanding of Hebrews.
Ques. What is the meaning of "drawing near" in Hebrews?
J.T. It is a great general thought taken from the types. In the types in Exodus -- first, Moses drew near; he brought the people out from the camp to meet God; he had gone up the mount himself, and then he brought the people out of the camp to meet with God. Well, that was drawing near. It is really the formula for drawing near to God, because that is the idea, nearness to God. The psalmist says, "a people near unto him". Well, Moses led the people out of the camp to meet with God, but God is very restrictive and urges Moses to see to it that the people do not get beyond the barriers, so that only Moses could draw near, and yet they themselves were nearer than other people. There were no people on the earth as near to God, though in the very restricted way as they were, but God would accentuate the idea of drawing near by saying to Moses, 'Now you are to go alone'. Even if a beast goes, it must be slain. Then presently God says to Moses, 'well, Aaron can come, too, with you', and then thirdly, after considerable instruction (chapters 20, 21, 22 and 23) we are told that Jehovah says to Moses, "Go up to Jehovah, thou and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel", chapter 24: 1. So that the number drawing near is being extended, and that is the position now. God would extend it to all His people; and they did, but before they actually ascended together Moses took precautions that the people should be committed thoroughly to the commandments of God, for no one should draw near to God in
{193}
disobedience. That is a most serious thing to be drawing near professedly, and to be unbelieving, and to be disobedient. Moses with true mediatorial instinct, reads the divine terms in the book to the people, and the people say, "all the words which the Lord hath said will we do". Moses accepts that and builds twelve pillars and an altar, and offers sacrifices and sprinkles the blood. The people, the altar and the book were all sprinkled with blood, which is the point in Hebrews, that there is the full use of the blood in drawing near to God. We can only draw near through the death of Christ. So they went up. That is the principle, that the thought of drawing near is persistent, and is increasingly accentuated. So that instead of Moses alone, we have Moses and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, four, and seventy others, which would be seventy-four, and Joshua besides -- he is to come with Moses. They all went up, and they saw the God of Israel and what was under His feet, and they ate and drank before God. That, I think, is the idea in the types and ought to be very attractive to us, that God has made a way, provided the blood, the blood of Jesus, even sworn to us, covenanted with us, not with us as christians, but with the Hebrew christians. They are viewed in that light, but in principle that is what it is. It is God engaging Himself to us in all these matters, and all to the end that we should be free to draw near to Him, not to remain at a distance, but to draw near to God.
E.M. Is that an individual thought so far as Hebrews is concerned?
J.T. Well, yes, but it is "Let us", you know.
E.M. I wondered if you meant that as a basis of later privilege -- taking up the principle of privilege -- first of all, we must know what it is to draw near consciously as individuals.
J.T. But I would like to hear what you understand -- what you mean -- by privilege.
{194}
E.M. Rising as sons before the Father, that is privilege; the consciousness of being in sonship before the Father -- God revealed as Father, and known consciously in our souls, but that, of course, is as we take a collective thought, "many sons". But I thought perhaps this might be taken as an individual exercise in our pathway.
J.T. Well, I think what you say as to that side is right, but as to the uses of the word 'privilege', and the word 'collective', you would include the assembling of ourselves together. In fact, you have not got that until we have all this instruction in drawing near to God. "Not forsaking the assembling of ourselves together", which they were doing, and many are doing now. You would have in mind when we come together in assembly, that that is privilege. That is glory, too, so that the individual experience must precede that, too. The coming together in assembly to break bread is the beginning of collective privilege. It is progressive from the time we sit down until we leave, or until the Lord leaves, which is a better way to put it. It is progressive, higher and higher yet. That is the principle. So that we go out straight ahead of us. And much intervenes -- the entrance to the gate, for instance, to Ezekiel's temple; the entrance to the gate would be something like seventy-five feet. Well, every movement of that distance would involve spiritual environment, and then inside the inner court, one hundred feet further, and then another entrance to these steps, and then another entrance of seventy-five feet. Well, it is steady progress, lengthy, too, but most happy because it is always spiritual environment. It is wonderful to go through with those extended entrances, and steps, too, seven steps and eight steps. What I understand is, we begin with glory; it is from glory to glory, which is the principle. Even leaving our houses to assemble is glorious. And the anointing
{195}
we are all anointed when we are christians, and that anointing is public, for public appearance and dignity, so that even the walk to the meeting-room is glorious. The sitting down is glorious, and all that follows. We come together to do something, and of course, intelligence requires that we should do it, but still it is done in the power of the anointing and the coming in of the Lord gives additional glory, and as we proceed and unfold the riches that we have got in our souls by the power of the Spirit, it is increasing glory. So that we reach the Father. Of course, Hebrews does not lead us as far as that. We do not come to assembling until all this instruction up to the end of the passage we read (chapter 10), but for the other scriptures, what you alluded to as special privilege would be direct worship of God, as such. But what precedes that is most glorious and most blessed -- our relations with Christ, as the assembly, and His relation with us and the interchange and reciprocated feelings -- all that is not only glorious, but most enjoyable.
E.M. You include that in "Let us draw near".
J.T. Well, exactly. The scriptures we have read are intended to prepare us for all that. Why should we remain at a distance from God?
J.H.T. You mean there would be a distinctive glory about Peter and John as they went up to the temple at the hour of prayer, and then in @Acts 13, there would be a distinctive glory about those, too, who were ministering to the Lord and fasting in the assembly at Antioch. Is that "from glory to glory"?
J.T. Quite so. The whole of the book of the Acts is upward still. I suppose chapter 20 is the acme of the teaching. Then we get Paul's journey to Jerusalem, but chapter 20, I would say, is the acme of the teaching.
Ques. Do you think our deep need is on the line of consideration? In @Hebrews 3 it says, "Wherefore,
{196}
holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling, consider the Apostle and High Priest" (verse 1), and I wondered if that took in the two sides just suggested.
J.T. Quite so. These scriptures which we have read have to do with the state of our souls. Am I really a believer or am I following what others are doing? That is the point here in chapter 6 -- it says, "We are persuaded better things of you", but they were on very low ground. They might be able to tell us something about the Priest and the Apostle, but where were they in their souls? Think of what is to be believed, and, as coming to the assembly, am I really a believer as to all the wonderful things that enter into it; they are to be in my heart, these things are not in the air in a room, but it is what you bring. They are in our hearts. So that the first thing you have is encouragement. The things that are really presented to us are the truth, so that chapters 3 and 4 stress the idea of faith.
J.H.T. Do we not get an exposure of that with Saul, the king? In @1 Samuel 14, "Let us go down after the Philistines by night ... and let us not leave a man of them". And the people said, "Do whatsoever is good in thy sight", but the priest said, "Let us come near hither to God". Was not Saul exposed as being an unbeliever and the priest rectifying the position?
J.T. Quite so. Saul was really standing in the way of everybody there. I would take advantage of those scriptures to enlarge on the truth. Saul is really the kind of man that is in the way in all these things, he is leading man in the profession, and yet he is standing in everybody's way, and therefore, "let us go down", he says; he is going to get all the credit for the victory; and it was the first altar he built and he calls for the ark and enquires of that, and all that, but there is no change in Saul. He is going to slay Jonathan, he is going to slay the very
{197}
man that acquired the victory, so that I am thankful you bring these things up, for they enlarge the truth for us. Jonathan was really going on to the very summit of the truth, because he partook of the fruit of the land, flowing with milk and honey. Honey was flowing and that is what you have in Hebrews. They are going back from the heavenly side. Honey was flowing and Saul would not have it, meaning that he was not appropriating the fruit of the land.
Rem. Had more of Israel taken it, many more Philistines would have been slain.
J.P.S. Conjointly with this movement Godward is there a deepening apprehension and appreciation in the soul of the greatness of Christ? I was thinking of the reference to Him as priest known in relation to our infirmities in chapter 4: 15, as contrasted with the presentation of Christ as "A great priest over the house of God" in chapter 10: 21.
J.T. Showing that it is a heavenly thing. This book is the book of the open heavens, and it is opened up to us, but where is the state? Am I a believer? Chapters 3 and 4 are to show that Israel were not believers. Their words were not mixed with faith, and therefore they did not get into the land. Jonathan was in, and really in. He was partaking of the fruit of the land and everybody partaking of it would be in glorious victory. Saul was not that way, and that is a most important word. Go in for the heavenly truth  -- partakers of the heavenly calling -- a power by which we can choose the good and refuse the evil, which comes out in this book.
J.S. As to Jonathan with this movement Godward, is there the thought of an increased apprehension of Christ? I was thinking of the reference to Him as priest, as a great priest over the house of God, as contrasted with the fourth chapter in relation to the Lord Himself.
{198}
J.T. Yes. There are lines of truth growing in the book. What is to be particularly stressed in the first scripture read is where we have encouragement in our souls. That is the promise and the oath -- God coming down to where we are, and that the hope we have in our hearts goes inside the veil and Jesus is there waiting for us. He is there as priest, but as priest after the order of Melchisedec. I believe that most of us would have to confess if we were to tell the whole truth, that there is a great want of faith as we sit down in assembly, as we have to do with the service of God.
Ques. Would it be right to say that the promise and the covenant secure the person for going in?
J.T. Quite so. They establish your heart that you are a real believer, because our hymns are prophetic, of God and of Christ, and you are affected by that. You are singing them effectively, so that you are really speaking of the Lord in singing them.
Rem. And then it says, "Let us approach". The persons are really secured consciously to enter the holiest.
J.T. Just so. The forgiveness with the new covenant is brought forward in chapters 8 and 10, really to augment the teaching. One lesson to be learned in Hebrews is the great use made of the Old Testament to force the truth on unbelievers. The Old Testament is calculated, is designed of God, to affect our consciences and great use is made of it. Here we get Abraham, and right down till we come to chapter 8 we get the new covenant. It is brought in to show that Christ is our High Priest, and has a more excellent ministry. He is the Mediator of a better covenant. It is not so much to enlarge as to bring out what Christ is as High Priest, what a ministry He has as Mediator of it, so as to establish our hearts in the knowledge of Him and the ministry that He has.
H.B. That would exercise us as to being intelligent --
{199}
intelligent in one's belief. I was wondering if it would be right to say, on the lines you are speaking, we are not just thinking of the Lord in His headship, rather are we thinking of Him in connection with the promises and in connection with the covenant and in connection with priesthood, not exactly in connection with His headship.
J.T. Hebrews hardly gives His headship, because the saints are so low down. For the working out of headship, we not only need the Lord Jesus (He is always the Head), but we need the state in the saints and hence if we are in that low state, shall we reach headship in assembly service? It is questionable.
W.T. Why does the city of refuge come in here?
J.T. Well, they fled from danger. They have not come very far to where they fled. It shows they were in real earnest so far.
Ques. Why is Christ mentioned as forerunner, before He is mentioned as high priest?
J.T. Well, "as forerunner", would mean that He has got us in mind, that we are just going after Him. So that in Exodus you get Aaron, but he is not officially installed as high priest, until we get the tabernacle. It is in connection with the tabernacle that you get the high priest clothed. It means we have to go further; it is a question of progress in souls.
W.T. They are going in to where One ever lives.
J.T. Just so, so that after we come now to the end of chapter 6, we have a wonderful line of truth opened up again from Genesis. The incident in the Old Testament is used in Hebrews to show that we must not make too much of one thing. That the new covenant, for instance, is referred to twice in this book, it might, among other things, be to induce us to draw near to God. There are other things, say in chapter 7, but this chapter does not allude to a new covenant, it is a question of Melchisedec, and the priesthood of Christ is on that line -- "such a high priest became
{200}
us", meaning that we progress in our souls and we begin to see that we are of Christ's order, and we need such a Priest as that. Well, one who understands that, if he gives out a hymn, there will be a richness with it.
Ques. Is this to lead us up (chapter 8: 1, with the sum of all that we have been speaking of, with Christ as the Object) -- to allure us after God?
J.T. It expresses what it results in, in the writer's mind, as the substance of things of which we are speaking. Is the present subject the One who occupies heaven? It heads up in this. That is the translator's note. So that it is the chief point. It is not everything, of course. In a summary you cannot get everything, but that is what is in mind. "We have such a one high priest who has sat down on the right hand of the throne of the greatness in the heavens; minister of the holy places and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord has pitched, and not man". But he is bringing that forward that He could set Himself down there. He is a divine Person. Nobody but God could do that. He sets Himself there, but He is there minister of the sanctuary. Now we get on further to a still higher elevation, that we have a whole system of things in the service of God set up, and we have this great Person there as the Priest, as the High Priest, and "minister of the holy places and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord has pitched, and not man". Now we are outside of man's position altogether. We are now in the presence of the great system that God has established in Christ in heaven, He has done it Himself, but He is still our Priest.
W.T. Is the idea not so much what has been spoken, but what he is speaking, having special reference to the High Priest?
J.T. What "we are speaking", the present tense. The whole company is one, listening.
{201}
Ques. Do I gather that what you are seeking to exercise us about is the importance of being balanced in relation to all things?
J.T. I am thinking of the teaching that enters into this section, and how the Old Testament yields under the guidance of the Spirit of God, how it yields matter for our instruction, and particularly to establish us that we are real believers in what is presented, that we are brought into a new system of things, that Christ is High Priest in it, and not only that, but He is minister of the holy places, "the true tabernacle, which the Lord has pitched, and not man". We are brought into a new system of things, and it is spiritual. So that we are prepared for @John 4, to worship in spirit and truth. We are prepared for it; it is the question of the state of our souls to reach it.
Ques. Do we see what was set forth in the Lord drawing near to two going on their way to Emmaus -- how He would draw near to them, and touch their affections, so they might enter into the blessedness of what He had for them?
J.T. That is right. We can understand why He would have said something about the service of God. He would probably allude to Moses and to Aaron as types. So that the crowning service that He renders to them, as you know, is to break the bread, and then He vanished out of their sight. They see that it is He vanishing out of their sight, and they went back to Jerusalem. That is the idea here.
J.H.T. So that is there a significance in the question in chapter 9: 14? The whole divine system has been given, but is he rather stressing now that there are to be living persons to worship the living God. Is that why in verse 5 he does not speak in detail?
J.T. Quite so. That is good.
J.H.T. I was thinking of what you said as to the whole divine system. It is not now that you are occupied with one item in the divine system, but
{202}
as a living person you are going in to worship the living God.
J.T. Quite so, and these Old Testament features are brought forward conclusively, in the new covenant, to augment what the apostle has in mind, he is really setting out christianity. He is setting it out insofar as the persons he is addressing could receive it. He says plainly that he could not go the whole length with them, because they needed the first principles even. Hence this book is very limited, but at the same time it sets out on a right basis this fundamental establishment in view of the service of God.
J.H.T. In regard of the Hebrews it says they were unskilled in the word of righteousness; would that be an allusion on the part of the writer that they should read Romans?
J.T. I am sure, for that is the word of righteousness.
Ques. Would Simeon set forth the features in view of the service of God? He would go about Jerusalem, and his walk would show that he was in touch with God, and it is said of him that he came into the temple and he gets the consolation of Israel and all his hopes fulfilled.
J.T. In @Luke 2 Simeon is alluded to -- how he came into the temple. He leads the way in that in the whole book. He came by the Spirit into the temple. That is how to come in; he came in by the Spirit and has consolation there; he took the Child in his arms. That is the idea. Jesus here in this book -- take Him in your arms, inside, as it were.
What light shines then! There is one thing to be noted in chapter 10. The writer speaks much about the sacrifices, and Christ coming to do the will of God, setting aside and terminating all the types in Himself, the antitype, "by which will we have been sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all". Then, "For by one offering he
{203}
has perfected in perpetuity the sanctified. And the Holy Spirit also bears us witness of it". That is a point to be noticed in view of our drawing near to God -- the service rendered by the Holy Spirit in bringing in the Old Testament -- bringing in, for instance, @Jeremiah 31 -- the new covenant, and stressing the thought of forgiveness. The Holy Spirit stresses the thought of forgiveness. "Their sins and their lawlessnesses I will never remember any more".
And therefore it says, "Where there is remission of these, there is no longer a sacrifice for sin". Now there is a point of importance, that the new covenant is brought in for one reason -- to stress the idea of forgiveness. That is what it is brought in for -- to stress what the whole teaching of the previous part of the chapter is. There is no longer any sacrifice for sin if sins are forgiven. They are not to be remembered any more. There is no need for any further sacrifice. And then the next verse is, "Having therefore, brethren, boldness for entering into the holy of holies by the blood of Jesus, the new and living way, which he has dedicated for us through the veil, that is, his flesh, and having a great priest over the house of God, let us approach with a true heart, in full assurance of faith, sprinkled as to our hearts from a wicked conscience, and washed as to our body with pure water" (verses 19 - 22). That is the great sum of what he has aimed at as regards us, that we should draw near to God, all these things provided.
Ques. Would all this secure a priestly state with us, bringing in Abraham to secure the believing side?
J.T. Exactly. Let us approach with a true heart and full assurance of faith; it is one of the greatest facts -- full assurance of faith. That is, all that has been opened up to us in the sense of privilege is true, it is to be accepted, it is fact.
W.T. Would the reference in chapter 8 to the new covenant be in relation to the more excellent
{204}
ministry of Christ, and then the new covenant in chapter 10, our means of approach?
J.T. Yes, to stress overcoming. The Holy Spirit brings forward Jeremiah to help us as to forgiveness. It confirms all that is said in the chapter previously, for if sins are dealt with in that way there is no need of any further sacrifice. The matter is all settled.
W.T. In the former it refers to the mind, but in the latter it refers to the heart first. Why is that?
J.T. It raises a matter that is most interesting, as to the modification of a word in Scripture. Why are these variations in the wording of the same things, especially the Lord's supper? Why does the Lord, in finally giving the Supper to Paul to give to believers among the gentiles, vary from what Matthew, Mark and Luke give us? It is a most interesting enquiry, and obviously it is that there is a certain setting in which the Lord would help us to be, and the Lord is making it exactly in regard of that setting. Well, do not forget that @1 Corinthians 11 is the last word as to the Lord's supper. So likewise here there is some reason for variation from chapter 8. There is hardly time for it, but brethren would do well to look into it.
{205}
DIVINE RIGHTS TO PURCHASE
@Matthew 13: 44; @1 Chronicles 21: 18, 19, 25; @Acts 20: 28; @Genesis 23: 17 - 20
What is in mind in these scriptures is *divine rights to purchase*. There are also creative rights, divine rights, and these rights God covenanted with men, beasts and even the earth, furnishing a universal sign of this covenant -- a sign which is still visible. God speaks of His bow -- "my bow", He says. When He sets it in the cloud, as He often does, it is for men to see and to rest in assurance of the covenant. It is wholly from God's side. No conditions are asked from man at all. God engaged Himself from His own side to these terms, so that every farmer and indeed every man, woman and child from that day has profited and is profiting from this covenant. The farmer ploughs and sows, and raises cattle and even a family. He is entitled to rest in the terms of that covenant. So that, we are told, while the earth remains, seed-time and harvest, cold and heat, summer and winter, day and night, shall not cease.
Men come and go; conquerors come and go; wickedness mounts up. Yet that covenant stands. Presently the Lord Jesus, in whom every promise is yea and amen to the glory of God, will come out from heaven. Indeed He has done so already in testimony, and places His right foot on the sea and His left upon the earth, and cries with a loud voice as the lion roars. The angel is said to be clothed with a cloud, and the rainbow upon his head, meaning that that covenant stands, the rainbow being the token of it. It is on His head -- as if to be maintained in infinite intelligence.
I am referring now, however, to divine rights to purchase, and so I take up this verse in Matthew as
{206}
basic of what I have to say. The Lord in this chapter, by parables, alludes to Himself as finding a treasure hidden in a field. He was in the world, we are told in John's gospel, and the world was made by Him, and the world knew Him not. It was about to turn Him out ignominiously, as if He had no rights at all -- not that they did not know He had rights, but it was as if He did not have any. They said amongst themselves, "This is the heir; come, let us kill him, that the inheritance may become ours", @Luke 20: 14. He was in the world and this was the outcome, but He is not alluding to that fact here. The Lord is not here referring to His death directly. It is the feature of selling what He had. No doubt this involved His death, but He is speaking about the commercial transaction, and He sells all that He had in order to obtain the field, so as to have indisputable rights in it that no one could question. His operations have in mind the securing of this treasure, which we, as instructed in the Scriptures, may readily see, has taken long centuries to accomplish. It is still proceeding, and every one of us who is the Lord's will rejoice that He has waited so long, so as to secure ourselves out of the field. Men are doing much. We read of the works, the earth and the works that are therein. Their works, man's works, do not include what I am speaking of. Theirs shall all be burned up with the earth, but the divine operations stand by themselves, and they are proceeding even now. The Lord is securing this treasure. He has indisputable rights in the field, whatever men who are on the earth may say. He has right of way in the field. He will make other use of the field presently, but in the meantime He is securing this treasure. We are left to understand what the treasure is from other scriptures. Indeed a very much quoted thought is the very next verse, where we get another parable -- i.e., the parable of the pearl, showing what was in the Lord's mind.
{207}
The pearl is one thought -- one idea -- but the treasure may involve many. He does not have to buy the field to get the pearl in it. He buys the pearl outright. It is not said to be hidden, nor does He hide it. It is a public matter, as it were, but this treasure is a secret matter. It is a hidden thing, and I only touch on it now as basic, as I said before, that we might have it in mind that the Lord has these rights in the whole world -- the whole earth, and is operating. It is not left as some might assume. We are enjoined to labour on, for our toil is not in vain in the Lord. There are results. The results are His. It is a question of "in the Lord". Many may be operating otherwise, professedly in His name, but the labour is to be "in the Lord", in His name, of course, but "in the Lord", and their labour is not in vain as "in the Lord". We may be reduced to small limits and even outwardly small results, but still the labour is not in vain as in the Lord. So we are told and enjoined always to abound in the work of the Lord. The results may be small, as I said, but there are always some; the work is not in vain.
If I have stirred up sentiments in our hearts by these remarks, they are surely of value when we belong to that treasure. Whatever men may think of us -- however much in reproach -- we belong to that treasure, and we are not understood. It is always a hidden matter, and those who are spiritual walk in the light of what I am speaking of, and are not understood at all. "For this reason the world knows us not", @1 John 3: 1. It is well to bear that in mind, and not to be surprised if we are not known. We are wonderfully watched over by heaven, although perhaps sometimes quite insensible of it. Scripture is so full of divine interest -- God's interest in His people. The Lord is pressing it upon us. "Ye are of more value than many sparrows", @Matthew 10: 31.
That is one point. The next is that the treasure is
{208}
to be put together structurally. The first mention of the word 'build' is in relation to Eve. I should not call her Eve, because it was before she was called 'Eve', but it was 'Ishshah'. She was out of Man. God builded her, we are told. It was a structural thought. There was no suggestion of a foundation in @Genesis 2, as she is a person, but still there is the word 'build'. It is not even used in regard of the earth and the heavens. It is "framed" -- the word 'framed' is used as to the universe -- not so concrete, not so staunch a thought as the word 'build' conveys. Heaven and earth may pass away, but not this building. And so when we come to David, we have the foundation, and it is a shown matter, as we learn in the next book, the second book of Chronicles. Solomon following David, being the counterpart of David in a sense, begins the structure on mount Moriah, which means a shown matter -- shown of the Lord, shown of Jehovah. Hence it was God who took the initiative in this chapter as to the threshing-floor of Ornan, the Jebusite. It was a remarkable period in David's life. It is through a crisis. It is there, dear brethren, that we are all made. If we are anything for God, the chief periods of making us are in the crises of our lives. So let us not falter in the presence of difficulty -- the presence of disaster, it may be -- it is the making time, and as I have been remarking about what the Lord found hidden in the field, it really alluded to the saints -- the disciples. He found them. The suggestion is that He was not just looking for the treasure. He found it. It was there hidden and He found it, and He found it in a man like Peter -- a man of whom He said, He would *make*. "I will make you fishers of men", @Matthew 4: 19. What crises he passed through, but in them all, one after the other, he was made what the Lord intended him to be. And so here with David. It was the making time. He was getting on
{209}
in years, but it was still the making time. Till the last breath we take, it is the making time. So let us be watchful and not take ourselves out of the hand of the Lord in the crises of our lives. Let us be in the hands of the Potter. We read of a potter making a certain vessel that was broken on the wheel. It was not suitable. He discarded it or rather made of it what pleased him. So the great thing is to hold ourselves in that attitude in the hands of the Potter, for He is making things.
It was so here with David. It was a critical time, but in the midst of the storm -- the angel, devastating Israel, having come to destroy Jerusalem -- what a moment in the life of David this was, and all brought upon himself. It was a question of the governmental dealings of God with him, but he said, "Let me fall, I pray thee, into the hand of Jehovah". That is the thing. His mercies are great, and in the midst of all the angel of Jehovah withdrew, and Jehovah sends to Gad to tell David to set up an altar in the threshing-floor of Ornan the Jebusite; it is a place definitely selected by God. David does so; he is subject -- one of the most important things. Without this there is sure disaster. Never lose confidence in God, He never changes. What He was before I was converted, and what He was when He converted me, He is now. So David is amenable to the direction, and this is what he was directed to do, and it involved a threshing-floor -- that is to say, in David's own soul. The word 'threshing-floor' is used several times here, not for nothing surely; it is a question of soul history. Foundational history must be soul history. It is a question of what is done in our souls. The foundation is not in the air; it is in our souls. Of course, Christ is the foundation, but it is the question of what is in our souls -- the apprehension of Christ in our souls. The idea of the threshing-floor is separative -- violent separation, too. The threshing-floor
{210}
involves a violent process. If the grain is to be separated from the husk and the chaff, there must be this violent action, and God loves us so much that He resorts to this in our histories that there might be a sure foundation. It involves the death of Christ. That is the basis of all this separative work. The process is carried on in our souls -- the lesson of separation -- separating the chaff, disengaging the wheat. That is what God has wrought in our souls separate from the chaff, from the refuse. In Matthew, of course, John the baptist says that the Lord would come with a fan in His hand, and He would thoroughly purge His threshing-floor. He will gather the wheat into His garner, but the chaff He will burn with unquenchable fire. So it is what is thoroughly worthless that is being removed from us.
David is very particular about this matter. He is going the whole way with the divine mind, according to what God enjoined. That is a great point, not to falter, but go the whole way in the mind of God. Nor would he accept anything from the Jebusite; he would not offer to God but what would cost him something. We must pay for things in that sense.
It is necessary. The Lord Jesus entered into death. It cost Him something, infinitely so, and the process goes on, to acquire the place. The word 'place' is used. That is the final thought -- the place of the divine foundation. It is called Solomon's foundation, later. That is where the structure begins, but here it is the purchase of the place. Solomon did not purchase it, but David did. David presents the suffering side. There is the suffering side of each of us as well as the restful glorious side. They run together. This is the time, this is the suffering time, the making time, and so David secured a place at the full price. We are told the exact amount he gave for it. It is much more than is mentioned elsewhere, but it is a wider thought here than in Samuel, showing
{211}
that David is going the whole way, that there will be no narrowness in the result. The whole way is to be trodden that God may have full scope, plenty of room for all He has to effect in us, whether it be in *any* of us or *all* of us collectively. There is to be full room given to God who is working in us the building, and the point is to give plenty of room to God in the crises, and we shall see the glorious result.
Thirdly, there is the purchase of the assembly itself -- a collective thought -- obviously a thought that applies to the assembly as it is down here, for the apostle is speaking to the elders of it. These will not be in it in our glorious condition; as in heaven, we shall not need their care; all is perfect then, all glorious. The assembly comes down, it is in perfect liberty with God, mark that! She comes down from God out of heaven -- not only out of heaven, but from God. She belongs to God up there, in perfect liberty -- not *sent* down, but she *comes* down. In order to come down she needed to be placed there.
This reference to purchase by the blood of His own is very remarkable. There can be no question that the New Translation gives the right rendering. That is, God purchased the assembly by the blood of *His own*, meaning the blood of Christ -- stressing the thought of His own -- a very precious thought indeed. Who else could be His in that sense but Jesus? At the banks of the Jordan, it is made clear that it is *His own*. "This is my beloved Son, in whom I have found my delight", the Father says, @Matthew 3: 17. He speaks of it on the mount, out of the excellent glory. That voice was heard on the mount, Peter says, even by himself. "This voice ... we heard, when we were with him in the holy mount", @2 Peter 1: 18. So that there could be no doubt as to whose He is. He is the Father's very own. Leaving out the word 'Son' emphasises the thought of *His own*. It is said of the Lord, "having loved his own". It is a
{212}
very precious thought, and so God purchased the assembly by the blood of His own. Down here we are under leadership, under overseership, and we are regarded in this verse as the flock -- God's flock. How precious that is -- under His wing -- under His care, and then God's assembly which He purchased by the blood of His own! How well off we are, dear brethren! The present economy means that we are -- in little companies here and there, not accidentally surely, but by divine order, in cities and towns -- under divine care. The idea, of course, is that the assemblies are to be sustained, hence eldership is secured. That marked the apostles Paul and Barnabas. They *chose*, it says, elders in every assembly. There are two thoughts -- elders for cities and elders for assemblies. Elders in cities, of course, would have government or control in all parts of the city. Elders in one assembly would, of course, have control in that assembly, if there were only one gathering in the city. In either case, the assembly is to be cared for so that it stands on its own feet -- the saints in every locality. In the chapter which tells us of the selection of elders by Paul and Barnabas (@Acts 14), we learn that there was a certain man who had been lame from birth; he had never walked -- that is the state of the gentiles. We gentiles never walked, but now, as set up in assemblies, they are to walk, to stand on their feet. The apostle says of this man that he had faith; he said, with a loud voice, "Rise up straight upon thy feet", and he did so. So it is that, as representative of assembly material and having the knowledge of God, we are to stand on our feet. In every locality however few -- we are to stand on our feet. God will support us. Eldership will not be wanting, for the idea in eldership is care: "how shall he take care of the assembly of God?" @1 Timothy 3: 5. So that even sisters are brought into this. Why not care for what there is -- however small a company or however
{213}
weak -- the weaker, the more the need for care and nursing!
I would urge the importance of the separative thought in the foundation of our souls -- the evil separated from the good in our souls and the truth maintained there by the power of the Spirit; and then the structural thought -- the foundational and the structural thought in the word 'assembly', as belonging to God. "The assembly of God", it says, "which he has purchased with the blood of his own". He loves the thought. He regards the town in the light of that thought. It is important to maintain it, for God is robbed if a meeting ceases in the town. That, in general, sets out our position here in this world to the end. The Lord's supper we celebrate carries with it the thought of the Lord's coming; "as often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink the cup, ye announce the death of the Lord, until he come", @1 Corinthians 11: 26. That is the position. So the Lord's supper must not be given up, either. God is robbed of something if the assembly ceases to function in a town. Christ is robbed, too. Hence the great urgency of maintaining these divine rights under these heads. Let us go on. "Occupy", says the Lord, "till I come", @Luke 19: 13. "Behold, I come quickly", @Revelation 22: 7. He would urge us to hold out, to get stronger and stronger in holding and occupying till He come.
Then there is the possibility of dissolution, which is a point that everyone old and young should accept. "If our earthly tabernacle house be destroyed", @2 Corinthians 5: 1. In Paul's case it was, and in Peter's case it was, and so with every departed christian since that day. Think of the myriads that have fallen asleep through Jesus. That is a beautiful word. "So also God will bring with him those who have fallen asleep through Jesus", @1 Thessalonians 4: 14. How interested divine Persons are in us!
{214}
I read in @Genesis 23 just to bring out the thought of divine ownership -- divine rights, too, as applying to our graves. The very grave is in the mind of the Lord, and He will know where it is. "All that are in the graves shall hear his voice", @John 5: 28. Hence in Lazarus¬ case, He says, "Where have ye laid him?" @John 11:34. The Lord would be led to the tomb. Of course, at the tomb He said, "Lazarus, come forth". So the Lord knows where the tombs are, and I believe that is a wonderful thought. This is the first grave we read of, as we have all often heard, and this whole chapter is devoted to the subject. One might wonder why more space is not given to the death of Sarah. How interesting it would be if we only knew what her last words were! But no, she died, we are told. The New Testament speaks about her as a holy woman. That is a fine testimony -- a holy woman -- subject to her husband. She called him lord. But there is not a word of her last words to Abraham or to Isaac. It would be very interesting, of course, if we had them, but the Spirit of God leaves all that, and gives us this whole chapter as to the purchase of a grave. Surely there is something to meditate on in this chapter.
The sons of Heth are respectful to the patriarch, like Ornan the Jebusite, and full money was paid. Is it not something for us to think of the Lord's rights over His departed ones, over His sleeping ones? Does it not mean that He is intensely interested in the graves of the saints, and not only their graves, but their burials, for there is a field. It does not say that the field is to be used for the graves. The field is surely for convocations, as in David's case there was space for the structure, and the trees, too, for shelter. Is it not that the Lord is saying to us that He has secured these things for us? I am watching over you as you die, He would say, for He uses the word 'died'. Lazarus died.
{215}
He had already said that he was fallen asleep, but the word 'died' is used, for the Lord is saying to us that He is watching over us so that we may face the last moment in that sense in the light of departing to be with Christ -- that there should be victory in our eyes, in our voices, as long as they remain, that is in our last breath. Who would question the Lord's rights over us? Victory is what is happening. It is happening under His hand, as saints fall asleep through Jesus, and are buried. We bury one another. Devout men do it. It ought not to be a matter for lawless relatives to arrange. It is the Lord's matter. Sometimes they are allowed too much, as if the circumstances covered lawlessness. Never can divine circumstances cover lawlessness, nor excuse lawlessness -- neither in marriages nor in deaths. The Lord is asserting His rights. It is "in the Lord". "Blessed the dead who die in the Lord from henceforth. Yea, saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their labours; for their works follow with them", @Revelation 14: 13. So the Lord has the matter in hand, dear brethren, and that is why I read these scriptures -- this last one particularly now -- so that we might be comforted and as we advance in years, if this tabernacle house be dissolved, there is still victory, so that the saints are victorious in all circumstances. There are divine rights to enter into every position we are in, even as we close our eyes in death and are buried, and how comforting it is! The Lord secured the burying-place, the field, the tomb, and the trees, so that love may show itself at such a time. May the Lord bless His word!
{216}
THE EXCELLENT GLORY
@Acts 6: 15; @Acts 7: 1 - 3, 54 - 60; @2 Corinthians 3:18; @2 Peter 1: 16 - 18
What I have in mind is to dwell a little on glory Stephen brings to mind the thought of glory, secondly the glory of the Lord and then the glory of the Father, "the excellent glory". The passage in Peter has been selected because it shows how glory is graded. The occurrence of the thought of glory in the Scriptures is affecting as we pursue it; God coming out in creation and in redemption, having His glory in mind, and this is to be distributed in vessels -- vessels of glory. We, as christians, are vessels of mercy fitted for glory, and we are told also that one star differeth from another star in glory; the sun has one glory and the moon has a glory. These are mere physical things, but still they set out in figure, at least, what is in the mind of God; for the vessels of His glory are those who are selected in mercy and fitted, prepared for glory. So that there is distribution of the divine glory in selected vessels. Christ is personally the glory of God, and the assembly is the glory of Christ as the woman is the glory of the man. There is a wonderful variety of thought in regard of it and the epistle to the Romans, which is foundational, is marked by it; the word that is peculiarly stamped on it is, "Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father": showing how glory entered into that transaction supremely, for it is really a question of love shining out in whatever form it may take, and it is thought that Romans indicates how we are vessels of glory, in that it is said, "Whom he did predestinate, them he also called: and whom he called, them he also justified: and whom he justified, them he also glorified". This evidently alludes to the
{217}
distribution of the Spirit to us; we are glorified in that respect in a positive way, a tangible glory: the anointing is glorious in a positive, substantial way. It was thought if we look at Stephen a little we get this exemplified for he, I believe, is intended to represent a vessel of glory. First in his face, for it says, "And all that sat in the council, looking steadfastly on him, saw his face as it had been the face of an angel", and then in the end of chapter 7 he is seen in moral glory, acting like Christ in his sufferings, and he speaks of seeing the glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of God; as if only one who is himself glorious is competent to speak of glory. He begins his address by saying, "The God of glory appeared unto our father Abraham" and this was in connection with Abraham's movement out of the world into the land of promise.
That is what one had in mind; it is rather a wide subject but we can touch on it briefly perhaps in Stephen as an exemplification of it.
F.I. Do I understand that as speaking of the God of glory, the glory as such stands only in relation to God, but is seen reflected in those who are formed after Him, Eke Stephen?
J.T. That is what I was thinking. In creative glory we have the sun, moon and stars, each having its own glory: David says, "The heavens declare the glory of God". So that the thing is there and, obviously, what God has in mind is that it should be seen in us as vessels of glory.
F.I. It is seen in us as reflected from God.
J.T. Stephen's face is as that of an angel and that would be the reflection of some glory, and then what he was in suffering, as depicted at the end of the chapter, would show that he was morally glorious, reflecting Christ's glory as a sufferer.
J.M. Would the glory at the end of chapter 6 be
{218}
of a judicial character as in contrast to the glory at the end of chapter 7?
J.T. I thought it indicates how Stephen may be taken to represent what we get in @2 Corinthians 3, "from glory to glory". You have angelic glory which would be judicial glory, I think, and then moral glory: Stephen is privileged to look into heaven and see the glory of God, and he was able to speak about it.
W.W. Would you mind saying a word as to what is involved essentially in the feature of glory? We use it rather lightly sometimes, I think.
J.T. Well, if we think of the glory of the sun or the glory of the moon or the glory of the stars, I suppose it is assumed that we are intelligent enough to depict what is in our minds in either case. We look up into the firmament of the heavens at night, what a glory there is; and the sun in the daytime, what a brilliancy of light, what a glory! God commanded the light to shine out of darkness, but there is no substance mentioned, simply "Let there be light: and there was light". There is substance in the sun, and so it is said of Jesus, "In him was life; and the life was the light of men". There is substance behind the light -- it is Christ as Man. I am speaking now of the sun: how we come to an advance of glory, the life of Christ here below was *the light*, and that could easily be followed in the wonderful variety of expressions of life in Christ's path here and how every expression was light. So the glory of God -- the heavens declare the glory of God creatively. Then we come to redemption glory, this must be seen in what God is: "Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father", @Romans 6: 4. It is a transaction by glory. You can perceive what a blank there was to Him during the three days in which the Lord Jesus lay in death: what it was to Him, and to heaven and to all spiritual intelligence, but especially to the Father. It was a question of time; He
{219}
was, as it were, waiting for the moment to arrive, because the Lord was to be three days and nights in death -- there must be a complete period, and God waited for the finish of that and acted. It would be as if all His affections were active in bending forth, so to speak, to take up the Object of His love out of death: all His affections would be in that; and so, relatively, in every one of us the reflection of glory is in the actings of love. It is what we are. It was what God was in a moral way, stepping forth to lift His beloved Son out of death, it was an act of love. So if we are glorified, as it is said in Romans, it would be the same power operative in us because the gift of the Spirit is glory, and therefore it would be the actings of love, the fruit of the Spirit is love: it is in what we are in the actings of love that the whole scene is lit up with glory in that way. A great deal more could be said, but this is a sort of general idea of what glory is, I think.
W.W. I was thinking of it as displaying all that God is in Himself in whatever He is touching or dealing with.
J.T. Quite so.
Rem. It has been well defined as distinctive excellence in display. I was going to ask, is it not striking that in John's gospel when the Lord says to Martha, "Did I not say to thee, that if thou shouldest believe, thou shouldest see the glory of God?" it is connected with the fourth day, Lazarus having been in the grave three days already -- linking on with your suggestion in Genesis of the sun being set in the heavens on the fourth day.
J.T. If it be a question of resurrection, in Christ's case it was the *third* day, the Father's glory shone in that, in the presence of the complete testimony to the power of death. He did not see corruption, the Father's Holy One should not see corruption, the glory of God took Him out in accordance with
{220}
@Psalm 16, as quoted by Peter on the day of Pentecost. The fourth day is corruption in regard of death, so it would be the glory of God in the resurrection of the saints which is not equal to the Father's glory in the resurrection of Christ. I mean there are greater glories, and I think we can see that the glory of the Father in raising Christ is a peculiar form of words, that is, He saw no corruption but still He was actually in death: it was real death as Abraham's was, although he had been in the grave for centuries and saw corruption. The Father waited for the three days to expire and His love entered into it; He raised His Son from the dead -- "Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life", @Romans 6: 4. There is a reflection of glory in every one of us.
E.H. In @Romans 8 we read, "But if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his Spirit that dwelleth in you". You were speaking of the Spirit of God in relation to the glory indwelling us, does that link up?
J.T. That helps in what I was saying in connection with "whom he justified, them he also glorified". The fulness of that will be the quickening of our bodies; it contemplates not persons dead but persons alive when the Lord comes, being quickened on account of His Spirit which dwells in us. I suppose there is the distribution of glory in us as the Spirit dwells in us -- there are two names, Christ and Jesus.
E.H. I noticed that; will you say a little about it?
J.T. It is a remarkable form of words, because I think it means that we are reflecting Christ as having the Spirit, "the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus" refers to what He was personally as Man down here "Jesus" is the Man down here, but "Christ" is what He was in testimony, I suppose. Both thoughts should attach to us if we are to be vessels of glory.
{221}
What we are personally is after Jesus, and Paul says, "The life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our body", @2 Corinthians 4: 10.
E.H. Are both these seen in Stephen?
J.T. I think he is the exemplification of them.
A.B. It speaks of the glory of God shining in the face of Jesus Christ.
J.T. It is what God is in the gospel, I think. In @2 Corinthians 4 we have "the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ", but I think those references in Romans help as to each one of us as to how each is a vessel of glory. One would like to think that in one's relations and circumstances there is glory. So that Stephen is a deacon, appointed with six others, to look after tables, and no doubt he served well, although that is not stressed very much; he was a man "full of faith and the Holy Spirit" -- he would be glorious in doing it. It was the idea of looking after material things for the brethren, and this is sometimes thought very little of, but that is how Stephen began his service. Now he is found suffering for the testimony, really accused falsely; and he is glorious in this new position. The thought is that we should be glorious in every circumstance; in visiting the widows, or the sick, you would be glorious in distributing the bounty of the saints, for the apostle speaks of distributing to the needs of the saints. Saul had tried to drag the saints to the tribunals -- he was a minister of the devil, but Stephen was a minister of Christ. Now, by false accusation, he is found in the midst of the council and he is glorious.
W.W. It speaks of him in chapter 6: 8 as "full of grace and power".
J.T. One has been thinking of it as bearing on assembly service, the Lord seems to make that the terminus of all our enquiries just now, to get in the idea of the service of God and how all these things merge in the service of God. So one has thought of
{222}
the anointing, "Whom he has justified, these also he has glorified". There is a reflection of glory in every circumstance. The Lord said to the paralytic man, "Thy sins be forgiven thee ... . Arise, take up thy bed and go unto thine house". He was forgiven and glorious for he was carrying his bed; he had never been in the house like that before, he had been a burden but now he was glorious.
F.I. I was just thinking that. He is glorious in what he is doing. Is that where the glory is seen The blessed God has given expression to His glory by that which He has brought into being?
J.T. It is what is done -- you *are* glorious. So the carrying of his bed to his house was an act of glory, the inmates of his house would see it like that.
A.H. Does it necessitate a touch from the glory for us to enter into this circle where glory is known?
J.T. You feel you like to be in full dress when you come in and as you sit down in the assembly and then you are ready for "from glory to glory". The idea is appearing in glory: Stephen appeared in glory in the council, it was a peculiar circumstance, he did not seek it out, he was brought there by false accusation, but he was glorious.
F.I. So that Saul on the road to Damascus was touched by the glory above that of the sun. It says, "A light from heaven, above the brightness of the sun", which would bring into view the glory which was attached to the blessed God in grace, how He could move to deliver a man.
J.T. He speaks of the light in different ways.
Rem. "Among whom ye appear", it says in Philippians, "as lights in the world". Mr. Darby has an interesting note that this is an astronomical allusion relating to the heavenly bodies.
J.T. Just so, it is like the position in John's gospel which has already been alluded to; and then the Lord came six days before the passover and there
{223}
they were, all brilliant, a beautiful cluster of glory, they were reflecting glory, and He came back to enjoy the result of His own work.
Ques. Is the full result seen in the heavenly city? "Her shining was like a most precious stone" -- the same word being used.
J.T. That kind of shining.
J.M. Does Peter's reference to the glory -- God having called us by glory and virtue -- show the attractive power?
J.T. It is a feature of Peter that God works through qualities, not simply by light in a general way, but by different qualities, glory and virtue, for instance -- one thing affects another. It is a cumulative thought of qualities, emanating from God, including glory.
E.H. Do you take account of the last verse of @2 Corinthians 3, "Looking on the glory of the Lord" as something beyond the covenant?
J.T. It is an inclusive thought of the covenant as to what he is speaking about: he had said, "The Lord is that Spirit" (verse 17), meaning the Spirit of the new covenant, and then "where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty". That is the thought, the Lord is more than the Spirit of the new covenant. He is said to be a quickening Spirit in @1 Corinthians 15 and that is a greater thought -- He is a Man but a quickening Spirit. So, "where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty", that would be the full thought of what He is in an authoritative way; He deals with us authoritatively, passing over nothing in us so as to have us for Himself, but still, in doing it, there is liberty.
E.H. That is, things are not done in an arbitrary way?
J.T. If I go to see a brother or the like in that way, in an arbitrary way, the brother has not liberty, but if the Lord is in it there is liberty although there
{224}
may be serious matters to be dealt with. So that the glory of the Lord in verse 18, whilst carrying through the great thought of the new covenant, would be more because it is without any qualification -- it is "the glory of the Lord".
E.H. How does that come in at the Supper, "Beholding ... the glory of the Lord"?
J.T. I think it is the principle with which He deals with us there, He must be recognised in a dominical sense, but He releases our affections, liberates us, whilst correcting anything that may be there that is contrary to the moment.
A.B. It says in @Psalm 50, "Whoso offereth praise glorifieth me".
J.T. That is another side and you get that very much in Luke -- everything done glorified God; offering praise glorifies God.
A.H. Would you say a word as to @John 17, "The glory which thou hast given me I have given them"?
J.T. He imparts what is communicated to Him, conferred upon Him. There are different glories in the chapter; first He says, "Father ... glorify thy Son", then, "I have glorified thee on the earth: I have finished the work which thou gavest me to do". Well, that is between the Father and the Son, really incommunicable glory, the glory of the Deity. Then He speaks of the glory conferred upon Him (verse 22) which, I suppose, is sonship. He was a Son, of course, "Thou art my Son; this day have I begotten thee"; that was God conferring that honour upon Him. Christ is born Son, He is the only One who was Son by birth. He confers that upon us, as I apprehend, "the glory which thou gavest me I have given them". That is, He carries us with Himself so that we may share in the service with Him. Then He says, "Father, I will that they also, whom thou hast given me, be with me where I am; that they may behold my glory, which thou hast given me": that again
{225}
would be personal but not non-communicable, it would be seen.
W.L. How do you regard chapter 2 of John's gospel, "This beginning of signs did Jesus ... and manifested his glory"?
J.T. That would be a kind of glory by itself. Thus, as we were remarking, glory is graded. Therefore, I thought in Peter we have the word 'excellent' alluding to the Father's glory.
W.W. We have, too, the word 'surpassing' here in connection with the new covenant in @2 Corinthians 3.
J.T. That is the glory that excels the glory of the first covenant but it does not go on to the glory of the mount of transfiguration.
W.W. It speaks of 'subsisting in glory'.
J.T. That is the ministration of righteousness -- it is a fuller thought. We might look at @2 Corinthians 3 from verse 7, it is a fuller thought, it is the ministry of the Spirit -- that subsists in glory, and it goes on "For if the ministry of condemnation be glory, much rather the ministry of righteousness abounds in glory. For also that which was glorified is not glorified in this respect, on account of the surpassing glory"; "that which was glorified" refers to the glory of the first covenant -- that is excelled, eclipsed, you might say, and we have not yet come to the glory of the Father which Peter alludes to as 'excellent'. He says, "there came such a voice to him from the excellent glory". Years had gone by since the transfiguration but he calls it "excellent glory". So that it seems as if we ought to allow our minds to run on those lines as to this great subject. Glory is graded -- the whole universe, whether physical or moral, is full of glory and we are specifically stated to be vessels of mercy, prepared for glory, prepared for it, and we want to be shining; that is the idea, I think: Stephen is a sort of exemplification of the whole matter.
{226}
F.I. So being prepared for glory, as taking account of the glory of the Lord, we should be changed from glory to glory?
J.T. That is the thought, and there seems no end to it.
F.I. First there must be the preparation. "Vessels of mercy, which he had afore prepared unto glory" that is God's side, but being prepared for it, we are able to take it on and we take on the various grades as we view the glory of the Lord.
J.T. So that as we come to the glory of the Father we take on greater glory, sonship glory, the glory which Christ gave us, gave His disciples. One, I suppose, thus is fitted for eternal things; so Paul speaks of "an eternal weight of glory".
F.I. The thought in relation to the Supper has been referred to. Do you think that as we continue, moving together as viewing the glory of the Lord, it would bring us to a point in which we would see Him in His wondrous position in relation to the Father, and thus we should enter into that which is the glory of the Father?
J.T. The question is, can I take on that glory, so it is "from glory to glory", and so the glory referred to in @John 17 would qualify us in having part in the Father's glory. He has imparted that glory to us the disciples on the mount were not equal to it but the thought is that they could have been equal to it. The glory came out and the voice was heard; Peter was equal to it afterwards. That is the idea, we advance from glory to glory. So that in any position in which the believer is he should be suitably glorious.
A.B. What would be the contemplation of His glory referred to in @John 1?
J.T. That touches on what we are speaking about "We have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father". That, of course, is personal glory -- we do not share in that, it is like the
{227}
glory we are speaking of, we come relatively into it. It should appeal to us; if we are to be in the assembly we must learn to take on glory and to be right in every case, and if I advance to the glory of the Father I take on what is suitable. Stephen was right in every case, right in visiting the saints, right in the council, and when it comes to his sufferings, the stoning, he is right there, he is glorious in a moral sense for he is able to pray for his murderers: that is morally glorious, he is like Jesus going into death, it is moral glory. He says, "I see the heavens opened, and the Son of man standing on the right-hand of God". Now, he is breathing his last and he says, "Lord Jesus, receive my spirit". That glory shone on the cross when Jesus said, "Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit". I mean all these things are illustrative of what is in my mind, and when the Lord calls on one to die (if He does), well, one wants to be glorious in falling asleep, why not? Christ was in His death, Stephen was in his, and so on. I am to be glorious in every position.
A.H. Is it seen somewhat in Abigail in very difficult circumstances? How glorious she is in helping David!
J.T. Very good. That raises another point, that is, what we are in dealing with evil amongst us in the care meeting, as we call it. We need this thought there; that is the judicial glory, I am able to take on things and deal with them and be glorious in them.
W.W. Is it significant that Paul in @2 Corinthians 4 refers to having received this ministry, "as we have had mercy shewn us, we faint not. But we have rejected the hidden things of shame, not walking in deceit, nor falsifying the word of God"? He was concerned to be in keeping with the glory.
J.T. Quite so, that is the glory of the ministry. So that in chapter 6 he goes over the ground as to what he was as a minister. He gives thirty-seven
{228}
items, each one different, each stands out, but his glory is in every position. A sudden thing happens and you are not equal to it, something you are not expecting: take the apostle Paul in Philippi, how glorious he was then, but when the message came for them to be released he was not so glorious for he said, "Let them come themselves and fetch us out".
E.H. In 2 Corinthians we have one brought before us in perfect keeping with his ministry -- Paul.
J.T. "That the ministry be not blamed". It ought to be glorious -- it is the ministry of glory, and the vessel should be glorious, and this is why the Lord calls him "an elect vessel": it is the idea of a vessel like Stephen.
J.M. Do we see two features of glory in @Luke 9? As the Lord prayed the fashion of His countenance became different, and then in delivering a soul from the power of Satan, they wondered at the glorious greatness of God.
J.T. He is glorious in each case.
A.L. The priests¬ garments were for glory. What do you understand by that?
J.T. That is what we are talking about: they were for glory and beauty, showing that in the service of God, the priest is glorious. It refers to the purification of the priest in approach to God -- he is suitably dressed.
A.B. So would you say that Paul and Silas in the prison were glorious in that they sang praises to God in those conditions?
J.T. Just so. The prison was turned into a temple of prayer and praise.
W.L. Would you say that the Lord delights to commit Himself in glory where conditions are right, as you were saying? For instance, Moses and Aaron fell upon their faces on several occasions, and on each occasion the glory of the Lord appeared.
J.T. That is God honouring them, and He honours
{229}
us if we are faithful. This thought has far more entrance into our circumstances than we think. In the care meeting, in the visiting of the brethren, and in dealing with evil, we are to be glorious.
C.K. There is a remarkable verse in the end of 1 Peter, it looks as if it is the ultimate end of God calling us -- "But the God of all grace who has called you to his eternal glory in Christ Jesus, when ye have suffered for a little while, himself shall make perfect, stablish, strengthen, ground: to him be the glory and the might for the ages of the ages. Amen". It calls forth a doxology from the apostle's heart -- the thought of it. I have often been struck with that; it shows what God's aim was in calling us. I suppose none of us had the slightest idea of what we had been called to when we were first converted; but God has called us to His eternal glory in Christ Jesus.
J.T. That is a very rich passage.
H.P. I would like to ask with regard to Stephen he speaks of the "God of glory" calling Abraham, and then he goes on in the recital of all His dealings with the people. Would it be right to take account of it that he had learnt God in the way he was speaking of Him in relation to all the movements of the people from Egypt, and that we might be learning the God of glory that has called us and dealt with us and been with us right through?
J.T. Quite so. We do not get this expression in Genesis. It waited for Stephen to tell us it was the God of glory. The whole history that Stephen goes over is lit up with glory.
A.H.H. Is it possible for us to hear as Peter heard and to recount 'we heard this voice from heaven'?
J.T. The point in mind is that it is a mature thought. When we are converted we are very feeble and shallow and God is very patient with us. He took Ephraim and taught him to walk, and it was so with Peter, he had to be taken by the hand and
{230}
taught to walk. When he was on the mount he was able to take in very little of the great vision he saw, but he did not forget it and it developed in his soul. The idea is that whatever glimpse we get it carries through and becomes enhanced. So here he is about to put off his tabernacle, and he says, "We have not followed cunningly devised fables, when we made known unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were eye-witnesses of his majesty. For he received from God the Father honour and glory, when there came such a voice to him from the excellent glory, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. And this voice which came from heaven we heard, when we were with him in the holy mount". The impression was very small at the beginning -- it was like a seed of glory in his soul -- but doubtless he went over the vision many a time with God, and the thing became more and more magnified; so at the end he is able to speak of the "excellent glory", and had increased in the appreciation of it. That is the idea with us as vessels of glory, the germ of glory that comes as we receive the gospel becomes developed so that at the end we are vessels of glory and able to speak of it in a right way so that we are fitted for the assembly.
A.H.H. Would you gather something from the thought "from heaven"?
J.T. It is the Father's glory.
A.H. It is a progressive movement to which you are referring. Would it not be exemplified in @Ezekiel 47 in the man moving in the waters, ankle deep, knee deep, to the loins, and then waters to swim in, waters that could not be passed over?
J.T. It is that sort of thing; he progressed in realising the depth of the river of grace and finally discovers it is infinite. I cannot pass over and nobody can, and the nearer we get to God the more infinite it all is. That is the idea.
{231}
F.T. Does the apostle speak of it in saying, "We have this treasure in earthen vessels"?
J.T. That is the thought. I think when Paul was converted he got a glimpse of glory and it was sown in his soul; he was blind and had to go into the city to have his eyes opened, and he developed and developed, and now he speaks of it as a treasure -- it was in earthen vessels.
A.H.H. Would it be too much to ask for a word on @2 Peter 1: 19?
J.T. He is alluding there to the ministry that had come from the prophets -- "Ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that shineth in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts". That is, he is getting back to first principles with them, that whilst what he was saying was "excellent glory", yet each and all had to move along in the course of the testimony making full use of the prophets until "the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts".
A.H.H. In the light of what we are saying, should we give more heed to the prophetic word?
J.T. God is helping us in the Old Testament and it all tends to the morning star -- it will be seen in the coming day of Christ.
R.B. Do we get this thought in respect to the queen of Sheba? She came to see the glory of Solomon, and she was so affected that there was no more spirit in her; she was like God in her giving. She was able to go back and, in speaking of it, she says, 'the half had not been told'.
J.T. The word would be for us to progress according to what we have received. How much progress has one made since one was converted? How much better can we speak of the truth now than when we received it first?
{232}
COMMUNICATIONS FROM ONE SERVANT TO ANOTHER
@1 Timothy 6
J.T. It is to individuals of a special character, as I suppose you noticed, that these things are written. They are communications from one servant to another. One is an apostle, of course, giving him authority belonging to no one today. Still it is from one servant to another, the latter to be governed by what is written to him. There are no servants in this position exactly now on either side. We have these epistles and all Scripture -- but no servant is particularly in authority over another. Servants are in direct relation to Christ and get what they are to minister from Christ -- but these epistles help us in any given circumstance. We see how the minister is to be governed. If he is to minister in industrial centres, for instance, where trade unionism would rule generally, or if he is working where there are many rich -- in residential places and the like, this chapter helps as to how he is to proceed. The first part of the chapter has to do with servants or bondmen and as to how they should regard their masters. The second part is to do with persons who have desire to be rich, a very common thing. Then we have, from verse 17, those who are rich. So the chapter as a whole deals with these subjects: persons who are in the place of servants, those who are aspiring to be rich and persons who are rich.
J.M. Does this all stand in relation to conduct suitable to the house of God?
J.T. Yes, I should think so. It is the order you read about in chapter 3. "These things I write to thee, hoping to come to thee more quickly; but if I delay, in order that thou mayest know how one ought
{233}
to conduct oneself in God's house". That is what I understand, in general, the apostle has in mind, bearing no doubt particularly on the earlier chapters, but in general it is the question of order and conduct in the house of God. Chapter 6 is a very practical chapter just now, because of the extraordinary change that has come over the industrial world. Labour has acquired great power and whilst those labouring are in the position of servants, they are in many respects masters, and yet the change has not helped the truth nor has it afforded greater liberty for the gospel. It has promoted independency and avarice. Underlying that is to get what others have on the ground that it is not equally divided.
A.H. Would the well-ordered house of the previous chapter and a well-ordered pathway in relation to business help us in regard to service in the house?
J.T. Clearly. One has to keep oneself clear from the evils contemplated here. That is disregard of masters¬ rights, aspiration to be rich and then those who are rich. It is clear these things all bear on our position in the house of God. Is that your thought?
A.H. That is what I was wondering.
J.T. Otherwise we should be unbalanced. Man is to be content in whatever circumstance he is in and trust God for his circumstances, it is a question of piety.
F.I. These features it would be necessary for us to be in the good of in connection with the house, so that we might be faithful in relation to the house position on the spiritual side. This is written to Timothy while at Ephesus. Do you think that has a bearing?
J.T. Just so. At Ephesus there was great expenditure of service by Paul. He was there three years, and the extent of the truth ministered was not limited as at Corinth. The truth ministered at Corinth was
{234}
limited but at Ephesus he had not shunned to declare the full counsel of God -- therefore the structure afforded a great range for development in the house of God. They are said to be indeed the house, built together for an habitation of God in the Spirit, so that there was great range for development in the house of God and the service of it, and hence so much about elders here and also in Acts. The apostle calls the elders of Ephesus to him. There is great scope for eldership in chapters 3 - 5, but now we are right at the end of the epistle and the apostle's exercise in writing this chapter is this industrial side of the matter -- how servants and masters, poor and rich, might be severally affected adversely by circumstances.
J.M. Does it show we would dishonour the name of God and the teaching by not being governed in our conduct in that way?
J.T. That is what is said here. "Let as many bondmen as are under yoke count their own masters worthy of all honour, that the name of God and the teaching be not blasphemed". It is a remarkable thing that disregard for one's master's rights might bring discredit to the name of God publicly.
-.G. In that way we are always in the house. This is what we should be governed by -- in the business or home or wherever we are.
J.T. Quite so. We always regard ourselves in that relation, it is the general position attaching to the saints in Ephesus. They were the house of God.
The question is, Is the name being blasphemed? If I am working under a man, that is, a master and I am irksome under it and disregard his rights, I am in danger of blaspheming the name of God.
A.B. Would this chapter help us to come under rule and authority in all our movements?
J.T. That is the thought -- under a yoke. As many as are under yoke. The allusion is to persons who are perhaps servants or menial, but in one way we are
{235}
all under yoke as bondmen of God, so this should help us, and if we are bondmen of God, the authority is graded from God to Christ, from Christ to man and from man to woman according to 1 Corinthians, but here it would include the master. A master has authority. The owner of a slave has authority over him like Philemon over Onesimus -- or even if he were earning wages, the master would have authority. It helps us as to whether we are dependent. Whilst we may profess dependence on God, we may discredit that profession by disregard of one's master and non-recognition of his rights.
A.H. Titus has much to say about bondmen -- they adorn the doctrine.
J.T. A very beautiful passage which morally elevates the slave. I believe God watches over servants and bondmen in subordinate positions which require subjection to others. I believe God has great regard for them. They are peculiarly tempted by the devil. In @Ephesians 5, instruction is given as to the husband having rule over the wife, then parents and children, children and parents, masters and servants, servants and masters, because in these relations we are peculiarly exposed to the devil. He gets in if I am a servant, and proud in it, to promote independency, to try and damage me and dishonour the name of God, so God has great regard for those in subordinate positions, because He would work out in us the truth of unqualified subjection, which is morally of great price -- far greater than anything accruing materially from it.
A.H.H. So that we would accept the idea of subjection as a principle?
J.T. It is worked out in the history of God's people. Israel were in the position of servants in Egypt, that was no accident. God had told Abraham they would be in such a state and that He would bring them out with great property. They would
{236}
not lose. God intended the truth of subjection to be worked out.
A.H.H. When it is a question of order in the children it says, "For this is right". No need for further argument in regard to this thought of subjection.
J.T. I believe we have to go back to Egypt to get the correct general thought. God is taking the people out of the world through redemption but He is not taking them out in independency -- not because they are seed of Abraham after the flesh, but because they have come through the ordeal, working out subjection in a most irksome way. It was no accident but ordered of God, so that the mediator is brought into evidence and comes down to look on them in that relation. He regards them as brethren but they are looked at in Egypt as slaves. They are tested but they come out of Egypt with great property. Not only material things, but moral wealth they bring out of Egypt. Three times over it is said that God gave them favour in the eyes of the Egyptians so that they gave them utensils of gold and silver and clothing. In going out they spoiled the Egyptians, that is morally so. Although their masters may take the position of being masters, morally the servants became greater and spoiled the Egyptians. The matter requires attention because this bears on the whole position morally in this world. They are brought out of the world in that way, learning subjection in the bitterest experiences, but through it subjection to God is developed, so that the servant is morally in greater advantage than his master if he goes through things with God. He becomes richer than his master.
W.L. Would that be seen in the little captive maid in Naaman's house?
J.T. Quite so, she was spiritually richer than Naaman. He was of great account with his master. She is only maid to his wife. She was richer morally
{237}
than the whole house of the Syrian. She is an evangelist. God's eye has been upon that young girl and she is serving God. It shows how God turns things upside down. We would perhaps covet our master's position, but morally he is not so well off, because if I am with God in the place of subjection, I have greater advantages than he.
F.I. And you are able to gather up wealth in that way by the circumstances?
J.T. I think that is what is in mind. They went out with great property. We had it on Saturday in @Genesis 15. God says to Abraham, "thy seed will be a sojourner in a land that is not theirs, and they shall serve them (or as it should read 'be in bondage to them'); and they shall afflict them four hundred years. But also that nation which they shall serve I will judge; and afterwards they shall come out with great property". That is the position, so that the master is in a dangerous position -- if he is not with God he is in a very dangerous position. The servant may have to endure a long time, but the moment comes when he comes out with great property and the master is spoiled.
J.M. This should help us to see how this that has been glorified in Christ here will be carried into eternity.
J.T. You are thinking of His place. As we know He takes the place of a bondman. He takes up bondmanship because He loves, not because He was forced into it. They had been servants in Egypt but He took it on in love. He loved His Master, His wife and His children and would not go out free, and so sets out the great principle of subjection in His own Person in incarnation right on to the eternal state, because after subjecting everything to God He Himself becomes subject. The principle is carried right through and the Lord takes on the place of subjection according to @1 Corinthians 15: 28.
{238}
A.H. Is that what the centurion saw in @Luke 7 when he says, "I also am a man placed under authority"? He saw it blessedly in Christ.
J.T. He saw that the Lord was in it as Man. I also am a man placed under authority. A centurion would be over one hundred men and he would be an officer, but there might be many above him right up.
That is the position. I am under my master and he is under somebody else. If he is not he will suffer and I will gain from the divine standpoint.
-.G. Does the thought come in in @Ephesians 5 where husbands are told to love their wives and the injunction to the wives is to be subject?
J.T. The point throughout that passage, running into chapter 6, is that God is meeting the devil, challenging the enemy's works so that everyone in subjection should accept the position and be subject. The church is said to be subject to Christ. That is the position she is set in. Now if each person in that position accepts it as before God, he is in the position of the Israelites and will come out with great property in due time.
W.L. Does the Lord make it attractive in the parable: "Enter thou into the joy of thy lord"?
J.T. Exactly. The bondman having something is able to go and trade. He is faithful, whereas the unfaithful one has despised his master and says, He is an austere man, I will hide his money. He has feelings against his master, and that is objected to here.
A.B. In connection with what you were saying as to the servant being morally greater than his master, Jacob blesses Pharaoh. I was wondering whether there was not something great about that.
J.T. Exactly. The less is blessed of the better and, of course, he was really subject to Pharaoh as in his kingdom. That is his position, but he is able to bless him.
{239}
A.H.H. You were saying that the testings were no mistake. All of us perhaps come through testings, and there is not one but is right and good for us.
J.T. It is the position of subordination which tests us because of our pride entering into it. We do not like to be under anybody. The devil works on these lines and we may bring dishonour on God's name.
A.H.H. How prone one is often to justify oneself when testing comes.
J.T. It says they that have believing masters -- these masters are not to be despised. It would include all servants. Let them not despise them because they are brethren but let them the rather serve them with subjection because they are faithful and beloved who profit by the good and ready service rendered. Philemon is addressed as a brother beloved regarding the slave who has escaped, and the apostle endeavours to bring Philemon round fully to the recognition of the spiritual worth of his servant who is to be regarded as a brother beloved, who would be in happy relations with him, and this is the same point the apostle is making -- because they are faithful and beloved, they profit by the good and ready service rendered. There is a real incentive to serve them well because they are brethren, and especially because they are beloved and faithful.
C.K. There might be a natural tendency if a man has a believing master to despise him and say 'We are both brothers'. This would correct that.
J.T. I think that is the point. We are apt to take advantage of the fact that we are brethren and think there should be no disparity. I am not referring to when we are together in assembly. When we come together like this we are brethren, but when we get back to the shop or business relations, masters are masters and servants servants, and this instruction is for us to make the servant happy in his position and to promote faithfulness and love in the master. It
{240}
should help both, but the servant has greater advantage because he is in a position of subjection where God can work with him to bring about His mind. The master has to learn as well and not to be proud and inflated, but here the master is said to be faithful and beloved, and this would promote love in the servant.
C.K. Because a man is faithful and beloved would be a further inducement to be in subjection.
J.T. If, through grace, he sees the grace of God working in his master, this is to be admired.
C.K. It is remarkable that the Spirit of God should make this provision.
J.T. It is remarkable how God goes into detail -- nothing more touching. Go through the prophets -- how God goes into the detail of evil. He would shrink from it, but He goes through in detail in order to get to our conscience, and now He goes into details of serving in business and the like.
A.B. It is not natural to be subject.
J.T. No, but we have to be as of God.
A.B. If we are tested and accept the test we may have to be subject, and if we accept it, God will turn it to good.
J.T. We get it in the journey through the wilderness, the preparing of the tabernacle -- the way God works out subjection in His people. In a difficult day (in Titus) it does not say masters adorn the doctrine but servants.
W.L. It was a difficult day in the day of Boaz. We see this feature beautifully portrayed.
J.T. Beautiful relation between master and servants in a difficult day, and that is just what we have now.
W.L. We live in a day like it.
J.T. For the last hundred years, this has been developing, unionism asserting its rights. The union is
{241}
greater than the master -- turning the position upside down and we therefore have to do with difficult times. Difficult times shall be there, and they are here now.
-.R. Would you say a word about the teaching (verse 1)?
J.T. That idea is, of course, running through Scripture and comes out particularly in @Acts 2. Teaching here is not the law, but what the apostles were teaching, and particularly Paul -- my doctrine, my teaching. It is the great general thought and involves the unity of the faith. The teaching will be discredited if masters and servants in fellowship are not proceeding on right and happy lines.
-.G. It does not seem to be the point here to speak to the masters.
J.T. No, it is this matter of subjection. Then it goes on in verses 2, 3, "These things teach and exhort. If any one teach differently, and do not accede to sound words, those of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the teaching which is according to piety, he is puffed up, knowing nothing, but sick about questions and disputes of words, out of which arise envy, strife, injurious words, evil suspicions, constant quarrellings of men corrupted in mind and destitute of the truth, holding gain to be the end of piety", and then we have that "piety with contentment is great gain". That is just the point. You come out with great property on those lines -- great gain.
A.H.H. Would it be possible to have piety without contentment?
J.T. You might have it in measure. The Spirit of God gives credit for anything at all, especially in John's gospel. We are credited with anything that is the result of God's work, however affected by other things, but this position of contentment is the point. I am content in my circumstances. Piety is bringing God into my circumstances, however trying they may appear to be. Contentment added would mean a
{242}
wealthy person. He would shine in the meeting and be greater than his master.
W.L. Does Paul shine in this in Philippians? He says, "I have learnt in those circumstances in which I am, to be satisfied in myself", and then he speaks of the power he has and he says, "My God shall abundantly supply all your need".
J.T. Very good indeed. "I have learned". What wealth in that word 'to be content'!
J.M. Would our movements in spirituality be according to what we were in piety?
J.T. I think so. Piety may be often accredited to us when it may not be piety in the true sense of the word -- that I bring God into my circumstances whatever they may be, whether master or servant. As master I need Him to save me from the disadvantages of mastership, because there are more spiritual advantages in the servant's position, but if I bring God into the mastership, that is piety, too. I accept it from God that I am master. God has placed me in it.
E.W. Do you see that principle in Moses? He was faithful to Him that appointed him -- to the position given to him in subjection.
J.T. That is right. He got his commission at the burning bush. Things were very small -- a very small position outwardly. He had to go through the thing in Egypt. He was faithful in that position. Whether I am master or servant, if it is of God, I am to bring God into it.
A.H. Might we go back to chapter 4: 7, 8 in relation to piety?
J.T. The allusion there is to bodily exercise. The word 'exercise' is used there strikingly and it may allude to fasting and that sort of thing. Bodily exercise applied today would be what is called recreation. It may be profitable to have a little walk, because a walk does help you sometimes, but godliness
{243}
is profitable for everything. If one does not take the walk he gets on. God looks after him. What is in your mind?
A.H. I was thinking something like that.
J.T. Of course, this matter of bodily exercise tests young people. It checks liberty. You say, What harm in it? It is called a sports field. We have in Scripture the pool of sport, and then the pool of Bethesda and the pool of Siloam. The pool of sport is in @2 Samuel 2. It shows the trend of it, how it really means murder. The proposal was that the young men should make sport, but it meant murder -- a terrible thing. That underlies the sports field. It is distinctly worldly. Those that advocate bodily exercise are likely to be drawn into the unclean relations of the sports field. Esau was a man of the field -- an outstanding man that could use a gun or cricket bat or anything like that. No doubt he was a leading man of his time, but it is said of Abraham that he dwelt in tents with Isaac and Jacob -- not a word about Esau. He is left out. Why was that? "This did not Abraham". A spiritual man would not go in for that.
-.G. According to that scripture Abraham dwelt with Isaac and Jacob.
J.T. It was Abraham's tents. He had in mind the house of promise. Esau sold his birthright -- not a word about him being in mind in Abraham dwelling with Isaac and Jacob. It could only have been a matter of fifteen years inclusive of Jacob because he was born when Abraham was one hundred and sixty years old. Esau was the same age as Jacob and had the same privileges but Abraham did not dwell with him. Abraham would not go out in the field, "this did not Abraham". You have to watch the man. People say, 'What harm' in what they do, but do the spiritual do it? You have to see which of the people do it.
{244}
-.G. So he would have an effect upon Isaac and Jacob.
J.T. He would impart those feelings.
-.R. Would that apply to the saints moving together, several generations, the younger getting the gain of being with the older?
J.T. The point I think is to see first that the Lord says of Abraham "This did not Abraham". What did Abraham do and what did he not do? He has a great place in Scripture. In @Luke 16 he has a great place and his bosom is referred to, showing he was a man of affections. Jacob kept in association with Isaac but where was Esau? Abraham would not go on that line. The young people say, 'What is the harm -- I take my playthings and my sports -- clothes down to the beach -- what harm is there?' Well, do the spiritual do that? Do you watch the spiritual? This, says the Lord, did not Abraham.
A.B. Lot would have done better if he had gone with Abraham.
J.T. He elects himself out of Abraham's company, the same as Esau.
A.H. Would you say a further word as to 2 Samuel?
You are referring to the statement of Abner -- and they lost several lives over it?
J.T. It was terrible -- it was sport. It is what sport may lead you into -- rivalry and pride. What do you say to these things, Dr. M.?
Dr.M. I was wondering if the best leverage to health was contentment, contented mind and spirit. Is it in the good of this we do not need the physical exercise? I should like to know a little more about contentment.
J.T. Very good to bring that up. No doubt as you say -- and you should know -- contentment is helpful physically. Contentment is great gain -- but with godliness. In chapter 4 it says "exercise thyself unto piety". The word 'exercise' is to be noted; "for
{245}
bodily exercise is profitable for a little, but piety is profitable for everything". So that you cannot in fact have anything better. Take any profession you like. It is not profitable for everything, but piety is.
H.Y. In @Hebrews 5: 7 it says, "Having been heard because of his piety", in speaking of the Lord.
J.T. A wonderful thought that. You feel you take off your shoes -- to think that it should be said of the Lord that He was heard because of His piety.
H.Y. I was thinking of what you were saying on Monday night after the prayer meeting as to our having the conscious sense of being heard.
J.T. Surely piety should enter into our prayer meetings.
H.Y. And you would have something distinctive to pray about.
J.T. This is a very striking word, "We have brought nothing into the world: it is manifest that neither can we carry anything out. But having sustenance and covering, we will be content with these. But those who desire to be rich fall into temptation and a snare, and many unwise and hurtful lusts, which plunge men into destruction and ruin. For the love of money is the root of every evil; which some having aspired after have wandered from the faith, and pierced themselves with many sorrows". It is the love of money. We do not come to the actual rich persons until verse 17. These persons aspire to be rich.
E.W. Would the thought be set out in Achan? He coveted and aspired to be rich.
J.T. Just so. We have this here very closely linked with the title "man of God". The title has a great place in the Old Testament. You get it in 2 Kings and running right through. It was applied to Moses and some unnamed men, and others whose works showed they were men of God, Elijah and Elisha -- but Timothy is the only one styled in this
{246}
way in the New Testament, and it is very significant that it is in the midst of these injunctions whether I am a servant or master or business man or aspiring to be rich. It is very remarkable that Timothy is here called a man of God. The speaking here is not in relation to great spiritual things but in regard to things to be avoided in the sense of having to do with God.
N.A. What is implied in the expression "conflict of faith"?
J.T. That is plain enough. That is, you are striving for what is good. You are not striving for anything selfish. Your striving or fight is for good. You are really in the good fight of faith. Paul speaks of having kept the faith and Jude turns aside to enjoin us to contend earnestly for it.
N.A. I was wondering, as it is said in connection with those that seek to be rich, whether it implied that they might be in a poor position but they should accept it in that way.
J.T. That would apply, of course, but when we come to verse 11 he is speaking to a man of God. It is a question of contending for what is good and nothing else. Not contending for a place among the brethren, but in faith. It is the good combat of faith.
A.H.H. So would you say the way into it is the fleeing on the one hand and pursuing on the other?
J.T. First, "Flee these things". The fleeing is striking. It is in the second letter, too. Not only give them up, but turn away -- cease from them as refusing them, and then follow what is good -- righteousness, piety, faith, love, endurance, meekness of spirit. The 'thou' is emphatic and the word is particularly to those engaged especially in the service of God. What do you think, Mr. I.?
F.I. I think it is encouragement in that way that as having that position he is viewed as a man of God.
J.T. In any engaged in the service, the Lord
{247}
has His eye upon us in that way. We are getting older. Paul was getting older and had his eye on this young man.
E.B. Would subjection make way for this? I was thinking the Lord Jesus pleased not Himself.
J.T. Pleased not Himself -- a very good word.
W.L. Is the encouragement that these features are going to be formed?
J.T. The second letter brings the instruction and burden laid on Timothy down to our own times, and it seems to me, in view of the difficult day and many who are engaged in the Lord's service, the Lord is challenging the younger ones and because of this we have these three personal letters -- 1 and 2 Timothy and Titus. The principle is that the young men should take on, so that they are burdened, and these are the instructions for them to go by. It is no small matter to be enjoined as it says, "before God who preserves all things in life, and Christ Jesus who witnessed before Pontius Pilate the good confession, that thou keep the commandment spotless, irreproachable, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ; which in its own time the blessed and only Ruler shall shew, the King of those that reign, and Lord of those that exercise lordship; who only has immortality, dwelling in unapproachable light; whom no man has seen, nor is able to see; to whom be honour and eternal might. Amen". You could hardly imagine a more serious charge.
Dr.M. Would this be on the same level as the thought of taking up the cross and following Him?
J.T. There was the revelation to Peter in @Matthew 16, then the taking up the cross and following Him and then going up the mountain.
A.H. "Which in its own time ... shall shew". Is that brought forward with the idea of giving us this insight into all this glory?
J.T. Yes, that is to be distinct.
{248}
A.G. Verse 16 would almost appear to refer to the Lord Jesus.
J.T. The Deity is in mind. You get the thought in @Titus 2: 13, linking God the Father and the Son together -- and then it goes on "whom no man has seen, nor is able to see". The showing is by Him in its own time. In chapter 2 we have "the testimony to be rendered in its own times". So here, in its own time.
C.K. The latter part of verse 15 should be a comfort to us today, should it not, the King of those that reign and Lord of those that exercise lordship; would that remind us that God has control of things?
J.T. It is a great comfort to know that every matter has been laid before God and He has charge of everything. He is the only Ruler -- the blessed and only Ruler.
H.P. Then Paul refers to the deposit, he says, Keep that which is *committed to thy trust*.
J.T. The principle is to keep the trust. In the second letter we get, "Keep, by the Holy Spirit which dwells in us, the good deposit entrusted". You are jealous of what you have. It has to be kept as a sacred trust.
{249}
RELIABILITY
@John 2: 23 - 25; @John 4: 28 - 30; @John 9:13 - 15; @John 20:22, 23
J.T. This thought of reliability in a spiritual sense has a special place in this gospel, and is obviously of importance, especially now when there is so much shallowness and unreliability, in these times peculiarly called difficult times. John's gospel is intended to furnish us in view of these times, so it occurred to me that it would be helpful to look at these scriptures. It is said formally of the Lord that He did not trust Himself to certain: "many believed on his name, beholding his signs which he wrought. But Jesus himself did not trust himself to them", @John 2: 23, 24. The Lord personally is brought into it in a very special way; there are persons He would trust, and persons He would not trust. The other scriptures read furnish examples of reliable persons. We are reminded therefore in chapter 2 that He knew all men, and needed not that any should testify of man. So it is clear that if we rely in any way on what we are as men, we are disqualified. The next chapter teaches new birth, that is, God has to begin over again in us. I believe the Lord has much to commit to those who are reliable, therefore it is of all importance to be reliable, for He needs us as trustworthy people.
Ques. Is friendship in mind as in the latter part of the gospel?
J.T. Yes, in chapter 15. The gospel is full of illustrations of reliability, because God has called us friends, as those to whom He would communicate things. That is seen in Abraham in similar circumstances in view of the overthrow of Sodom -- the judgment of the world. God would not hide from Abraham the thing He would do; Abraham was a trustworthy man, he would command his house after him.
{250}
P.H.H. Have you in mind that divine workmanship must underlie every feature of reliability?
J.T. That is what I thought we might see in these instances. Many others might be mentioned, but the work of God must underlie all, because not only unconverted men, but christians who rely on the flesh in any way are unreliable, the Lord cannot trust them. The woman in chapter 4 illustrates a reliable person. The Lord committed nothing to her, He did not tell her to go in peace, or sin no more; elsewhere he does, and warns persons whom He helped, as in chapters 5 and 8, showing He was not quite sure of them, and could not rely on them, but the woman in chapter 4 goes away of herself, and shows that she was an observer and was taking in what the Lord was teaching, not only in word but in the spirit and principle of it, for she made use of it.
Rem. Would you say the persons alluded to in chapter 2 were convicted mentally? It is obvious faith was not there. I suppose the Lord cannot trust Himself to persons where faith is absent.
J.T. That is the thought in the passage. I think we all, young and old, might learn from it how far we may go in being helped to observe external things, and yet inwardly be unreliable.
H.B. Must there be the sense of divine searching if there is to be this feature of reliability? I was thinking of the Lord's dealings with the woman and what He says to Nathanael, I saw thee. He would have the sense of being under His eye.
J.T. That is an important side of our subject. This passage says, "Himself knew what was in man". He said to Nathanael: "Before that Philip called thee, when thou wast under the fig-tree, I saw thee". Not only does He know what is in men generally, but He knows each one, and how we are positioned.
P.H.H. What would correspond today with the believing on His name? Is that connected merely
{251}
with the outward things which can be seen -- "beholding his signs which he wrought"?
J.T. Yes, whatever is public in the way of testimony. His name carries all that He is with it. It is remarkable it comes in in the first chapter, as bringing out our relation as children. It says, "those that believe on his name" (verse 13). That applies today, because the Lord's name is testified to, and many may be affected by the public testimony, as millions are, but they are not trustworthy, that is why one brings this forward. Reliability is so important; the Lord has much to commit to us if we are reliable.
Rem. We had a case recently of a young man who had difficulties as to the pathway. His difficulties were met and the principles set before him, but the question was raised as to whether he had received the truth mentally, or embraced it in faith, as knowing the difference between the two.
J.T. We were looking at that side of the truth on Saturday, what professing believers really believe. It is said in @Ephesians 1: 13, "in whom ye also have trusted, having heard the word of the truth, the glad tidings of your salvation; in whom also, having believed, ye have been sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise". It is not only the gospel in a general sense, but having heard the word of the truth, and having believed, for the truth does not flatter us. The gospel of our salvation is a great overture of grace on God's part, intended to affect us, to influence us in that sense, but the 'word of the truth' is a matter to be noticed. That is heard before they received the gospel. The truth is not only grace, in fact it is alongside grace -- grace and truth. The gospel is grace, but truth challenges and searches and adjusts us, searches us inwardly, so that what we believe lays a basis for reliability; we are adjusted by the truth. I believe many are devoid of the Spirit because this matter of the truth is not received at first and looked into.
{252}
Rem. It was no accident that the Ephesians had a powerful John baptist ministry before Paul; was it to pave the way on the lines of the truth for the reception of the glad tidings?
J.T. I think Paul is alluding here to what he had told them. They were defective because they had not received the full truth. I believe many believers have not got the Spirit because this matter of the truth has not been looked into before committal to the gospel. The gospel is distinct here; "in whom ye also have trusted, having heard the word of the truth", and then "the glad tidings of your salvation". All this precedes the sealing of the Spirit.
Ques. Have you in mind in speaking of the truth, the ministry of the cross?
J.T. It would include that in it.
A.B. Would it include what man is naturally, and what God is?
J.T. It must be so. Not simply truth, but the word of the truth, the full thought of it.
A.M. The Lord says to Nicodemus, "He that practises the truth comes to the light, that his works may be manifested that they have been wrought in God", @John 3:21.
J.T. I believe chapter 3 coming in after these verses at the end of chapter 2 is the opening up of the truth, the necessity of new birth, being born of water and the Spirit, and that the Son of man *must* be lifted up, involving the cross, which means the condemnation of sin in the flesh. The lifting up of the Son of man is mentioned three times in John's gospel, referring to the condition of sin in the flesh.
P.H.H. The new man according to Ephesians is described as "according to God ... created in truthful righteousness and holiness", @Ephesians 4: 24. Would that be the divine side, and our side receiving the word of the truth?
{253}
J.T. Quite so. I believe it is a wholesome challenge to everyone as to whether he has the Spirit. That is the challenge in @Acts 19 -- "Did ye receive the Holy Spirit when ye had believed?" (verse 2). They said they had not heard of Him. The apostle says"To what then were ye baptised?" (verse 3). Then he tells them the truth about Christ, and when they heard that, they were baptised to the name of the Lord Jesus. Paul laid his hands on them and they received the Holy Spirit.
A.B. Would you encourage believers not conscious of having the Spirit to look to God with the desire that they might receive the Spirit?
J.T. We are told to pray to the Father. Again there is a challenge with it as to why I have not the Spirit while others have. I believe it is largely because of not receiving the word of the truth.
Ques. Are you implying that there is no reliability apart from having the Spirit in this way?
J.T. Quite so. The Spirit's presence is contingent on new birth, and receiving the word of the truth. The Son of man lifted up involves the truth of the cross. In that way God moves so that we might be set free from that which stands in relation to us as men after the flesh, so that He can give the Spirit.
H.F.S. Does the cleansing of the leper come in in that way, first of all the blood, then the oil put on the blood? "Upon man's flesh shall it not be poured", @Exodus 30:32. You realise that that is absolutely necessary?
J.T. The word of the truth spoken of here would imply all that, the blood and the oil.
G.W.B. Would it be what is presented in the early chapters of Romans?
J.T. It is developed there in a fundamental way, the Spirit of God coming down to us as believers, or as those who would be believers; the truth is developed in a remarkable way in that epistle, so that the
{254}
Spirit is immediately in view, as it is said, "Who has been delivered for our offences and has been raised for our justification ... . Therefore having been justified on the principle of faith, we have peace towards God through our Lord Jesus Christ; by whom we have also access by faith into this favour in which we stand" (@Romans 4: 25 -- chapter 5: 1, 2), and then immediately the Holy Spirit is recognised as doing something -- shedding the love of God in our hearts, taking possession of our hearts, as much as to say, believers according to what is stated are garrisoned in their hearts, the love of God is there, the Spirit of God Himself active in that service.
Ques. Would the word of the truth enter into the preaching?
J.T. Certainly, that is why John begins with new birth, and the lifting up of the Son of man. The truth is involved in these two things, the two 'musts'
'must be born anew' and 'the Son of man must be lifted up', because new birth in us would struggle unceasingly and never get deliverance aside from the condemnation of our state; we need not recognise sin in the flesh any more. I think the woman in chapter 4 furnishes the other side of the position to chapter 3; she appears without premeditation. The Lord was not without premeditation, for He had already been constituted the great Administrator of God's grace and of the gift of the Spirit. She appears and affords the Lord an opportunity to unfold how this matter of state is worked out in the sense of historical sinning. He did not bring this side before Nicodemus; to him He spoke of the necessity of the lifting up of the Son of Man, and that even the Pharisees needed this. But the woman in chapter 4 affords the Lord an opportunity of bringing out the application of the truth in relation to our histories, historical sinning. That is a most searching and humiliating matter, and many are not ready to face
{255}
it, but the Lord went through the matter with her, and she was ready to go through it, too. When the disciples came on the scene she left, and left her waterpot behind her, showing she had taken in the truth. The Lord had told her He was the Christ; she did not tell this to the men; she was not trading on her knowledge, but spoke of what she had gone through in her soul. That is the kind of thing to rely on; to work things out in the soul, deal with the history of sinning, not merely quote Scripture. She did not merely quote what the Lord said. She could easily have said, He told me He was the Christ, but that would not have been as convincing as what she did say: "Come, see a man who told me all things I had ever done", and she makes it a hypothetical matter -- "is not he the Christ?"
P.H.H. That is, persons formed in features of the truth become a challenge.
J.T. They knew her. Had she said a certain man told me He was the Christ, what would you expect them to do? It would be a question of her veracity. But when she said, "He told me all things that I had ever done, is not he the Christ?" there is a person to be trusted, a sincere person, and they did trust her; they believed what she said and came to the Lord accordingly.
Ques. In speaking of historical sins, had you in mind her personal history, or something more?
J.T. Herself. She had enough. Paul does not hesitate to tell us what he had been -- an insolent, overbearing man, and also chief of sinners; that man has weight with men.
P.H.H. Does the element of prophecy come into this (verse 19)? Would you be free to link that with the element of prophetic ministry amongst us?
J.T. I should indeed. The Lord is encouraging us in it in a little way. He is with us. The Lord's word, "Lo, I am with you", is connected with prophetic
{256}
ministry. It is very feeble, but it bears on what we are saying, and He is with us in it; it brings out the secrets of men. The man is convicted, comes under the influence of prophecy and is judged of all, the brethren fall into line with the thing. You have a real person now. That is what is going on at the present time, it is all to bring out reality.
Ques. Would the doctrine of new birth precede this? Is it to show the ground of divine operations?
J.T. I think we must have doctrine. Paul says, Thou hast fully known my doctrine. The Lord made much of doctrine, and directs Nicodemus back to Ezekiel; we must have that as a basis, but chapter 4 is the other side. Here is a person who has gone through her historical conduct and does not hide it. She refers to what effect His word had on her own soul. That gives weight to what I am saying. Some do not get early history, they come late into the truth and do their best to catch up, but never do catch up -- they have missed their opportunities. We need early history to be in power in our testimony.
G.W.B. Is reliability seen in Joseph, particularly as tested in secret? "How should I do this great wickedness, and sin against God?" (@Genesis 39: 9).
J.T. Quite so. I believe Joseph stands for that. He represents the young side in the book of Genesis, a great patriarchal book where old men are seen, reliable, too, but here is a very young man who is reliable, tested severely, but reliable.
A.B. Is this thought of all I have ever done the thought of the history being reviewed? Is that to be carried forward with us?
J.T. Paul carried it forward. In 1 Timothy he refers back to what he was himself.
P.H.H. The Lord does not say anything about worship until this matter of transparency is declared (verse 20). She says, Our fathers worshipped. The Lord seems to take up her word, and indicates that the
{257}
hour is coming when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and truth. Would it be just to suggest that these exercises are foundational to what may go on with us in the assembly?
J.T. I think we wonder why the Lord spoke of such great things to this woman, but she said, "I see that thou art a prophet". It does not say He told her, but she perceived it. That means the work of God was showing itself in her. It is the basis of what follows -- the truth of worship. And then the place the waterpot had with her, that her body was to be that, she was to be the waterpot. So she left the waterpot and went away. The disciples had come on the scene, and apparently paid no attention to her, they had no interest in relation to whether she was converted or not. They wondered that He spoke with the woman. They might have more than wondered, made enquiry, but apparently she does not become an object of interest to them at all. She rightly leaves then. "The woman *then* left her waterpot and went away into the city" (verse 28). Why is that mentioned? Why are we not ready to come into the work of God wherever it comes to our attention? And then it says, as though she saw there was no interest on the part of the disciples, she said to the men, "Come, see a man". She is not discouraged by the want of interest, she goes on, and leaves the waterpot, meaning she has light in her soul as to herself, what she is to be now, a characteristic vessel of the truth He has presented to her.
P.H.H. She leaves that in the presence of the Lord and of the uninterested disciples.
J.T. See how they are left. There they are, and the Lord says to them, "I have food to eat which ye do not know" (verse 32). That seems to me a rebuke.
Dr.M. Would the disciples be like those who have not left their waterpots? She is morally greater than they are.
{258}
J.T. Yes, the present work of God outshone what was official. Here we have what the Lord is after in this city today, and we may not take notice of it, it may be little in our eyes, but what is it in His? It is great in the Lord's eyes. The point is what is being done now, the actual present work of God. The official class pass it by as if it were nothing; the Lord says, I have food you do not know of. It is a very humbling thing, to be told you do not know.
A.B. Is that why they are told to lift up their eyes?
J.T. We do not lift up our eyes, we are occupied with ourselves, it may be. Why did they not ask about the woman? What a fine field for enquiry!
Ques. Do you think we should look for these features in those desiring to break bread?
J.T. Exactly; they are ostensibly the present work of the Lord. We are in the official place; that challenges us. Why did not the disciples ask about this woman, What is she doing here? Why is she going back without her waterpot?
P.H.H. What about chapter 9?
J.T. In this chapter God is going to manifest His works. Now we are in the presence of something greater than creation. Jehovah said to Job, "Where wast thou when I founded the earth? ... When the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy?" @Job 38: 4, 7. Job was not there, but it was a wonderful time. The morning stars were engaged, and the sons of God were engaged. But here is a chapter greater than that, a question of the works of God, not creational works, but spiritual, the present works of God. The man did not move towards Christ, did not ask like Bartimaeus, he is passive. The disciples took notice of him and made enquiries, "who sinned, this man or his parents, that he should be born blind?" The Lord says, 'Neither, it is a question of the works of God and My presence here'. He is working before night comes.
{259}
"I am the light of the world". In the presence of the most wonderful set of circumstances, what is this man going to do? He is for the manifestation of the works of God. Is he this? That is the point. When the man is brought to the Pharisees they question him, and he says, "He put mud upon mine eyes, and I washed, and I see". To the neighbours he says, "having gone and washed, I saw". The history of the Spirit of God is, "He went therefore and washed, and came seeing". That is the fact stated of him.
'Saw' is historical. He is true to the Lord's word about him. The Lord has made no mistake about him, he is a trustworthy person, he is manifesting the works of God, doing it now, seeing now. He is a person reliable for fellowship.
E.G. Would you say a word about 'works' in the plural?
J.T. One man may be used in that way. Think of what interest you are to heaven. The Lord is saying, I am going to make this man a manifestation of the works of God; you want to be alive to it. The man made no mistake at all in any question asked of him.
Rem. I suppose the works would be many and various to set forth the divine glory?
J.T. This is one of the most glorious chapters you can read from this point of view, it is what one man can be in meeting different people, how he answers them, his understanding and answers, the very words said about the Lord.
P.H.H. Would you open up a little what is involved in the spitting on the ground and putting mud on his eyes?
J.T. The Lord is making clear His own position in entering on this great matter of the manifestation of the works of God, the Worker under God, He Himself being God, it must be understood how He is doing it. He came so low as to be like another man,
{260}
spitting on the ground, making mud of the spittle, for that is the word used, a very humiliating thought -- 'mud', but the Lord made it. There was never such mud as this before or since.
Rem. It involves the incarnation, and the great truth involved in it.
J.T. That is the idea, what is essential, His essence, the spittle. That mixed with clay, which would mean humanity, but such a humanity as never existed before, only existed during the life of Jesus before their eyes in blood and flesh.
Ques. Would you say a word in connection with 'sent'. It is not until he has washed that he gets his sight.
J.T. It brings out the question of obedience. He did not deviate one iota from what he was told to do. It says, He went and washed, and came seeing. A question of obedience, you adhere to it sedulously, that is essential to the works of God being manifested. You do not deviate a hair's breadth.
Rem. I was thinking of what the Lord says, "Go, wash in the pool of Siloam, which is interpreted, Sent", as though it might bring out the Lord's own position, that that should be understood.
J.T. The man was in that sense on a level with the Lord's own position -- sent. He goes and washes and came seeing, and now he is a continuance of the thing, seeing better spiritually as he proceeds.
P.H.H. Would this fit in with what Paul says in @2 Corinthians 5: 16? "We henceforth know no one according to flesh; but if even we have known Christ according to flesh, yet now we know him thus no longer". I was wondering about the mud and the anointing, involving the incarnation, and yet that being washed off.
J.T. It is that condition brought to an end. Siloam means the counterpart of that, the water implies His death, so that that condition is terminated.
{261}
The works of God can never be manifest without the condemnation of sin in the flesh, that condition being set aside.
W.C. Does the washing apply to the whole man?
J.T. It is the whole man.
W.C. The blindness was characteristic of our state by nature; the whole man has to go.
J.T. The water implies that the whole man has to go, not only sins dealt with, and the man figuratively accepts that thoroughly, he went and washed and *came*. Where to? It is a thought that lies in your soul, you return, the idea of reaction in the reception of the truth, it is what you do afterwards, it is the reaction that you come not only into the good of your sins forgiven, but the condemnation of sin in the flesh. How can he have such light and respond so steadily and consistently with all that came up save as he had accepted not only the question of remission of sins, but the condemnation of sin in the flesh? How can a man answer all these questions save as he is clear as to his sins and state?
W.C. Do you think anyone owning the Lord as Prophet has bottomed things?
J.T. This prophetic ministry meeting is a question of dealing with the secrets of our hearts, and that clarifies our view, so that I am ready for every question that comes up.
F.I. Would there be a sense of power in the Spirit when he says, I see?
J.T. Seeing in that sense, no matter what comes to you, and what puzzling things there are today in christendom, let them come if you are clear as to this matter, including cleansing, and condemnation of sin in the flesh, you are ready for them.
Rem. The seeing is characteristic?
J.T. The man represents an advanced stage in the believer's history. It is not only one work, it is works, not only dealing with my sins. You can
{262}
bring what you like to this man. If one reads the 'Collected Writings' one marvels at the way every thing is met. This could not be on a new covenant basis. He could not answer everything on that basis, there must be @Romans 7 and 8, so that the man sees all things clearly. Whatever you bring he sees all round it.
Rem. And the glory of the Son of God, too.
J.T. Exactly.
H.F.S. With regard to the works of God, is there always a corresponding answer with us?
J.T. The inward state is the difficulty. It is the return that brings out the thoroughness of the man. He came back to where the light was, and everything is clear. Whatever questions were brought up, this man could answer them. The cleverest men of the day were there, but he is an overcomer. That is what is needed at the present time. The world is full of blasphemy and modernism. How can we meet them save as we are clear, the whole matter settled as to my condition?
Ques. Does the reference in @Ephesians 5 bear on it? "Ye were once darkness, but now light in the Lord; walk as children of light", then the reference to the fruit of the light being in all goodness and righteousness and truth?
J.T. A very excellent scripture here.
Rem. Verse 13 of that chapter is a wonderful verse.
J.T. The culmination of all this is in the verse read in chapter 20. The Lord is now ready to commit Himself unreservedly to the disciples; there is no condition at all, unqualified committal to the disciples. "Peace be to you: as the Father sent me forth, I also send you".
P.H.H. Is there a link in that the Son of God found the man when he had been cast out and so to
{263}
speak linked Himself on with him? Would that prove the man was reliable in any degree?
J.T. He was fit for the new world, ready for it. He belonged to it. The Son of God implies a new world, chapter 10 is the opening up of that.
Ques. Is the thought of coming back in view of the flock in chapter 10 -- all the work of God put together, resulting in the company in chapter 20?
J.T. That is the teaching of the book, there are many other instances, especially at Bethany. The Lord came there, it does not say why He came, but I think He came to love's circle, a beautiful thought, you can trust those who love you. The Lord came in amongst them six days before the passover, "where was the dead man Lazarus, whom Jesus raised from among the dead". It is the dead Lazarus, that is the man, He has come in relation to him, a continuation of the thought of the man in chapter 9. The matter of death is gone through, he is a risen man, and the circle is of that kind, no personal interest in that circle at all, Jesus was perfectly at home amongst them. That is the idea, perfect reliability in that circle, because love is there. Here we have a circle of persons in the home.
H.B. Is the reliability of love seen in keeping His commandments?
J.T. Exactly, chapter 14, and then friendship in chapter 15.
W.C. I suppose the scene at the cross would also be a link, love standing by, proving itself, the Lord committing His mother to John, it suggests the circle there.
J.T. Beautiful. All is cumulative.
Ques. Have you some thought on the breathing?
J.T. This is the topstone of the subject. The Lord is placing them in His own position. He was sent out by the Father, and says, I am sending you out as my Father sent Me. He is bringing them on to
{264}
a very high level, not now a circle, but servants who were to act for Him, to be representative of Him, and He commits Himself to them without any qualification at all, breathing into them, meaning they are possessors of His Spirit, which raises the whole question of the spirit that marks us. You can come into a company of brethren like this and be at home, they will not criticise you unduly, they will make the most of what you say. How much that was to Christ! We may see that at Bethany, and now the continuation of that is present, sending them out into a wicked world, but trusting them.
Ques. Is it the Spirit of the sent One breathed into them, a reliable One that the Father could send?
J.T. Himself, His Spirit imparted to them. The level is a very high one here.
H.F.S. Would such a company, having such features, be the place where the Lord can unfold in a deep way His own thoughts of love and enlarge them amongst His own? Is that the secret of having a touch from the Lord?
J.T. Exactly, it is a question of His Spirit here, a beautiful and most intimate transaction in view of being sent out. You have to do with people who have committed sins. Chapter 4 is a question of sins dealt with, and chapter 9 the whole question of the state of man so that the works of God are manifested. Now these disciples represent all that worked out in themselves, so that they are sent out, and they will have to meet people who have sinned. What are they going to do? The Lord says to them, "Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted to them; whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained". You could hardly get anything more expressive of confidence than that, because the Lord's name is involved. Whether we forgive sins that should not be forgiven, or whether we retain sins that should be forgiven, the Lord's name is involved in that, because He has
{265}
committed Himself to us. Hence the importance of having clear vision in dealing with those who wish to walk with us.
P.H.H. Does this involve the assembly?
J.T. It is more the persons who form it. In Matthew the binding comes first, but here, the more gracious side, forgiveness comes first. We are now in the midst of Christendom and the denominations, involving sins committed. We have to know how to deal with people, and if they come out from the Establishment, etc., our attitude is, we are ready to forgive you, but then you have got to accept there are sins. Nobody can be in these denominations without being guilty.
Rem. If people are coming into this circle, this should be our attitude; but on their side they must come the same way as we do.
Ques. Does Matthew represent the Moses side, and John the grace side?
J.T. Very good, John puts the grace side first -- full of grace and truth.
P.H.H. Thomas missed all that.
J.T. Quite so, he was not there.
A.M. Thomas said, "We know not where thou goest". I wondered whether any are wilfully ignorant of the position, and their wilfulness is fastened on them? They do not want to know, really.
J.T. It is as having gone through things ourselves. Take Nicodemus, he is out of it, he is still in the circle of the world. The woman in chapter 4 can be brought into the assembly, she is trustworthy. The man in chapter 5 cannot be trusted, the Lord warns him. You can hardly allow a man to break bread in that state, he is not reliable. The woman in chapter 8 is similar, "Neither do I condemn thee" is negative. "Go, and sin no more", she is in danger, too, but the man in chapter 9 is ready for fellowship.
Rem. He accepts the ostracism.
{266}
J.T. He does. What is it that enters into these men that the Lord is so confident about? They have been through all this. The woman in chapter 4 would be a reliable sister in a locality. Suppose she was there when Philip went down and preached, listening to Philip she would wonder about Simon Magus. Sisters ought to be ready to discern where people are, so that if the brothers look into matters, sisters are not left out of this matter of persons qualified for fellowship, and I think it wise to announce names, and give a week to think it over. The sisters ought to be ready and watchful. I believe this sister in @John 4 would be like that.
A.B. Would it bear on cases of recovery? Peter had a past history. Would he be one qualified to exercise this?
J.T. I think the Lord goes to the full limit with him, and challenges him whether he loved Him more than the others. Peter had to judge that the Lord knew what was there. He was still a reliable man potentially.
Rem. The Lord said in chapter 1, "thou shalt be called Cephas", and it went through.
Ques. What feature of reliability does Mary of Magdala represent? She is entrusted with much.
J.T. It is a question whether the Lord can commit truth to you, there are very few of us trustworthy enough for that. We are apt to adorn ourselves if the Lord entrusts anything to us. The woman in chapter 4 is similar. The Lord had communicated to her formally that He was the Christ, and she does not speak of that. She speaks of the moral side, what her history had been. She is trustworthy, she can keep a thing. The apostle Paul kept things for many years. Peter knew about sonship, and as far as we know he did not speak about it in his preaching. He might easily have adorned himself with the fact that he was the first to get a revelation of the Son of God.
{267}
G.W.B. Would it be seen in @1 Corinthians 5, that Paul, though absent, having judged the matter at Corinth, could enter into this same spirit the disciples were found in in this chapter -- capable of judging?
J.T. Quite so. What a reliable man he was, and what a servant. He might have said, I am not in Corinth, I have to leave it now, but he watches it.
Rem. The thought is that this is the quality and character of the personnel the Lord entrusts things to?
J.T. That is the idea, we want to belong to that.
{268}
PRINCIPLES THAT SHOULD MARK LOCAL ASSEMBLIES
@1 Corinthians 11: 16; @1 Thessalonians 2: 14; @Galatians 1: 1, 2 @Revelation 1: 10, 11
J.T. The word 'assembly' appears in each scripture -- in the first the assembly of God, then the assembly in different localities, and in Corinthians it is the general thought. The assembly of God brings before us an economy. Things are worked out in assemblies locally but each has the status "of God". Corinth itself is an example that catholicity and absence of contention are to mark an assembly; in Thessalonians we have the principle of imitation of assemblies, one that is young imitating one that is older and more formed and instructed; in Galatians we see how an assembly may be affected adversely by false doctrine -- evil becoming infectious; and in Revelation it is still a specified place and the seven assemblies are regarded as symbolical of the whole assembly from Pentecost to the end. Consideration of these will help locally, I hope, and help us, though isolated, to hold ourselves free from the sense of isolation.
The first point, the incongruousness of contention, is worthy of consideration. The matter dealt with is apt to cause contention -- the question of the covering, but vagueness should not lead to contention, but rather to silence and waiting on God.
Ques. What is meant by 'custom'?
Rem. It says, We have no such custom. 'We' is apostolic, or at least refers to those who adhere to the mind of God. The word 'custom' is used relative to what is generally practised -- here of contention. We are all given to it more or less. We like to gain our point instead of the brother. The mind should
{269}
be open till we arrive at the truth and then closed as in Philippians. It is better to wait on God; the truth must be maintained so it is wise to be patient.
Ques. Are contention and withstanding distinct?
Rem. Quite so, as with Paul and Peter. It cost the apostle suffering to withstand Peter. Contention would stop the free access of the Spirit as in the case of Isaac -- he moved on and got plenty of water.
Ques. Have you anything in mind in relation to the covering?
Rem. No! I should be afraid of contention. It should be dealt with at home.
Ques. Would "assembly of God" be a help to the local company?
Rem. Yes. The phrase "assembly of God" is dignified and would deter the disposition to be contentious. God is a God of order, not of disorder, but of peace.
Ques. Did the apostle Paul mean the saints of Corinth in saying "we"?
Rem. It is more the apostolic 'we', what characterised himself and those with him. It has a wide bearing and bringing in the assembly dignifies it. In them we have what represents God, as the apostle Paul indicates in 1 Timothy. Contending earnestly is right -- it is a vital point. All who love the truth will stand for it at all costs. It involves conflict but not the spirit of contention.
The assembly, to mean anything, must be representative of God. The assembly of God is a general thought including all. This is important as to testimony. Its existence means God is to be represented where each local assembly is. So Paul and Barnabas chose them elders in each assembly. The assembly is marked by seemliness in everything and contention is below its dignity.
The catholic principle of the assembly throughout the world is that God should be known in each place.
{270}
The enemy spoilt it at Corinth, but this should come out. There is to be order and peace in our assembly and hence one has to know how to behave himself. The whole epistle has in mind the commands of the Lord and the assembly ceases to represent God if contention comes in, and where brethren set themselves against the truth in an assembly God may leave things thus, as in the next verse. Compare the impressions of a visitor to a heathen temple, the synagogue and the assembly of God. He falls down and worships, and reports God is in you of a truth. Today it is the same thing. What is there in places of worship to represent God? Verse 13 calls for divine sensibilities -- "Judge in yourselves".
And His commands are not optional. Take, for example, Lydia and the jailor. She attended to the things spoken by Paul, and he went into her house. Entertaining is an important feature of christianity, and that needs a house. Nor should it be marked by contention, for that shows itself in the assembly.
Ques. Is subjection the opposite of contention?
Rem. Yes. Then Thessalonians calls attention to the importance of imitating what is of God. There is a correspondence between the assemblies in Judaea and Thessalonica. Both suffered from their own countrymen. The Thessalonians were proud and might despise the Jews naturally but now they are imitating them. God has come into the Greek world and into the Jewish world and it is an incentive to draw them together, national feelings are broken down and what is of God prevails. The young would do well to attend to this imitation.
It is not metropolitanism so it is not the assembly of the Jews but of Judaea -- less important in a sense but classified with all the others. The assembly of God carries with it certain advantages -- why not get the benefit of them?
{271}
Ques. Would suffering make way for spiritual instincts to develop?
Rem. Yes. God works in a sense of what may have to be contended in a district. What marks this city? Every city has its own features and we have to contend with the world as it is in the one we are in.
If we see in another features of God which we have not we had better get them -- imitate them.
There are great variations in the times of meetings; should this be so? The assembly of God in Christ Jesus connects with @Ephesians 3. It is an allusion to power -- position involves power. All assemblies should be governed by the same principle even to times of meeting.
Imitation is a proper thought, "Be ye imitators ...". The young should take advantage of the older, so we are models for one another. "Learn of me".
Ques. Would this refer in a special way to suffering?
Rem. It would. The principle of example is important. In moving around, part of our business is to call attention to irregularities and recommend what is of God in one to another. For example, the ministry meeting. Tell others of the advantages. In 2 Corinthians the apostle brings forward one district to stimulate another. As with Paul and Barnabas at Antioch, the year of instruction was to make the crowd an assembly. Each christian is the subject of God's work, and so in moving about from day to day something is learned every day.
Ques. Would fellowship meetings promote this principle of imitation?
Rem. Yes. We speak to one another, there is time for conversation; as in Malachi, they spake often. In Galatians we see how solemn it is that a whole district may be affected by bad doctrine, because meetings are contiguous to one another. We are warned of spreading things which might damage.
{272}
Ques. Why is it "all the brethren with me"?
Rem. To give weight to what he said, because the thing was serious. Those with Paul would be godly men -- there is a list in @Acts 20. It would be serious if they had different minds. Their judgment, being like his, would make it weighty. It does not determine it wholly, but it raises the question why I am different from them. These Galatians had been influenced by the stirring up of Jewish prejudices. There is a danger of leaders being affected by false doctrine permeating a whole district. If you discredit the vessel you will soon discredit the ministry.
Then in Revelation, Asia, the province and the locality in which each was, is also mentioned so the idea of locality is stressed. They did not copy one another; each had developed evil of its own kind and the proneness to develop evil is brought to our attention. The suggestion is that the assembly dispensation is prone to evil -- not only imitating evil in others but also developing its own.
How is this to be remedied? Bring out what the assembly is, what marks the assembly of God. The assembly normally is representative of God, but these were not so. John represents the mind of God in the dispensation. Note verses 4 - 6: "John to the seven assemblies ... ages of ages. Amen". He speaks to them abstractly, they are still owned as on assembly ground, he blames them with nothing, he gives them credit for what is there. He makes an appeal to them in verses 4 - 8. Abstractly they were on the foundation, and that is how to cure evil, to recognise what there is of God.
{273}
"TO US, THERE IS ONE GOD, THE FATHER"
@1 Corinthians 8: 6
We cannot but be impressed as reading these epistles to the Corinthians with the extensive ground covered, particularly as to the assembly in its public character. The ground covered in this first epistle is remarkable, and the opening verse gives the clue, "the assembly of God which is in Corinth", that is, the assembly in its present relation; and then, "with all that in every place call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, both theirs and ours". There is the local and universal relation of the assembly, and these epistles show how it stands over against all else of a religious character in the world.
This chapter 8 treats of things offered to idols, and tells us that though there be "those called gods, whether in heaven or on earth, (as there are gods many, and lords many)" -- the allusion is to all that is religious, idolatry indeed; but over against that is "to us there is one God, the Father". So the assembly's position is clearly marked, for in it God is owned "one God, the Father". And then, "one Lord, Jesus Christ". The public position is marked off clearly: one supreme Object of worship, and One in the place of lordship, that is, delegated authority. God is the Father, not our Father yet, but that Being is supreme, expressive of grace; and yet to us He is the "one God ... of whom all things, and *we* for him". And then, "one Lord, Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him". He has, as it were, brought us into being as we are.
So, dear brethren, there is a juncture in our service when this comes in. The Lord has had His place, the "one Lord", He is clearly known, "Jesus Christ". He has had His place; it is His supper that we have
{274}
celebrated and His love has come before us. He has part with us in assembly, too; it is rightly due to Him that there should be acknowledgment of Him in relation to the assembly, for it is His. Then what is in mind is that there is "one God, the Father, of whom all things, and we for him". We are for Christ, too, for the assembly is for Christ and we have been for Him in measure in our feelings and affections and intelligence; but then, we are for God. So that the mediatorial thought appears, "one Lord" and we are "by him". The word 'by' is instrumental; He has effected our very existence as in assembly. The position is clear and we now proceed accordingly as "by him", effected by Christ according to the relationship into which we are brought -- for Him and for God. Christ therefore would take His place among us and give us to understand that He is with us on our side, and effects our very existence, as it were "we by him". Now all is for God, "of whom all things".
The Lord is with us to make all this good, to make it realisable and practical, that the service of God may proceed according to divine appointment and richness -- all for God! Further, of course, is the great thought that it is His Father and our Father, His God and our God, and we as by Him are His brethren. He has effected our very existence, He has brought us in thus, so that we proceed with Him in happy and intelligent relation with Him before God.
{275}
THE LORD JESUS STANDING
@Revelation 5: 6; @Revelation 3: 20; @Revelation 8: 4, 5; @Revelation 10: 5 - 7; @Revelation 14: 1
All these scriptures contemplate the Lord Jesus standing, an attitude contemplating readiness for action; and the sections of the book plainly enough indicate that action from God is needed. There is a time of action. The present is a time of great activity, most of it man's activity; but God is not without those through whom He can act, and they are not all inactive.
This book, although not wholly dealing directly with the assembly, is addressed to the assemblies. It is called the "Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave to him, to chew to his bondmen what must shortly take place; and he signified it, sending by his angel, to his bondman John, who testified the word of God, and the testimony of Jesus Christ, all things that he saw", chapter 1: 1, 2. The Lord Jesus appeared to John in the isle called Patmos and told him what to write. "Write therefore what thou hast seen, and the things that are, and the things that are about to be after these". He did it very well, too, as it is written, "who testified the word of God, and the testimony of Jesus Christ, all things that he saw". And immediately he speaks to the assemblies as much as to say, You are in all this. "John to the seven assemblies which are in Asia", speaking to them in a very holy and affectionate way, so as to bring them intelligently and feelingly into what he was testifying to them.
So he said to them, "Grace to you and peace from him who is, and who was, and who is to come; and from the seven Spirits which are before his throne; and from Jesus Christ, the faithful witness, the firstborn from the dead, and the prince of the kings of
{276}
the earth. To him who loves us, and has washed us from our sins in his blood, and made us a kingdom, priests to his God and Father: to him be the glory and the might to the ages of ages. Amen", chapter 1: 4 - 6. That is how John brings us, dear brethren -- that is, the seven assemblies symbolical of all -- into what he was testifying to them. Every minister always seeks to have the brethren with him in whatever work he is entrusted with, and John brings, or would bring, the seven assemblies into what he was entrusted with in a very feeling way. The Lord Jesus confirms this at the end of the book saying, "I Jesus have sent mine angel to testify these things to you in the assemblies", chapter 22: 16. So that the assembly or assemblies are brought into it at the beginning and at the end; and in the body of the book the Lord speaks of Himself in a variety of postures or attitudes.
The Lord regards Himself in the Apocalypse in a secondary position. It is His apocalypse which God gave Him but then He is one of the great characters in the scenes depicted. The first is chapter 5, where He pictures Himself as a Lamb standing in the midst of the throne and of the four living creatures, and in the midst of the elders, "as slain". There are clear indications that He had been slain, as is said of Him later, "because thou halt been slain, and hast redeemed to God", chapter 5: 9. He is not actually dead in this scene any more than He is actually dead in His supper. There is indeed a link between this passage and the Lord's supper. We do not remember a dead Christ; we remember a living Christ, who has been dead. The bread and the cup denote that He has actually been in death, and in dying He finished a condition which He had taken up, namely flesh and blood, which He will never taken again. But the bread and the cup denote that He has been in that condition and has died; the blood is separated from the body. It is a dead Christ as a testimony before
{277}
our eyes, but it is a memorial of a living Christ. So here He is a living Christ, but He has been dead and is standing, as it says, "a Lamb standing, as slain, having seven horns and seven eyes". That is no evidence of death, but of life: seven horns and seven eyes. These horns are to be active, these eyes are to be active.
I bring this particular verse forward, dear brethren, so that we might see how it bears on ourselves, and especially on the Lord's supper, which is initial as to christian experience or christian worship and service Godward. He appears here as One needed. John felt the need of the Lord Jesus as seen here. It is as we feel the need that God comes in. John wept, he said, because "no one had been found worthy to open the book nor to regard it" (verse 4). It is as we feel things, and, oh, how much there is to be felt now! But the question is how we feel. Do we feel the pressure as something unending, something not to be terminated, or do we feel it as something for a moment, to be finished for ever? It is the latter. All pressures that come on the people of God have that character. They are not permanent. But the secret of their termination lies in this Person, this Person who is seen in the midst of the throne; that is to say, where governmental authority is, and in the midst of the "living beasts", representative of creation, a living creation. It is a living state of things. The Lord Jesus is not in any other. He is not in a dead circle, or in an impotent throne. He is standing where there is power and authority. He is standing, too, in the midst of experienced men, the elders. He has seven horns and seven eyes, and He is "as slain"; the testimony, dear brethren, to His love, the foundation of everything, as He says, "I am ... the living one: and I became dead, and behold, I am living to the ages of ages, and have the keys of death and of hades", chapter 1: 18. Where is there
{278}
any room in the presence of such a scene for distress or discouragement? There may be sufferings. This precious Lamb knew that experimentally. The word for 'Lamb' here is diminutive, meaning that He did not defend Himself; He went down into death; He experienced it really at the hands of others, as we read, "by the hand of lawless men, ... crucified and slain" (@Acts 2: 23), but now He is alive for evermore and He has seven horns, complete power, infinite power, all power in heaven and on earth. And He has seven eyes, which are the seven Spirits of God, as we are told, "which are sent into all the earth". Is anything invisible to Him? Is anything happening unknown to Him? Not one thing! He is not yet interfering in power, but He is assuring us that not one thing is happening without His perfect knowledge; nothing is by accident.
This is a very great view, and I want the brethren to ponder it. It is a scene, the need of which was felt by a man who knew love, by a man who knew the Lord Jesus perhaps better than most. John says, "And I wept much because no one had been found worthy to open the book nor to regard it". He felt it keenly and wept much. Heaven takes notice of that. This scene is the answering one, and the elders who knew things acquainted John at once with it. Who is this Person? "Behold, the lion which is of the tribe of Juda, the root of David, has overcome so as to open the book, and its seven seals". That is the first thing and I want every brother and sister, old and young, to ponder a little what is involved in this; that this is our Christ, this is our Jesus, this is the Son of God, this is He whom we meet on the Lord's day, His day. He has singled out a day out of all the days, that we call His own; and He has a Supper and we partake of it. It is our Christ and Lord that is before us here. Then He is worshipped and praised. How beautiful it is, as the Lord is known in this way;
{279}
with seven horns and seven eyes, and standing ready to do what is to be done! There is much to be done that He is not yet doing. He is not yet taking up the government of the world; that is the Father's matter now, @Acts 1: 7. The Lord Jesus is about to take it up and when He does, the thing will be done. In the meantime He is standing here to do something and it is going to be done. The books are to be opened, the seals are to be broken, and He is ready to do it. When He takes the book, that is when He begins to do the thing, then the worship comes out. Let us watch for the doings of Christ, dear brethren, however little they may seem to be. "And when it took the book, the four living creatures and the twenty-four elders fell before the Lamb, having each a harp and golden bowls full of incenses, which are the prayers of the saints" (verse 8). The Lord Jesus loves that. Every minister of Christ loves to have the saints with him, and the saints love to see your service done well. Every saint becomes more loved as he does things that are needed and does them well. So the Lord Jesus takes the book, and there is movement on the part of the four beasts and the twenty-four elders; they "fell before the Lamb, having each a harp and golden bowls full of incenses, which are the prayers of the saints". How suitable they are! What an assembly to surround this glorious Person! But, mark you, it is not that He is attracted to the book, but He takes the book. He does the thing that is to be done, and He does it well; and as He takes the book they worship Him. I connect it, as I said, with the Lord's supper. It is a Christ who has died and is risen; and then an active Christ who has seven horns and seven eyes. How restful, how assured we are in the presence of such a Person!
The next point is that He is standing at the door, somebody's door here tonight, maybe -- such a One as this! He is not seen here as ruling the world, or
{280}
creating the world. He has created the world, and He will rule it. But now He is standing at some door -- the Lord is knocking at your door. Think of the grace of that! "If any one hear my voice and open the door, I will come in unto him and sup with him, and he with me", chapter 3: 20. Let us not shut our ears to His voice. Something has happened. Let us open the door. He is waiting -- such a One as this! See what people the Lord surrounds Himself with -- the living creatures and the elders. Can you afford to be elsewhere than in that circle? These are symbolical numbers: four living creatures and twenty-four elders. Plenty of life and plenty of intelligence and experience. You cannot afford to be outside of that circle; you will perish if you elect that. The Lord says, "Behold, I stand at the door and am knocking; if any one hear my voice and open the door, I will come in unto him and sup with him, and he with me" -- such a Person as that! What an appeal it is!
In chapter 8 the priestly angel is standing at the altar, having a golden censer. Sometimes we speak about Gabriel as the priestly angel. Michael is the military angel. But here it is Christ. It is neither Michael nor Gabriel; it is a Person to be known by what He is doing. There is no one in the universe that can answer to this but Christ. He is standing by the golden altar, where God can be approached, where God can be solicited, where God can be spoken to. How well-off we christians are! The Lord says, I am going to take charge of all your affairs up there. When you go up there you will find everything as it should be. That is what I expect. My place will be assured and it will just suit me. I have been in eternal counsels; it has been thought of before all time, and when I enter into it all will be in every way suitable. The Lord Jesus says, "for I go to prepare you a place", @John 14: 2. But here He is
{281}
standing at the golden altar and He has a censer. He is fully equipped, and, as we read, "and much incense was given to him, that he might give efficacy to the prayers of all saints at the golden altar which was before the throne", chapter 8: 3. The Lord takes that place on our side; because it is as Priest He is on our side. "And the smoke of the incense went up with the prayers of the saints, out of the hand of the angel before God". Let us admit this thought into our souls. There is One that takes care of us above, who makes intercession for us. @Romans 8 is full of this thought. The Spirit makes intercession for us; in our groans the Spirit takes part, our righteous groans. But then the Lord Jesus, too, is at the right-hand of God also to make intercession for us. He is taking care of our affairs above. I have been saying that, but then He is taking care of our affairs below.
What are these affairs? Our prayers surely. Every need, not only of mine, but of the whole assembly, should have a place in my prayers. The Lord would enlarge our prayers. Here it is "the prayers of the saints". The Lord is in the midst of all this, taking charge of affairs. I often wonder why God makes so much of prayer. Why cannot He do things without prayer? He can, of course. He did things before there were any persons to pray. He made the universe. Why does He need prayers? It is well worth thinking about. I believe that, as a prayer issues from one's mouth, or even from the heart alone (remember Abraham's servant, a very spiritual type, who prayed in his heart and God heard him), as it issues forth there is power. It is God's way. It is mysterious that there is power in prayer as it goes out of your mouth. Think of the volume of prayer.
I think of it every Saturday. The service of God beginning away in the south-east, in New Zealand, then Australia, then in South Africa, then right around in Europe and America, beginning Saturday
{282}
and continuing on until Monday night, extending on to the Pacific, when we are sleeping; up until two a.m. this is going on. I often say to God, Let there be a volume of prayer. There is power as soon as it begins and God acts with it. So here, there is One in the very centre of the moral universe looking after these prayers all the time. For that is what it says "And the smoke of the incense went up with the prayers of the saints, out of the hand of the angel before God" -- all passing through this priestly Angel. As the youngest child prays before he retires to bed at night, or in the morning, or in the wakeful hours, this glorious Person is looking after this department of prayer. It is so important. It is power in which God would have us to have part; and all made efficacious through the much incense that is given to this glorious Angel-priest.
The passage goes on to show that the effect is seen in this way. "And the angel took the censer, and filled it from the fire of the altar, and cast it on the earth: and there were voices, and thunders and lightnings, and an earthquake" (verse 5). Of course, these are strictly punitive things but I connect them with the Tuesday. God would have us to be real christians, living by the week; living by the day, of course, by the hour, by the minute, by the breath, by the beat of the heart, but living by the week. The week opens up a way for divine services, and I connect this verse with Tuesday. God comes in, and I want to be available to Him, because the answers really require the saints. The saints pray, but then God says, I will require you, too, for the answers to your prayers; that you may be utilised in the service, in the answers that the prayers require.
I come to chapter 10, where we see another angel. It is none other than the Lord Jesus. "And I saw another strong angel coming down out of the heaven, clothed with a cloud, and the rainbow upon his head,
{283}
and his countenance as the sun, and his feet as pillars of fire". Nobody needs to tell you who this is. There is only one Person in the universe that answers to this; it is the Lord Jesus. He is standing upon the earth; His right foot is upon the sea and His left foot is upon the earth. Who can remove Him? No power in heaven or on earth can remove this Person whose feet are, one on the sea, and the other on the earth. What is He saying? What is He thinking of? What am I to learn from Him? He is here to be learned from. This is His own revelation from God, and we may learn from Him. What does it mean? In the first chapter of Genesis we are told there was only sea to be seen, nothing but water. The Spirit of God brooded over the darkness, over the face of the waters. The deep was the water. It was one of the creatures of God, but for the moment it engulfed the earth.
But on the third day God said, "Let the waters ... be gathered together to one place". That is to say, God would limit His creatures. No creature is to be unlimited. The waters are to be gathered into one place and the earth is to appear. What pleasure God had in the third day! Think of all that God saw as the earth came up out of the depths. What history God read in it all! Some of us may have noticed that God brought the land animals to Adam to be named, but He did not bring the heavens and the earth and the seas to Adam to be named. He named them Himself. The first three days speak of things that God made and named Himself, so that He called the waters seas, and the land earth. That is the position up to the present time. The flood, of course, in Noah's time altered it a little, but it was momentary. The original thought is still here, earth and seas. There are the continents and the oceans and the seas, but the seas are all under one Head. He made it all. It is the Jesus we are talking about here, that
{284}
is standing on the earth now in this character as an Angel. He is the One that did the very things that I have been speaking about in @Genesis 1. He separated those waters. He caused the earth to come up; He caused the grass to grow. Now He says, I have come down to take charge. They have got out of hand. This man and that man are claiming their portion of it. Presently there will be a man coming up who will claim all.
The Lord Jesus comes down in a covenant garb, "clothed with a cloud, and the rainbow upon his head". The reference really is more to Noah's time, the rainbow. There is nothing about a rainbow before Noah. So that it is the world subsequent to Noah that we are dealing with here, the world in which government has had its place, where great history has occurred. Now in the end of the days, a Person comes down and puts His right foot on the sea. I believe He is indicating that the sea is the important item. The Spirit of God hovered over the face of the deep. The waters were a great item with God. Now they are under control. They are gathered into seas, named by God, and the Lord says, They belong to Me, and I am going to use them -- and also the earth. He is saying, Do not allow yourself to be overwhelmed by circumstances. He is presented to us in this way in power, with a token of the covenant, and He is saying to us, Do not be overwhelmed "the days of thy mourning shall be ended", @Isaiah 60:20. There is plenty of mourning. What large bottles God must have, dear brethren, at the present time, speaking figuratively. The Psalmist says, "put my tears into thy bottle", @Psalm 56: 8. What bottles of tears there are! But "the days of thy mourning shall be ended". God is saying that to His people. There are limitations to the greatest sorrows. The greater the sorrow the shorter the time limit, as the Lord says, "and if those days had not been cut short,
{285}
no flesh had been saved; but on account of the elect those days shall be cut short", @Matthew 24: 22. So here the Spirit of God says, "And the angel ... swore by him that lives to the ages of ages, who created the heavens and the things that are in it, and the earth and the things that are in it, and the sea and the things that are in it, that there should be no longer delay". That means no longer delay in the needed action. "But in the days ... of the seventh angel, when he is about to sound the trumpet, the mystery of God also shall be completed, as he has made known the glad tidings to his own bondmen the prophets". That, beloved, is what this great Person is saying to us, standing with His right foot on the sea, and His left on the earth. Things are about to be completed. What is needed, therefore, is patience. As a great servant of His says, "Ye also have patience ... for the coming of the Lord is drawn nigh", @James 5: 8. It is to stabilise us in patience.
The final word is in chapter 14. "And I saw, and behold, the Lamb standing upon mount Zion, and with him a hundred and forty-four thousand, having his name and the name of his Father written upon their foreheads". He is standing now on the mount Zion which He loves. It is the place where divine love is expressed. He is not standing there alone; He has a complete administrative number with Him, one hundred and forty-four thousand. The succeeding verses show what a suitable company they are. I have been speaking of the four living creatures and the twenty-four elders, who represent a living state of things and an intelligent, experienced state of things. I cannot afford to be outside of it, it would be destruction. But now it is a hundred and forty-four thousand -- they are living people and they have learned the heavenly song. They are an earthly people, it is true, the Jewish remnant, whose place is on the earth according to divine counsels, but they
{286}
not despising what is in heaven. They are learning the heavenly song. It is not their song; it is sung by others, but they can learn it. Is there any here who is content just with the little he knows, the little he can sing? These one hundred and forty-four thousand would say to you, Do not be content with what you have; if there is something more, aspire to it and acquire it. They are privileged people, but they are aspiring and they can learn that song. They are the only ones that are so privileged, as it says, "And I heard a voice out of the heaven as a voice of many waters, and as a voice of great thunder. And the voice which I heard was as of harp-singers harping with their harps; and they sing a new song before the throne, and before the four living creatures and the elders. And no one could learn that song save the hundred and forty-four thousand who were bought from the earth".
{287}
CONTINUANCE IN SERVICE
@Revelation 10: 8 - 11; @Acts 23: 10, 11; @2 Timothy 4:17
My remarks will have service in view. For this purpose it is said, "to each one of us has been given grace according to the measure of the gift of the Christ", @Ephesians 4:7. Nothing is left haphazard in the things of God. The principle of measure enters into each, whether it be a great servant like Paul, or a very obscure servant. Each is assigned something to do, and given grace to do it, that grace being according to the measure of the gift of Christ. It is one of His departments, so to speak, to select servants, to assign each his work and to furnish grace accordingly so that we are in a great system carefully measured. We see it in its widest sense in the great heavenly city which is measured in its square measure and its cubic measure.
What is in mind now is the continuance of each servant, for if the Lord takes us on it is not by the day, but the whole lifetime of the believer is in mind. He discharges no one. There are days in the divine reckonings, and the divine measure was twelve hours in a working day, and after we have finished, according to the way He speaks, He would put it in our mouths to say we are unprofitable servants. That is to be understood in its own setting, for He never fails to accredit us as we are profitable. Paul says, "lest that by any means, when I have preached to others, I myself should be a castaway", @1 Corinthians 9: 27. It does not mean that any true believer is cast away eternally from the Lord Jesus, for the Lord says, "they shall never perish" (@John 10: 28), but that a person may serve, and serve effectively, and yet become a castaway. No doubt Judas served well in his day with the other apostles, but he was lost. He
{288}
is called "the son of perdition"; only he and the man of sin are called by that terrible designation. So it is most serious not to come up to the measurement in service. Paul says, "lest ... I myself should be a castaway". He would put himself forward as representing others, making himself representative of others, as serving, and yet failing to be accepted eternally. The Lord says in regard to such, "for I have not found thy works complete before my God",
@Revelation 3: 2. He says that to Sardis. So He has His  eyes on us as to our works. He says of old by the Spirit, "Cursed be he that doeth the work of Jehovah negligently", @Jeremiah 48: 10 -- a very strong word, a solemn word, especially needed where we are on optional lines in the work of God, that we may do it or we may not do it without consequence either way, whereas the Lord has His eyes on us and metes out the grace needed for each of us, and He looks for results. Of course, "Ye are saved by grace, through faith; and this not of yourselves; it is God's gift", @Ephesians 2: 8. But when it comes to service, there is a big'if'attached to it, and when it comes to continuance, whether collectively or individually, God is not mocked, and never was any dispensation more real than this wonderful dispensation in which we are. "I have not found thy works complete before my God"; hence the peculiar kind of judgment that the Lord metes out to Sardis, and each of us comes under that heading. I shall have to hear the Lord say, 'thy works'. Books are kept above. In the kingdoms of old there were chroniclers and scribes, persons who were skilled in writing and reading and recording things, and so it is that God has His chroniclers and His recorders and scribes, and everything therefore is kept with the utmost accuracy above. Not only is there a book, but books, and not only our names, but our sins, and our works, are recorded. Each shall receive according to his works, we are told.
{289}
Now John is a prophet. We should rightly call him a prophet in the book of Revelation. He is an apostle in writing the gospel, and I bring him forward first as an example of one who is allowed to continue, who is not discharged from the work. Many have been discharged. John is kept on according to this passage, and what is stressed is how he kept things. That is, the bitterness in his belly -- the little book was the same as in his mouth as to material as it was in the belly, but it had a different effect in each. It is said that it should be bitter first. The angel told him that as he ate up the book it would be bitter in his belly but in his mouth sweet as honey. When you come to the actual facts as they happened, he says, "I ... ate it up; and it was in my mouth as honey, sweet; and when I had eaten it my belly was made bitter", @Revelation 10: 10. That is, the sweetness comes first, the bitterness comes second. In the mouth of the angel the bitterness is mentioned first and sweetness second, but in the actual transaction he begins with the sweetness. The taste is brought into action. Job speaks of it, "Doth not the ear try words, as the palate tasteth food?" @Job 12: 11. It is a question of the senses, whether it be taste or hearing, spiritually we should be fully equipped with every sense, as John was, at least as to taste or feelings in his inwards and in his mouth, and notice is taken of this. Surely it is not literal; it is a question of a servant feeling things with God. "I took the little book out of the hand of the angel, and ate it up; and it was in my mouth as honey, sweet; and when I had eaten it my belly was made bitter", meaning that he was a brother or a prophet who felt things. The word of God was to him sweetness. Jeremiah speaks of that, "Thy words were found, and I did eat them, and thy words were unto me the joy and rejoicing of my heart" (@Jeremiah 15: 16), meaning that the mind of God, written or spoken, is always sweet in itself to
{290}
the lover of God. He cries out for it, as the psalmist speaks. There is one psalm of 176 verses, @Psalm 119, that is almost entirely devoted to the word of God, and the writer of that psalm lived in it.
John is accustomed to this. It is he who tells us about Christ being the Word: "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God" (@John 1: 1), that is, Christ as conveying the mind of God. John is employed to bring that truth out, and he knew how sweet were the communications of that blessed Person. On the occasions when the Lord Jesus came in and went out amongst them from the baptism of John until He was received up, every meeting brought out something fresh. John had become accustomed to the words of Jesus, they were sweet to him, but they might have been bitter to him as digested. He had also his sorrowful exercises regarding his own ministry in the gospel and in the assembly. He speaks of having great joy amongst his converts, or his children, as he calls them, as he heard of them walking in the truth.
He was a man of great feelings and sensibilities, both as to affections and as to sorrow, and I believe all these things enter into these verses. Is he to continue as a prophet, or servant? The Lord Jesus is the One who has the book in His hand here; the facts show plainly enough that He is in mind, although an angel is mentioned. It is a question of whether John is to continue prophesying, and my point is that he continues here as having eaten the little book and felt according to what was in it. On the one hand it was the word of God, the little book, and on the other hand it contained something that was sorrowful in the history of God's people. He loved the saints.
Those who love God and Christ, love the saints; and things that are sorrowful in the history of the saints become the occasion of sorrow to one who loves them, he is not indifferent. Any failures on their side, any
{291}
advantage to the enemy on their side, any persecutions they have to endure, are felt by the lover of God, of Christ and of the saints. If I am a true christian, a true lover of God, of Christ and of the saints, I shall feel bitter as things happen that are detrimental to them and to God's testimony. I make my christianity questionable unless I am affected by what affects God, Christ and the saints. I am questionable, and if I have been given a little bit of work to do and I am relinquishing it in any way, I may not be employed again. My opportunity may be past and we cannot afford this. We shall not pass this way again. Others will, but not ourselves. Some of us are nearly finished, others of us are in middle life and others in the first part of our lives, and our prospect is yonder in that sense, but we shall only pass this way once, and it is a way fraught with wonderful privileges. If we fail in them the Lord will be obliged to look around for others, and there are others, thank God, to carry on the service. Why should I have to look around? Why should I not feel with them in what may be occasioning sorrow?
Why should I not have bitterness? It belongs to my very nature, if I am a true christian, when sorrow takes place.
So the word here is, "And it was said to me, Thou must prophesy again as to peoples and nations and tongues and many kings" (verse 11). There are two speakers to John here. The first is a voice from heaven in verse 4, and then in verse 8, "The voice which I heard out of the heaven was again speaking with me, and saying, Go, take the little book". This is the Lord Jesus Himself, the second speaker. How often He had spoken to John before! How often John had heard Him speaking! What holy conversation they used to have! John was one of the last persons to whom the Lord spoke at the cross. He had finished His life on earth, I might say, with a
{292}
word to John. His mother was standing there, John was standing there, by the cross of Jesus, and the Lord says to Mary, "Woman, behold thy son". He referred to John. John was to be a son to Mary, the mother of the Lord. Our Lord was to be no longer her Son. He was taking up a wholly new condition in which she could not be a mother to Him. Natural relationships do not apply to that condition. He is, therefore, plainly referring to John. He said, He is to be your son, and you are to be his mother. After that He said, "It is finished". John tells us he was a witness to all that happened, and we know his witness is true.
Now the same Jesus who hung there upon the cross at that time is here seen as a mighty angel as it says in verse 1, "And I saw another strong angel coming down out of the heaven, clothed with a cloud, and the rainbow upon his head, and his countenance as the sun, and his feet as pillars of fire, and having in his hand a little opened book". That is the same Jesus who said to John, "Behold thy mother". But now Jesus is speaking from heaven in another guise altogether, as a mighty angel. It is a question of His taking possession of all here, the sea and the land. He puts His right foot upon the sea and His left foot on the land, and He cries, we are told, with a loud voice as when a lion roareth. Such is the mighty Person presented here, and He has authority, and He says to John, "Thou must prophesy again as to peoples and nations and tongues and many kings". He had already made him an apostle to preach the gospel, to cure diseases; now he is to prophesy again, before many peoples, nations, tongues and kings. He is not rejected, he has maintained right feelings in his service, he is not careless about his service, not worrying about what this little book means, but he eats it according to the word given and it enters into his inwards to be digested and
{293}
assimilated and there it is felt in its true bearing, as involving the people of God, and he feels it as bitter. The Lord says, You continue the service. No matter how small the service, we cannot afford to lose it, to prove unprofitable through negligence or indifference, so that we are no longer employed in the service of the Lord. We cannot afford to be a castaway in that sense.
Now I turn to the other great servant, Paul. He is to continue, although he had just made some errors. He had gone to Jerusalem of his own accord, in spite of divine warnings, and he had just said to the high priest, "God will smite thee, whited wall", which he quickly corrected, saying, "Thou shalt not speak evilly of the ruler of thy people". We are not to speak evil of elders or rulers. It is a good word for all of us. We are enjoined to treat them as fathers. Paul corrected himself but he suffered most bitterly. I need not go into detail; the chapter is well known. He was arrested after going up to Jerusalem; the persecution against him was most fearful, and he felt it. It might have been the judicial act of God. Am I to be superseded? Is another to take my office? He magnified his office, a word for everyone, no matter how small, to be rightfully filling out his ser vice, even if it be a deaconship. It is to be magnified, and you can understand how Paul would be exercised lest he should be superseded. The Lord had given him a commission exceeding all others. The night following, when doubtless he had serious concern (and the Lord knew it), the Lord stood by him and said, "Be of good cheer, Paul". He was a suffering servant, but not delivered to death. He was testifying of Jesus all the time. On the way up he said he was ready to die at Jerusalem for the Lord Jesus, he was a true martyr, and now he is suffering. It is said in verse 10, "lest Paul should have been pulled in pieces" -- that was the state of things. Think of the
{294}
agony of suffering entering into all that, from his own countrymen, and in the midst of it all he had called the high priest a whited wall, which was not right because he was still there in the priestly office. But Paul corrected himself, which is a very fine thing in those of us who serve. If we make mistakes, acknowledge it. We need not be afraid, we have a great Priest above interceding for us, making intercession for us. "If any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous". He is ready to cleanse us from all unrighteousness, from all sin, removing the effect of it, even the fine effects of sin. He knows how to do it, and set us up again in the anointing, as if nothing had happened. Paul knew this. What exercise he must have had that night 'Lord', he would say, 'why did all come upon me, why did I say that to the high priest?' This would come home to a man with a conscience like that. The Lord heard all that. No one felt more for him than the Lord Jesus Himself. He never fails any of us. He looks for confession. "If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness". He assures our hearts that whatever happens He will never fail us, as it says of David, "David strengthened himself in Jehovah his God", @1 Samuel 30: 6. Doubtless Paul did, too, but the word is, "the night following". Some time had to be gone through to reach it. There are three days and seven days in the Old Testament types so that we might be thoroughly cleansed, not only by the blood of Jesus, but by the water that flowed from His side. Paul knew how to use this. No doubt Paul wrote the epistle to the Hebrews, so he knew well the great system set up in Christ. It was for him and the most insignificant of saints. The Lord appeared to him the following night, and said to him, "Be of good cheer", not a word of reproach. As one servant says, 'the joy of an unrejecting, gracious
{295}
Saviour'. The Lord called him by name, indicating the real companionship of Jesus in our service. Is it not worth our while to do our little bit and do it well, lest we should come under the rebuking gaze of the Lord and the forfeiture of our commission?
As we feel things like Paul and John, we magnify the position. It was no small thing to Paul to be an apostle. "Have I not seen Jesus our Lord?" He could not afford to forfeit a moment to the Lord's displeasure. We must please Him all the time. How much he speaks about pleasing the Lord! So the Lord says, "Be of good cheer, Paul; for as thou halt testified of me in Jerusalem, so must thou bear witness also at Rome". Paul might have said, I did a poor job at Jerusalem, but the Lord says, "thou hast testified of me in Jerusalem", for in truth he had, and now He says, I will give you a bigger job, to witness at Rome, the very capital of the world, and so he did for two years, longer than the time he spent at Corinth. He might have spent even longer, after he was in prison the second time, but we know he was there two years and the testimony reached out, and some of the household of Caesar were christians. It was no small matter to be a witness to Christ in Rome. Doubtless Paul was martyred there. The Lord honoured him in witnessing for Him in the greatest of cities of that time.
Now to confirm that, in Timothy we have the apostle saying that the Lord stood by him when the last moments had come for him to witness before the emperor. "At my first defence no man stood with me, but all deserted me. May it not be imputed to them. But the Lord stood with me, and gave me power, that through me the proclamation might be fully made, and all those of the nations should hear". That means that no one was to take his office. He was to have no successors. The preaching was to be fully known through him, of course through the twelve,
{296}
too, but the word of God was completed by Paul, and he says here that the Lord stood by him. Let nobody try to displace him. The Lord took him up for a purpose, and He stood by him until the work was finished. "I have combated the good combat, I have finished the race, I have kept the faith. Henceforth the crown of righteousness is laid up for me, which the Lord, the righteous Judge, will render to me in that day; but not only to me, but also to all who love his appearing". He could not afford to lose that, and hence he kept on and on, even though chained to a soldier; he kept on with his work. The greatest written ministry came out of that prison in the city of Rome. In no more exalted way did he testify of Jesus than he did at Rome, carrying out the Lord's word, "thou must bear witness at Rome also". May we be encouraged to continue the little bit the Lord gives us to do! Thus we shall not be rejected, we shall be carried forward to that great day when everything will come to light, according to the word, "knowing that your toil is not in vain in the Lord". It may be very small, but it is not in vain in the Lord.
{297}
MORE AND MORE
@John 15: 1, 2; @1 Thessalonians 4:1, 9, 10; @Philippians 1: 9
It will be observed how the words "more and more" are found in these scriptures. They bear on us so that we should increase. While we are here increase is the order, "until we all arrive at the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, at the full-grown man, at the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ", @Ephesians 4: 13. The most spiritual is to move on. We never can assume to have reached that stature, that standard. Even Paul himself in writing to the Philippians says, "Not as though I had already attained" (chapter 3: 12); so that he accepts the general weakness, great as was his stature and measure. There will be no room for increase after we leave this scene; we are perfected. There is no idea of angels growing or increasing; nor is there any thought of the saints increasing after they are translated, or even in the interim between their falling asleep and their taking on their glorious bodies, bodies like that of our Lord Jesus. So this is the learning time.
We are urged not to miss our opportunity or to allow any hindering elements to interfere with our steady growth, growth after the pattern of the Lord Jesus. He is the standard. The bodies we are to receive are to be glorious. They are to be bodies of glory such as that of the Lord Jesus at the present time. His body, it is said, is one of glory. We are to be conformed to the image of His body of glory, and the divine thought is that we should be equal to that. There will be no discrepancy between that which is inward and that which is outward, and the present work of the Spirit is to that end. We cannot
{298}
admit for a moment that there is to be any discrepancy, yet there is room for our side of the matter, for vigilance that we should grow, that it should be said in that day, as of Jacob and Israel, "What hath God wrought!"
Now this chapter in John that I have read stands by itself. It deals with the vine. The Lord Jesus expressly says, "I am the true vine", allowing that there were other vines. Undoubtedly the Lord alludes to the planting of a noble vine. We cannot think of Him doing anything that was not noble. The planting was in Canaan. What care God exercised over His people in the wilderness that they should not carry any of its features into the land! But the wilderness is simply the type of the world in which the Christian finds himself when he becomes a Christian. We are enjoined to have our loins girded about with truth, so that our garments do not drag loose, so that we keep our skirts clear, unspotted from the world. We are apt to take on spots, and we have to be on our guard against them. "These are spots in your love-feasts", @Jude 12. At first they are not noticeable, but later they come into evidence as agents of the enemy. But then that is a terrible thing; they are not Christians at all there. But Christians may have their garments spotted; and, when we come into the assembly, they show up. Spots grieve the Spirit, and the spiritual, too. It may be they do not grieve the ones who have them. "Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat", @1 Corinthians 11: 28. It is not that he is to give up eating, but to judge himself and go on eating. "So let him eat", but see that the spots are dealt with. It is a question of self-judgment, and, of course, all the wonderful system that God has set up in Christ and made available to us. Our bodies are to be washed with pure water, and our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience. In Revelation we have, "Blessed are they that wash their robes",
{299}
chapter 22: 14. They wash them that they may have right to the tree of life, and that they may enter by the gates into the city. There could then be no rebuke from the Lord or from the spiritual who sits beside you.
Jehovah certainly watched over Israel in the wilderness those forty years, bringing out His fatherly qualities. We know how children quickly get their clothes soiled, and it makes them unpresentable. That is what God sought to prevent, that they should be a plantation of a noble vine. It is no new thing for Him to plant. We read of His first planting in Genesis. There will be no planting in heaven. Planting contemplates soil with the power of life there. God planted a garden eastward -- He took account of the compass -- eastward in Eden. Eden is a wider thought than the garden. God planted the garden. Think of the blessed God doing that! Of all the trees of Eden He speaks of two, the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, and the tree of life. God put them there. Just think for a moment of God doing that! And then having done that He sets Adam in the garden to dress it and look after it. So God was accustomed to this thought of planting and He planted Israel, a noble vine. He refers to it later with great sorrow because Israel utterly failed, but now we come to the true Vine.
He was as a tender plant and as a root out of a dry ground. Being a divine Person, He did not draw anything from the soil. He had all the nourishment in Himself. He is the true Vine, and He displaced Israel. He grew up before Jehovah as a tender sapling full of sap. He was to be the true Vine and unique, of course, for no other vine could grow up out of sapless land, dry land. He was a root out of a dry ground. He had the sap in Himself. "I am the root and offspring of David". Christ is a divine Person and carries with Him all that is necessary for growth.
{300}
But what I want to stress on this point is that "every branch in me that beareth not fruit he taketh away". The Father does that. "My Father is the husbandman". John has a great way of bringing divine Persons together. Here it is the Father, the Husbandman, and the Son, the Vine. They are together, and there are the branches. "Every branch in me that beareth not fruit he taketh away". The branch will never be saved, it is burned. Men gather it and burn it. It is soon to be so of the vine of professing christendom. The Father knows all those that are unreal. The Father is intensely active in relation to the Son -- "My Father worketh hitherto, and I work". That principle runs through John. He takes away what is an encumbrance in such a position. He leaves others to burn them, but He takes them away. We are each to inquire as to whether we are truly abiding in Christ. The Father's eye is upon you, and He is looking for reality; He knows reality and unreality. He will not tolerate a branch professedly in the vine not bearing fruit. It is just in the way; it is unsightly, unfruitful. It is not a question of the Father burning them; it is men that burn them, but the Father takes away unfruitful branches. As the Lord says here, "Every branch in me that beareth not fruit he taketh away". It is the Father's work. It is unsightly; being incongruous, it must go. Other things will follow. There will be agents to do the burning. The Father is concerned about the Son, and will not tolerate anything outwardly identified with Him unless it is real.
Then the Lord says further, "every branch that beareth fruit, he purgeth it, that it may bring forth more fruit", full results. We read of a certain man who had a fig-tree planted in his vineyard, and he came seeking fruit upon it, and did not find any. "And he said to the vine dresser, Behold, these three years I come seeking fruit on this fig-tree and find
{301}
none: cut it down; why does it also render the ground useless? But he answering says to him, Sir, let it alone for this year also, until I shall dig about it and put dung, and if it shall bear fruit -- but if not, after that thou shalt cut it down", @Luke 13: 7 - 9. That is the Lord Jesus seeking fruit in Israel. So the Father here is purging. If we are not disciplined we are bastards and not sons. How blessed it is to be under the Father's hand! The Father purges it; He removes what would interfere with fruit. We all need it; let us not shrink from it. Whether it be John or Paul or Bartholomew, every one of us comes in for it. It is essential to us. The Father sees something that is hindering. He says, There it is; I know it is there; it was there from the beginning. The Father has noticed some little crooked thing at the beginning, some little thing that the flesh would have. The Father knows that, if that goes on, something seriously evil will happen. It is as sure as possible that something will happen, and the Father will give you to understand that He purges every branch that bears fruit, however little or however much. The Father knows, and He would tell you fully and freely that there is fruit, some fruit, however little. It is "every branch that beareth fruit". It does not say how much.
He is saying to some of us here tonight, There may be ever so many commendable things about you, but one thing is lacking, and that lack has been hindering growth. The Father knows, and He loves you too much to allow you to go on like that, because sooner or later you will come into discredit. "He purgeth it, that it may bring forth more fruit". If it were Paul it would be applied to him, even though the Holy Spirit dwells on Paul, regarding him as a model. Paul does not say, 'having attained', although he was just about to be offered up; his course was almost finished, and he was writing the most spiritual letter;
{302}
yet he says, "Not as though I had already attained", @Philippians 3: 12.
Well, the Father purgeth each branch that it may bring forth more fruit. You say it may be a little exacting, but the Father says it is to your advantage as well as His. You are going to get some wages. It is a question of what our wages are. John spoke about getting wages. The Lord says, "Are there not twelve hours in the day?" @John 11: 9. Yea, He worked twenty-four sometimes. He taught the disciples during the day, and then He went out and prayed all night. What a work this was! So that it is a question of wages. "Who for the joy that was set before him endured the cross", @Hebrews 12:2. That is what He would call wages.
The Lord says, "that no one take thy crown"
(@Revelation 3: 11), to Philadelphia. It is for each of us to understand what his crown is. I often challenge myself as to what my crown is, what my wages are. Each one should seek to see what his wages would be.
The Father would say, I am going to get more out of you. Think of what we cost the Father. The Father delivered up His Son to secure us. He is deserving of all the fruit, and hence it is right to say, "more fruit". Think of what you will be alongside of Paul.
I often think of how it will be there. We often sing
<blockquote>"Nor what is next Thy heart <br>Can we forget; <br>Thy Saints, O Lord, with Thee <br>In glory met". (`160:8)</blockquote>
I am sure that we shall know all the great saints. It is no small thing to think of these great saints with whom we shall converse. There will be only one street, and it is made of gold. It is all gold. God can walk there; Christ can walk there; Paul can walk there; and we can converse there with them.
There must be perfect correspondence. We are responsible down here that we bear more fruit. My
{303}
stature up there will hinge on that. I do not want to be short. Each of us wishes that his stature will be according to the divine thought. You want to be sure of it. You want to know what is to happen. You want to have an abundant entrance into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. I have met christians who were satisfied with the pardon of their former sins.
Now what I have said would fit in with what we have in Thessalonians. There Paul is just saying what I have tried to say: "Furthermore then we beseech you, brethren, and exhort you by the Lord Jesus, that as ye have received of us how ye ought to walk and to please God, so ye would abound more and more", but sometimes there are dark spots. "These are spots in your love-feasts". There may be shallow conditions, but then there are meetings that are pleasing. One is thankful when one finds that. But then the word is, "more and more". Enoch is a model of being pleasing to God. He had this testimony before he was translated that he pleased God. It is said about Enoch that before he was translated he pleased God, but it is *before*. He was not a discredit, not a dark spot. He walked with God for three hundred years. Wickedness was increasing in the world. The devil's power made it corrupt. @Genesis 6 tells us that the wickedness of man was great on the earth; but the deluge was brought in to cleanse the world and to start a new world. Enoch would see that and he would say, 'I must walk with God', and he did for three hundred years. What a walk of faith with God could be written! How can two walk together except they be agreed? Enoch and God were agreed. His son lived to be the oldest man, nine hundred and sixty-nine years, and he died, but not Enoch. God would say, I love you so well that I will take you out of this scene of corruption up to where I am. He had this
{304}
testimony that he pleased God. The Lord is going to take us, and that very soon. You want to have the testimony that you are pleasing to Him. You can never have too much of it for God. He said, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I have found my delight", @Matthew 3: 17. There is no deficiency whatever in Him.
I go on to verse 9: "Now concerning brotherly love ye have no need that we should write to you, for ye yourselves are taught of God to love one another". That is a beautiful thought, that we are taught of God to love one another. The Lord quotes in John's gospel that we are all taught of God. How touching that is! One of the greatest businesses of God is teaching the brethren. Everything is actually done by the Holy Spirit down here. "He shall guide you into all the truth", @John 16: 13. That is the idea; it is God that is doing it. He is teaching us to love one another. I believe it is one of the hardest lessons to learn. "By this shall all know that ye are disciples of mine, if ye have love amongst yourselves", @John 13:35. Love for all saints is a great field opened up for us, and these Thessalonians are said to have love towards all in Macedonia. "But we beseech you, brethren, that ye increase more and more". It is that one should love another more and more. One can speak of it in a little way. The more you encounter the saints in serving, the more you love them. I often think of the high priest's clothes. They were for beauty and ornament. The more we see each other in the light of those garments the easier it is to love one another.
Now we have in Philippians, "And this I pray, that your love may abound yet more and more". This I have already dwelt on, as seen in Thessalonians, but I wish to speak on what follows. Paul says, "That your love may abound yet more and more in full knowledge and all intelligence". That is the
{305}
idea. The love is the same as in Thessalonians, but here the love is in connection with full knowledge, more and more in full knowledge. That is, you are not content to be just mediocre, you want the complete thought of the word. Full knowledge, whatever there is to be known, is to be known entirely. It is that love may abound more and more in full knowledge and in all intelligence; so that we can *name* things. Adam named the animals. Through knowledge we can name things. How shall I know the saints in heaven if I do not learn to know them now? I have got to learn to know things, and persons, and name them. Just picture to yourself how long it would take to know the brethren up there. The Lord Jesus is to be the firstborn among many *brethren*. The idea is that I can name them. There were one hundred and twenty names in Jerusalem, a "crowd" of names, but you can pick out the persons, Peter and all of them. So it was with Adam. As the animals came up to him he could name them intelligently. The ability was divinely given. But look at the intelligence the saints have: "we have the mind of Christ", the same faculty of knowing things that He has. We should know all that is to be known, and if we do not know we should ask God to help us. That is the idea. God encourages us to go in for full knowledge, and then with "all intelligence" you can know everything. God says that the Unction teaches us all things, and is true, @1 John 2: 27.
That is my message. I urge on all that we should increase more and more in what is of God. "The path of the righteous is as the shining light, going on and brightening until the day be fully come", @Proverbs 4: 18.
{306}
DIVINE VISITATIONS
@Genesis 17: 22; @Genesis 18: 33; @Genesis 35: 13
I have a thought that came to me today as to God's way of maintaining personal relations with His people through visitations. I have selected Genesis because of the peculiar freshness it always affords to subjects of which it treats. It affords early facts relative to God and men that have peculiar freshness and simplicity, and particularly as to His personal relations with men. They began early, for we read of His walking in the garden. Adam heard the voice of God, and the facts indicate plainly enough that He intended to commune with Adam, to have a personal hearing with His great creature, whom He had taken such great pains to create and form, and with his helpmate.
That is a very early instance of what I am speaking of, but a very sorrowful occasion, and to no one was it more sorrowful than to God. We are told later of conditions that grieved Him in His heart, conditions that had come about on earth after a lapse of many centuries, for the antediluvian world was more extensive than perhaps we are disposed to admit in our minds. I need not go into the details of that visit to Adam; while it was sorrowful, it was eventful, and gave rise to the very greatest things, the effect of which remain here to this very minute. Eve was there recognised as the mother of all living, and Adam so designated her. God established and consolidated the light indicated in the name so given. Thus, if we receive a little light and are simple, God will come in to consolidate it, so that it remains in fixedness. He clothed Adam and Eve just then. He made clothes for them; so that the idea would synchronise with the idea of life -- it was life out of death. If there
{307}
was to be any life of which Eve was the mother, it must be on the principle of death; for clearly the animals from which the coats of skins were made died. We just get hints in those early chapters, not great unfoldings of doctrine such as the book of Romans. It is a very precious hint that as Adam named his wife Eve, meaning 'life', God stabilised that in bringing in the clothes for Adam and his wife. So great results accrued from that visitation; it was not for nothing. God did not come into the scene and become defeated, and go out defeated. Before He left He drove the man out, but He drove him out as clothed. Satan was shut out, too, and his final overthrow announced. God already sealed the matter in the making of the clothes, and it is left there clothed, as you might say, and comes down to us in the One of whom it is said, "In him was life, and the life was the light of men", @John 1:4.
Then we find Enoch walking with God for a period of three hundred years; one of the most remarkable incidents in the whole history of man is that walk between God and Enoch, year in and year out for three hundred years. What conversation, what communion, dear brethren, must there have been between God and Enoch! Finally God liked him well, and he grew greatly in His estimation. He was more to God in the three hundredth year than he had been in the first; there is no question about that. As one might paraphrase the facts, God might say, I like you so well that I wish to have you for ever. And He did. He took him up to heaven -- a remarkable bringing out of what I have in mind. It is no mere hour or hours or even days, but three hundred years in personal contact with the man, and the man in personal contact with his Creator. How the conversation was carried on I cannot say. What form the communion took, we are not told, but what is stressed is the walk. Enoch *walked* with God three hundred
{308}
years. The way it is put would indicate that others might be in that walk, too, but he was one. I do not say there were others, but I should not deny it if anybody brought it forward. I do not believe for one moment that Enoch was the only one on earth in the antediluvian world in which he lived who could walk with God. He seized the opportunity; whether others did is not stated. Noah did, and of course, Abraham. I bring forward these facts initially so that we might see how God can come down to His creatures, as it is said in the Psalms, "Who humbleth himself to look on the heavens and on the earth", @Psalm 113: 6.
Now I take up Abraham. This short verse says that Jehovah "left off talking with him". It was a conversation covering several points, but on one theme, namely, the heir, the seed to whom and concerning whom the promises were made. God said, "It is I", and Abraham could speak to Him freely, Abraham and God, God and Abraham. What was going on in the vicinity? What social affairs were there? Who knows? Men went on, of course; their affairs went on; items of news, marriages and deaths and other things. But here was a wonderful fact. God was down here conversing with Abraham, talking along with him, listening to what Abraham had to say. God did not come down to talk to Abraham about Ishmael; but, when Abraham brought up the matter, God says: Well, he is thy seed, that is what interests Me about him; he does not interest Me himself, his ways do not suit Me, but he is thy seed. What an encouragement that is to all parents! Some of us have an Ishmael, alas! It is well to face these matters -- a wild ass of a man, a persecutor of Christ, typified in Isaac, when he was thirteen years of age. He began early. But Jehovah says, he is thy seed. Abraham introduces the subject, and God met him in His grace. He is thy seed, He
{309}
says. Well, that is a comfort to every parent who has a wild ass of a boy, who does as he wishes, whose heart is towards Egypt. He does not go all the way. He dwells before his brethren. He is not ready to go all the way into Egypt. His mother took him a wife out of Egypt, but he has an eye on his brethren, and would like them to pay attention to him, too, when it suits him. He has little or no conscience about his course; he has no shame attached to him. But then Jehovah says to Abraham, 'He is thy seed, and I bless him because of that'. That is a comfort. Who is the father that would not take such a blessing for his Ishmael? How God honours godly fathers and godly mothers, even comforting them as regards their wayward boys and girls. He is thy seed, He says; "twelve princes shall he beget" (verse 20). He is going to have administrative powers on the earth.
I refer to that by the way, because it is part of the conversation, but the great theme was Isaac; "for in Isaac shall a seed be called to thee", @Genesis 21: 12. As Paul says, that is Christ. And the Lord Jesus says, "Your father Abraham exulted in that he should see my day, and he saw and rejoiced", @John 8: 56. He saw Isaac honoured in his house; he also saw Ishmael mocking, but he saw Isaac. Isaac fills and illumines the chapter. He is the great theme of the conversation. God has come into this. It is a household matter, and the time came when enough was said for the moment. The matter was not finished; God broke off the conversation and went up. That is what is stated in the verse: "And he left off talking with him; and God went up from Abraham". It is not a finished matter; it is to be resumed. Think of the familiarity God had introduced and maintained with His great child, as I might call him, Abraham. He was great enough to be called a father; high father, father of a multitude. He was the most interesting man in all the earth to Jehovah at that
{310}
time, and hence this conversation full of holy matters, the effect of which reaches down to us. As I was saying, the Lord said about Isaac, about Himself, "Your father Abraham exulted in that he should see my day, and he saw and rejoiced". It is a question of Isaac, and hence the "Book of the generation of Jesus Christ, Son of David, Son of Abraham",
@Matthew 1: 1. The closing words ere the ascension were, "Sarah thy wife shall indeed bear thee a son; and thou shalt call his name Isaac; and I will establish my covenant with him, for an everlasting covenant for his seed after him" (verse 19). Then He introduces Ishmael according to what I have been saying, and then He says further, "But my covenant will I establish with Isaac, whom Sarah shall bear to thee at this appointed time in the next year" (verse 21).
God is dealing with life, and He breaks off the conversation.
Is there not a word in this as to our communion with God? It is one of the greatest things we could have before us. What intercourse have we with God?
The burden of the universe is on His shoulder; worlds that we cannot compass are under His hand.
"By faith we apprehend that the worlds were framed by the word of God", @Hebrews 11:3. He framed them by His word. He has not left them to wear themselves out. He has looked after them ever since. We have to look after our watches, and in spite of that they run out and need repairs. There is not a world in the universe that is not looked after by God, in all His grace, and it never lapses. There is no lack of repairs. The system goes on; the untold number of systems go on; the worlds go on. Think of what God is engaged with every day! He has affairs that we have no idea of and cannot touch. He is occupied with them every day, and then He comes into our affairs, our families and our businesses. Businesses of men of faith are matters of concern to God. Even
{311}
to the grain of wheat God gives a body as it pleases Him. Think of God's feelings being brought in as to a body given to a grain of wheat! I think the dear brethren might do well to think over these matters and become enlarged; that God might come in to us, as He does come in to our families and talk to us about our children, so to speak. The word of God is what He would say to us, and our prayers are what we would say to Him. Every creature of God is good, being sanctified by the word of God and prayer. That is, He is speaking to us, and we are speaking to Him. That is how the matter goes on day and night in this world. If we laid hold of this -- what God is doing day and night -- it would have the effect of delivering us from what man is doing. So He left off speaking with Abraham and went up.
In the next chapter He appears again in company with two others. Now it is not a question of regulating Abraham's house. Chapter 17 is a question of Abraham's house and its regulation, and the great theme is circumcision, that is, the putting off of the body of the flesh -- the totality of it -- in the circumcision of Christ. That is the lesson of chapter 17, and now God comes back. What does He find? Will He be greeted by some fleshly person in the house? Will it be like Martha, who opened the door to the Lord and let Him in to her house and criticised Him as soon as He came in? No. Circumcision is a real feature in Abraham's house, and that, dear brethren, is the point in our houses. If the children are to be kept, the application of circumcision in principle in the house is necessary. Baptism cannot be excluded from the idea of circumcision, but circumcision is a greater thought. Circumcision is the putting off of the body of sin, the totality of it, in the household; in the individual, of course, in the man himself. It applied to Abraham as it did to his youngest child and to every servant in his house. The whole
{312}
house is circumcised, and then God comes back. He had broken off the conversation, but He comes back, not now to adjust Abraham's house but to accept hospitality in Abraham's house. You cannot expect godly and spiritual people to accept your hospitality unless the principle of circumcision is applied; baptism, of course, but circumcision as well. Now there is going to be a larger meeting. In chapter 17 it is God and Abraham, but there are three now, and Abraham and Sarah are called into it, and the servant, a young man. Jehovah says to Abraham, We will wait here for you until you prepare what is needed. Think of that! He, upon whose shoulders everything rests, the maintenance of the world, would come and just wait under the tree until Abraham prepared His repast. God says, "So do as thou hast said", chapter 18: 5. He accepted his hospitality and waited until the meal was set before Him.
Many things were said and done; the time came for them to move, for the moment, and Abraham said, "after that ye shall pass on; for therefore have ye passed on towards your servant" (verse 5). He implied they were going on further; Abraham is not the objective this time. He was in chapter 17, but this time he is incidental, as it were, but of great importance. God is going further; He passed on. Pass on, Abraham says. He is humble about it. He understands that Jehovah is on a great mission. He was on a mission of wrath. In principle, God is on His way to final adjustment of things in this world. Abraham was not the terminus, but He called in on His way -- that is very beautiful. Abraham ran. It is one of the remarkable things in Scripture, like Mary Magdalene and the father of the prodigal. What agility will arise when God comes in! Abraham ran. They all moved quickly. Now, the time is passing on and there is no running now, because God is very sure and steady. There is no hurrying at all
{313}
in divine movements. All is according to perfect measurement, according to plan, according to the way devised. They are going to pass on, and Abraham says, as it were, I will go along with You. It is very beautiful; just like going with a friend down to the corner, or to the station. Pardon my simplicity, but I want to bring home to you what God is, coming down to Abraham, supremely above what men are doing. God is going His way; Abraham says, 'I will go along with You', and he did. The two men passed on, and went down to Sodom. We are told in chapter 19 what happened there. Jehovah and Abraham remained. I cannot go into the details of it. We have often heard about this wonderful word about the righteous: fifty righteous, forty righteous, thirty righteous, twenty righteous, right down to ten righteous. God says, I will save the city for ten. That is God -- for ten righteous. One can understand what was in the mind of the blessed God. It would be wonderful if there were ten. He knew there were not. He knows the number of the righteous. They are carefully marked off on this earth; they are so precious, so valuable. God knew the number that were in Sodom. That anyone in Sodom should be called a righteous man is grace. Though Lot was in such a place as Sodom, he is called a righteous man in the New Testament. God will save the city for ten -- ten righteous men.
I come to verse 33. Jehovah went His way. He had something in His mind. He was going somewhere and He went there, and Abraham, it says, returned to his place. The word 'place' is to be noticed there. Abraham had a place. It is true enough he was a pilgrim and a stranger, but he had a place. There is much importance attached to that, Abraham's place, Jacob said that he would return to his country and his place. Paul says, "with all that in every place call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, both theirs
{314}
and ours", @1 Corinthians 1: 2. Do not forget that. Corinthians has the idea of place, but do not forget it is the place in which we call on the name of the Lord Jesus. It is known that we call on that name. There really can be no assembly in the locality save on that principle. The name is the thing. That is, we are not trusting the government to support us; we are not calling on them for their support. We pray for them, of course; we are glad to support them. I was thinking of it lately in the mid hours of the night; I wonder why it is that God allows the continuation of the conditions that are so intolerable abroad; still the trains are running, the sun rises every day, the rain falls, the moon rises, and the stars are there; and the laws are generally respected. Who is at the back of all this? God is. Take His hand away and all would go to pieces. There is not a question about that. The christian would be conscious of it. If the divine hand were withdrawn, the whole thing would go to pieces. But it does not. God is in it, and so it is calling upon the name of the Lord -- that name has power in it and there is a local assembly there that could not be without it. There is the protection not only of the government -- we pray for external government -- but the power of the Lord; the Lord Jesus in whose hand is all power in heaven and on earth; and in hundreds of places there are those that call on the name of the Lord Jesus. He is both theirs and ours. We are bound up in that in one unit. There are hundreds of localities on earth. Abraham went to his place, where he had servants, his wife, his tents, and his cattle, and where he administered things, entertaining his friends, entertaining God in his place. Each of us is to understand what is his place, and how he is holding himself in regard of others, similarly engaged in their place, calling upon the name of the Lord.
Now in chapter 35 it is a question of the house of God; God coming into His own house. It is not
{315}
Jacob's house; it is God's house, and how is He to find Jacob in it? He is coming in just where Jacob is. He had had to do with Him there before, only He was in heaven and Jacob was on the earth, and now God comes down and He converses with Jacob. It is a question of His house. That brings up the question, dear brethren, of place, as to how each of us is behaving himself in his own place, where he calls upon the name of the Lord. That is one thing. Another thing is how you behave yourself in the house of God. So we are told here, "And God went up from him in the place where he had talked with him" (verse 13). Now it is not simply Jacob's place; it is the house of God, but in the place where the conversation was held. God is signalising that place by going up from him. He does not go off from Jacob and then go up; He goes up from the very spot where the conversation was held. With us it might be a Bible reading or a ministry meeting. It is a question of Beth-el; El-beth-el. That is the point. It is the house of God, and God speaks with us in the house. We are told, "But the Spirit speaks expressly, that in latter times some shall apostatise from the faith", @1 Timothy 4: 1. That is how it happens. God comes in and speaks with us, and then goes up. He is only here a short time. These seasons are not long and are not intended to be long. God has wonderful matters to attend to, and if He comes down to earth and visits us in His house, every minute counts. Who can afford to be absent?
"And God appeared to Jacob again after he had come from Padan-Aram, and blessed him. And God said to him, Thy name is Jacob: ... but Israel shall be thy name. And he called his name Israel. And God said to him, I am the Almighty God: be fruitful and multiply; a nation and a company of nations shall be of thee; and kings shall come out of thy loins. And the land that I gave Abraham and Isaac,
{316}
to thee will I give it, and to thy seed after thee will I give the land" (verses 9 - 12). Think of how much God can put into a few words, a few sentences. Do we understand, dear brethren, what the house is? Jacob did. This very chapter tells us that God said to Jacob, "Arise, go up to Bethel, and dwell there" (verse 1). He did, and he buried the idols by the way. Now God appears. It is a question of a visitation. It is not only an appearing, but it is actually the standing of the feet of Jehovah there. Let nobody attempt to explain how this took place -- what feet they were. He came in intelligibly to Abraham, and His feet trod on the spot where Jacob was, and He spoke to him, and He went up from that spot. I am seeking to impress us all with what God is; the familiarity with which He is with His people, "all the time in which the Lord Jesus came in and went out among us, beginning from the baptism of John until the day in which he was taken up from us", @Acts 1: 21. So the passage I read says, "And God went up from him in the place where he had talked with him", (verse 13). That spot will never be forgotten, so Jacob according to this passage "set up a pillar in the place where he had talked with him" (verse 14). It is never to be for gotten. Moreover, it says he set up "a pillar of stone, and poured on it a drink-offering, and poured oil on it. And Jacob called the name of the place where God had talked with him, Beth-el" (verses 14, 15). It is a question of place every time, as if God says, Men claim this and that and the other, but I have got one place, however small physically, however circumscribed; I can take that; I can stand there and talk to you. Think of the speaking, what was conveyed to Jacob in this conversation, and now the Spirit of God says, It is not only what was said, but where it was said, and it is to be signalised for ever. This earth is remarkable in that way -- how heaven looks at different places. I have often thought of Asia
{317}
Minor and the spread of christianity outside of Judaea. See what places there are that heaven knows well, knows exactly the spots where divine Visitors came and spoke and left and went back again into heaven, and in this continent, too. God has followed up mankind with His light and testimony, and the places there are well marked in heaven, and well marked, too, by those who love the Lord and His people, and to whom His name is dear. For He says, "In all places where I shall make my name to be remembered, I will come unto thee, and bless thee", @Exodus 20: 24.
The point I would finish with is Jacob's behaviour. What was his behaviour compared with chapter 28? Here he pours a drink-offering on the pillar. Now that pillar refers to my experience, and I was conscious when God was speaking to me that God loved me, that I pleased him. That is the idea -- Jacob is now a lovable man and he is in the right place, a place where he was directed to go, that is, Beth-el. God made him what he was in Beth-el. He anointed the pillar, so that he could say at all times, That is the spot. He was conscious that God loved him, and that he was pleasing to Him. He would say, If I have done anything out of the way since, I am ashamed of myself. He would always want to return to the joy of that occasion at the spot where Jehovah spoke to him.
{318}
LOVE
@2 Samuel 12: 24, 25; @Matthew 3: 17; @1 John 3: 1
I am venturing to speak about love. It is not introduced formally in the Scriptures as early as might have been expected. It is connected with Abraham; it is connected with Isaac; it is connected with Jacob. Significantly, it begins with Abraham, representing the Father, the Source of all, as we have been singing. Jehovah says to him, "Take now thy son, thine only son, whom thou lovest, Isaac", @Genesis 22:2. Then we find it with Isaac; he was said to have loved Rebecca. And we find it with Jacob in intensity; the character of Jacob's love for Rachel was intense; the very existence of it shortened the time of his experience. So that, in that threefold witness of Genesis, we have love introduced as active.
Static love is hardly to be counted, for true love is ever active. So it is introduced among the family of God in an active way, and the intent is that it should be there for ever, increasing as it goes. We are reminded of it today in this gathering, affording scope for the Spirit of God to stimulate love; without any element of boastfulness one may say that the brethren do love one another. These special gatherings are intended to be peculiarly well-springs for us. The enemy would defeat the purpose. The more spiritual we are, the more we shall be conscious, as drawing near the time of these occasions, that the enemy is active and would rob us of our portion, diverting our minds to other things or irritating us; whatever it would be that would best hinder such occasions, Satan did not fail to present himself with the sons of God as coming up before Jehovah; @Job 1 and 2. "There was a day", it says twice over. It is literally a definite article, "the day", as if there were fixed periods even then in which sons
{319}
of God came up to appear before Jehovah. Satan also came. That is a solemn reminder of Satan's activities in regard of what is before us to spoil the well-springs. However long he detained Jehovah in the conversation about Job, there would be a certain diversion. The sons of God normally would be engaged with positive things, and that is important in these gatherings. There is a time for everything and the care meeting is a time in which to take up negative matters. The Lord would be with us there. But normally the sons of God are occupied with positive things. We have a note in Job that "all the sons of God shouted for joy". It is a characteristic of the sons of God, christians who are so designated are led normally by the Spirit of God. They are the possessors of joy in the Holy Spirit. So, in these holy convocations positive things are the order of the day. Positive things, not whisperings or back-bitings or even investigations. The time is too valuable; we are to be engaged with positive things and that implies that love is operative, love among ourselves.
Well now, as I said, this is a great matter, that this threefold testimony as to love in Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob came in among the family of God, and the thing is to continue. It comes out in Moses; it comes out in David particularly; his name means 'beloved'. And so it is with Solomon's name; his second name, but the name that should be written in golden letters for eternity, is that Jehovah loved him. A greater name than that of Solomon is Jedidiah, only mentioned once in the scripture, as far as I know. What it means is many times found in the Scriptures. But Jedidiah is to be outstanding. Its very solitariness makes it outstanding, the name derived from the immediate expression of divine love.
Jehovah loved him. He loved a new-born babe. David named him immediately, no doubt having in mind the message through Nathan as to him, that he
{320}
should be a man of peace. His name is Solomon. He named him Solomon. The man of war himself found a convenient outlet, for the moment at least, from the realm of war into the realm of peace. Solomon was the guarantee for that, that there was to be an outlet from war. War was not to be forever. Neither in heaven nor on earth is war to be for ever. It is not strange to heaven any more than it is to us. The greatest of all battles, I suppose, is that between Michael and the devil in heaven, and Michael prevailed. How long the battle lasted we are not told, but Michael prevailed; that is the thought. And the devil is cast out, never again to have footing there. The Lord Himself takes up the battle later in the book of Revelation; He comes out of heaven riding upon a white horse, and the army that was in heaven after Him, following Him also on white horses. They are not battling up there; the battle is to be down here then. The generals are taken first, not the soldiers in outposts, but the generals themselves, two great representations of sin, the dual embodiment of sin with Satan behind them -- a terrible trio of sin. They are cast alive into the lake of fire. That is the end of them. They will not see death as ordinary men; they are not given to the fowls of heaven as food, as the other battalions behind them; they are cast alive into the lake of fire. That is to say, the combination of evil fully developed, and marshalled against the Lord Jesus is met and defeated and destroyed -- cast into the lake of fire. It was prepared for the kings; that is, the embodiment of sin; heaven would be peculiarly exultant in the embodiment of sin among men being consigned there. Satan would be allowed to continue in prison for one thousand years, and then be let loose again to attack the city, the beloved city, and then fire comes down from heaven and destroys the armies and he is consigned himself to his eternal doom. These are very striking
{321}
matters, dear brethren, at the present time, and love is behind all this activity. You may not think it is love, but it is. The lake of fire is a necessity of love. The consignment of the false prophet and the beast is a necessity of love; the consignment of the devil is a necessity of love; the whole realm of creation is to be cleared. Not that they are annihilated, but they remain, a testimony to how love abominates sin as fully developed.
So returning to David, he found an outlet in his son. He is a type of Christ. Solomon is Christ; the outlet is in Christ. And so he called his name Solomon, an outlet for him for the moment -- peace. One can understand that a great military man would be thankful for the opportunity of having recourse to the company of Solomon from the very outset. How quickly David associated him with himself! He modified David even on the throne. David began to say a great deal about love, about the service of God, about the outgoings of the hearts of the saints Godward as he had Solomon by his side on the throne. Thus Solomon bearing his second name, or really his first name, Jedidiah, would ever be the reminder that peace and love were associated in his person. David thus had this outlet, and I want you to understand that this is no theoretical matter; our outlet from the present sorrow, as from all sorrows, is in Christ. He is the outlet; hence the necessity of getting near Him.
Now I wanted to speak about Nathan and his part in this name. How David discerned that Jehovah loved him is not stated, but David himself was a spiritual man. He was a prophet; he had just lost the other son in the government of God. The son died; David's heart had been wrenched. God was preparing him for the positive in the death of the first son, and David says finally: "I shall go to him, but he will not return to me". David discerned and
{322}
accepted and owned that he was not the centre of things. He was a warrior and he had no thought of his son returning into a realm of war. And so we have a Solomon who replaces him, an outlet from the realm of war, an outlet into the realm of love, into the realm of peace, where building is the order of the day, where the house of God is prominent, where the priests of God are prominent, the levites of God, the thousands of those who love Him, are prominent. That is the door opened in the birth of Solomon. Well may we understand therefore that Jehovah loved him. And it was no immediate matter, no local matter. It was a prophetic matter, and David understood that. My use of the word 'prophetic' here is because it applies peculiarly; it is directing our hearts on to the future. I know in myself, I am altogether too local both as to time and place; the prophetic ministry is to direct us to the future; it directs us to God and brings God to us, but all that with an eye to the future, that we are moving on. And Nathan represents a sort of ever-present prophet; he belonged to David. He belonged to the regime of David, as I may call it, as it is today the regime of the Lord Jesus, and the prophet is there. The whole scene is governed in a departmental way. That is what comes out in David's ministry, departmental ministry, and amongst the departments is the prophetic department. It is to serve all the others, and primarily the family, the immediate family of the king. So we find Nathan here occupied with the babe. I am thankful for every babe amongst us -- I say 'amongst us', for that is where they are. They come under prophetic ministry; they are not to be treated lightly. They are potentially great and that is what prophetic ministry implies; not only what is immediate, but what is potential, what great things are ahead for us; every prophet is engaged in enlarging the brethren in what is ahead and preparing
{323}
them for that greatness. This clothes the prophetic meetings with peculiar importance, that we have prophets. Nathan represents the family prophet, and one does not wish to be anything else -- not a military prophet but a family prophet; that is, a man of love, a man that will always be regarded as a gift. You say, A gift in the sense that he can preach? No, that is not the meaning of Nathan; the meaning of Nathan is that he is given in the sense of enlargement of the family, the family of David. The first mention we have of him is in regard to David's desire to build a house for Jehovah. David inquired and challenged himself as to living in better circumstances than Jehovah lived in. He says, "I dwell in a house of cedars". Nathan was there; the first mention of Nathan was in that connection. He says to David,"Go, do all that is in thy heart". It is a heart matter, but then the matter was somewhat changed, and in the change David is instructed about the family, about the greater than himself, the man of whom God said, He is going to be My son. He is yours, but he is going to be My son. It is a prophetic matter, whatever we may think of our babes, and of course we sometimes make altogether too much of them; that is, we connect them with ourselves, but the prophet will not connect them with you; the prophet will connect them with God, and that is a much greater thing. I would rather have my child connected with God than with myself. Of course he is connected with myself, but the prophet takes him away from me and places him in relation to God. That is a fine thing. You know how in Elijah's time there was a child sick in the house of the woman of Sarepta. The boy got sick in spite of the prophet being there. It looked as if he were going to die. That is, the presence of the prophet in itself will not save a child; prophetic ministry is necessary, and the prophetic ministry will detach the child from the bosom of the mother. That is where the
{324}
difficulty lies; it is in the natural links between the parents and the children which allow too much latitude. So the boy is taken out of the bosom of the mother and carried up and laid on the bed of the prophet. He is detached from the natural and hence he is saved from death by the prophetic ministry, by the prophetic service.
So now, as we come to Solomon, David appropriates him at once. He appropriated the other child, and lay all night on the earth until the child died. God struck him, alluding governmentally to David's course, David's conduct. He accepted it; he arose from the earth when he heard about it, and he changed his clothes and went into the house of the Lord. How pleased God was with him! And then we have Solomon. Is he going to treat Solomon this way?
I have got a son of peace now. What is he going to be? He is going to be a wonderful man. Is David calculating in that way? David says, I love that child. Well, dear brethren, let us give God the preference, and that is what a baptism of a family means. I give God the preference. He loves the children more than I do; He has given each of the children a spirit, which I could not give them. It is God's action, and the spirit is what is to abide eternally. He is the Father of spirits. Well, God puts in His claim in the most positive and blessed way. He says He loves him. What more favour could He put on a child than to love him? What is behind that love? All that God could give him! He loved that child. We have very little about Solomon afterwards until he goes on to the throne, but he was loved all the time by Jehovah. The child is called Jedidiah, 'beloved of Jehovah'. What a fine name for a child! And the prophetic ministry is here to stamp that name indelibly on that family. It will never be erased from the family, because he is the object of the Father's love, supremely so. It is Jesus.
{325}
I go on to Matthew to bring out the fact: "This is my beloved Son", God says. As regards the opening of the heavens it is said, "the heavens were opened to him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending as a dove, and coming upon him", chapter 3: 16. That was for the Lord Himself. There are things that are for each of us -- secrets. A christian has very little value who has not a secret with God, things that He says to you Himself.
<blockquote>'Called by that secret name <br>Of undisclosed delight <br>(Blest answer to reproach and Shame), <br>Graved on the stone of white'. (`79:4)</blockquote>
That is secrecy, and the Lord had this precious joy of something for Himself. It was opened to Him, and the dove came upon Him, but others are to know by heaven's voice: "This is my beloved Son, in whom I have found my delight". Others are to know it. We have therefore the development of Jedidiah; the existence *de facto* of love in the family; not simply in God's heart, nor in Christ towards us by the Spirit, but the actual existence of love coming in through Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, but really coming in through the death of Jesus, for it says here, "Hereby we have known love, because *he* has laid down his life for us", @1 John 3: 16. It is thus we know it, but then it is not only attested in that way, but we know it in the Lord, as the Babe prophetically. Let us talk as we may about love, but really we come to know it prophetically. You may say, Well, I do not understand that, but it is so. Prophecy is a special provision of God to make us know things, to force them on our heart, to write them on our hearts, that they are there indelibly. That is the point of prophecy. It is a gift in those who prophesy, of course, but Nathan was a gift, not simply because he had ability, but because God would have David and David's family to know that God loved that family
{326}
and so would give him such a man as Nathan. He was engaged solely with David's house. He helped in the kingdom. We cannot say what he did or did not do, but what Scripture designates of him is that he was occupied with David's family. He was a gift to David. You may say, How does that work? Well, take for instance the passage read in @1 John 3
"See what love the Father has given to us". That is the meaning of Nathan; the thing is bestowed upon David and his family. And what about ourselves?
"See what love the Father has given to us". He has given us love. You may say, He has shown it to us, but He has *given* it to us. How is it being given? Well, it is worked out that way: "that we should be called the children of God". It is a prophetic idea, that the divine mind as regards us is that we should be called the children of God. But then the love is given. Let us take it down; let us appropriate it. God has given us something: "that we should be called ...". Who is calling us the children of God? I quite admit that the word 'called' is not oracular as it is in @Acts 11. We are called christians in an oracular sense; that is, God would have it, as it were, that everyone should know that we are christians. They were called christians. Christians are those who take on the character of Christ as over against all sectarianism; the disciples had been regarded as the Jewish sect, but they are not a Jewish sect. God would have it different. They are called christians and the word 'called' is oracular; it is God's mind that they should be called christians; it is no accident. Well, it is not the same word here, but the same idea, that we are called children of God. You can see how the link runs through these three passages, first in the babe, in Jedidiah, and then in Jesus -- "Thou shalt call his name Jesus", and then again, "the holy thing also which shall be born shall be called Son of God", @Luke 1: 35: not '*is*
{327}
Son of God'. Many enforce this idea that He was that already, but that is not the way the Scripture puts it. He "shall be called" that; it means He is that, as born a Man here, and the testimony of it is there, that it is palpably so. The disciples saw it. They saw His glory, "a glory as of an only-begotten with a father". And so it is here at the banks of the Jordan; John and those with him there would hear that voice: "This is my beloved Son". What would they say about Him? He is to be called that. Every lover of God would say, I will call Him that. Have we learnt to call Him that? Has the light of God come into our souls, so that we call Him that? It is not simply because Scripture says that, but I see that that is His name, that that is what He is. I call Him that.
So it is that the Spirit of God takes up a man like John who loved the Lord, or better than that, whom the Lord loved specially. How precious is the thought, to be loved specially! John is loved specially, and he is the one who is taken up to say so much about the Son of God. John the baptist said, according to John, "I have seen and borne witness that this is the Son of God", @John 1: 34. That is the One he baptised. Did he hear the voice? Undoubtedly. But then he heard more than that. He says, "Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending and abiding on him, he it is who baptises with the Holy Spirit. And I have seen and borne witness that this is the Son of God". It is what He does. It is the concrete matter that is in mind. He is called Son of God, and so we are called christians for some good reason. The disciples at Antioch had been in the school of Barnabas and Paul for a year, and they are called something that surely is testified in them, that they are christians. They are taking character from Christ, not from Judaism or Presbyterianism or any 'ism'. That is the force of the word 'called' there, that God would
{328}
have it so. We are to be marked off from all sectarianism, taking character from Christ. The same thing applies to the Son of God, "for as many as are led by the Spirit of God, *these* are sons of God", @Romans 8: 14. That is what was said of Jesus after it was announced that He was Son of God. "Then Jesus was carried up into the wilderness by the Spirit to be tempted of the devil": He was led by the Spirit "in the wilderness" in Luke, not'*into*'it, but "in the wilderness" for the whole forty days. He was led by the Spirit. Thus we see the marking off, the leading, as of sons. And so as to children. The Lord Jesus is not called a child of God in the sense in which we are His children. He is called a Child in Matthew, a Babe in Luke, but He is not called one of the children of God. He *is the Son*. God from the very start says this, "Thou art my Son; I this day have begotten thee", @Psalm 2: 7. It is to be known. He is marked off in this way. So it is that John the baptist says that this is the Son of God; He baptises with the Holy Spirit. But he heard the Father's voice, too. He was there, and the voice was, "This is my beloved Son". It is a question of love. I can understand, dear brethren, how that would thrill the lovers of God at the banks of the Jordan. I wonder how much we know about being thrilled with heavenly things, with heavenly reports, with heavenly witnesses. God began to speak of it in the wilderness at Sinai. In Genesis He says very little about love; there are only two or three references to love in Genesis, but in Exodus God says, "thousands of them that love me" (chapter 20: 6)not that 'ought to love Me', but "that love me". It has a peculiar application at the present time, for surely there are thousands who love God. John takes it up, as I said, as specially loved by the Lord Jesus. He was taught by the love that Christ expended on him -- "the disciple whom Jesus loved". He is qualified to speak of love. And so it is that he says here:
{329}
"See what love the Father has given to us, that we should be called the children of God". That "see", I suppose, is an expression of feeling -- another thing that is very scarce among us -- genuine spiritual feeling.
"See what love the Father has given to us". It is a gift; it is not simply a development; it is a gift, for love is of God. If we have it at all it is His gift to us, taking form in us, so that we can love; we can love like Him. So Paul says to the Thessalonian saints -- they were beloved saints -- "to the assembly of Thessalonians in God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ". That meant that the Father loved that assembly. They were in His heart and so the apostle says to them, I do not need to speak to you about love, because you are taught of God to love one another. They were in the divine school and the main subject of that school is to teach love. It is the one abiding thing. "And now abide faith, hope, love; these three things; and the greater of these is love", @1 Corinthians 13: 13. Faith and hope cease; love abides and God teaches us love, and in teaching us love He says, I give it to you, because He is the Source of it. It is not developed in us as a nature exactly. God is the Source of it. It does develop in us, of course, but God is the Source of it; it is a gift and we are called the children of God.
So, dear brethren, let us take it to heart, as in the valley of Baca, to make it a well-spring. What is it but coming together in love? -- love among ourselves, for the brethren. You love to look at their faces, and they love to look at yours. We are glad to meet each other; we are not in a hurry to leave each other; it is a bond for eternity; a bond of love, attested through the death of Jesus, indicated in the name we are called down here, "children of God" -- up there sons of God, down here children of God. "For this reason the world knows us not, because it knew him not". Let us be content. We are not the great people
{330}
of the world. We read of the seven thousand names of men slain. We are not among them, thank God!
That means the great people of this world. Men are making names all over the world. Let us be content to be at the tribunal, and say we are lovers of Jesus. We are of no account; we are in the way in the eyes of many. We can thank God indeed for the generosity of the governments. God is in that, too, but we are not aspiring to be among the names of men. We are unknown here, unknown and yet well known, for the children of God have more influence in this world than any others -- a powerful influence. It is there, permeating secretly but invincibly, permeating conditions and affecting what I may call restraint of evil, and the opening up of the ways of God.
May God grant that we carry on in this way, dear brethren, knowing the love that has been given to us, that we should be called the children of God
{331}
OBJECTIVE AND SUBJECTIVE TRUTH
@Psalm 19:1 - 14
J.T. This psalm furnishes an opportunity to consider what is called objective truth and the corresponding subjective. The first is in verses 1 - 6 and the second from verse 7 to the end. The first obviously is objective because it treats of things that are in heaven, or in the heavens, whereas we are on the earth. From verse 7 on to the end, we have the work of God's Spirit in us, in the saints, and the working out in the law, that is, in the word of God -- the ideas of the law, the testimony, the precepts, the fear and the judgments of God -- all point to the word of God which operates in us. It is presented as valued, as appreciated, as occasioning joy; the psalm, therefore, affords a remarkable combination as illustrated in the saints in all times and in all places normally.
G.V.D. There should be a complete correspondence between what is objective and what is subjective; and is not that the present service of the Holy Spirit, to bring that about in the saints?
J.T. That is what I thought we should see. There is correspondence in the saints with what is above, the Spirit being here. He came down from above knowing everything, and knows how to affect us so as to bring about correspondence.
A.P.T. The Lord Jesus in heaven -- is that known objectively, the work of the Spirit here making it good in our souls subjectively?
J.T. That is what is presented in the psalm. We read that He was seen going into heaven: "This Jesus who has been taken up from you into heaven, shall thus come in the manner in which ye have beheld him going into heaven", @Acts 1: 11. In the meantime He is received above, as it is said, "Whom
{332}
heaven indeed must receive till the times of the restoring of all things", @Acts 3: 21. But then the Spirit is needed here to enable us to know Him. In Luke it is said He was parted from them before He was received up. He was parted from them, but the Holy Spirit had not yet come. But now that He has come, we are linked up with the Lord and, of course, Paul's doctrine is available to us; but primarily this psalm is Christ in heaven and we here.
C.N. Would you tell us the difference between the heavens and the expanse? "The heavens declare the glory of God; and the expanse sheweth the work of his hands" (verse 1).
J.T. If you go back to @Genesis 1, we can obviously make a connection there. We are told, "In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth". Not heaven simply, but the heavens. How many there are, we cannot say, but there is nothing said about the expanse in that verse, so that the expanse was something additional. That is, when the creation began to take form, as we have it, in the second day, it is said in verse 6: "And God said, Let there be an expanse in the midst of the waters, and let it be a division between waters and waters. And God made the expanse, and divided between the waters that are under the expanse and the waters that are above the expanse; and it was so. And God called the expanse Heavens". The word 'expanse' may be 'firmament', but 'expanse' is more accurate and more expressive. It means something spread out or opened out, but it was additional to the word 'heavens' in verse 1; and therefore it would be seen that waters were above it and waters below it; not in the ordinary sense of heaven but what we might call the atmospheric condition. The lights are said to be there, too; therefore, we have in the expanse something adjacent to us in which God is operating in physical relations.
{333}
C.N. That is verse 14.
J.T. "And God said, Let there be lights in the expanse of the heavens". They are not said here to have been created. The lights were just there. It would be as if they were adapted. They would be there before undoubtedly, but in the new conditions that this chapter contemplates they would be adapted and made to shine, although they are not spoken of at first. God said, "Let there be light. And there was light" (verse 3). We are not told from whence they came, but in the fourth day we have these bodies. It is quite interesting to compare these great things near to us, and then to consider what we go to. Paul went to the third heaven, very different apparently; and Ephesians and Hebrews say Christ went beyond all heavens. So that they evidently open up an immense range of thought; but it is the expanse you have in your mind. We have both here. "The heavens declare the glory of God" (verse 1). That is what is alluded to in Genesis. Then the expanse is what we have already spoken of, created in the second day.
W.W.M. In Solomon's prayer he speaks of the heaven of heavens. What does he mean by that?
J.T. That is left indefinite. It is not easy to say, but he speaks of it in a negative way: it cannot contain God. So that God Himself in His infinite Being is outside of that, according to verse 1 of Genesis. He made the heavens and the earth. They were all created, but where God is in His infinite Being is beyond that. We have to leave that. He dwells in light unapproachable.
W.W.M. Would the universe be the whole creation, including heaven and every created thing?
J.T. Quite so. The word means that. It includes everything but it does not include God or His abode, because it is infinite. He is outside the range of creation. He is the Creator and will come into what
{334}
is created, but He was before that. Therefore, what can we say? We have to leave that.
W.W.M. Is it proper then to have in your thoughts the universe as the whole created sphere in which God is operating so as to fill it all to His eternal pleasure?
J.T. That is the way to look at it. So that 'universe' is not outside of Scripture. It is not used literally in Scripture, but the thought of it is there, and "all things" is equivalent to 'universe'. The Son made all things; @Colossians 1: 13 - 16. "He who has built all things is God", @Hebrews 3:4. That is a phrase in Scripture. That would mean God made the universe.
F.H.L. Peter speaks of Him who made the new heavens, but this is not that.
J.T. This is the heavens we are having to do with. We are told the heavens are to be consumed, the whole universe in that physical sense; but then there is that which we can hardly speak of as physical. The higher we get the more attenuated our thought is. The Lord Jesus is said to have passed beyond all the heavens. We cannot include where He is as touchable by anything.
A.R. You are talking about the created sphere. Is that the idea? What is created is to be removed.
J.T. Quite so. We are told there is to be a new heaven and a new earth.
V.C.L. Would this represent heaven as it appears to a christian today? If you are capable of taking on impressions, this is what comes before your soul in connection with the link we have with heaven.
J.T. That is what I hope we shall be able to link on with. "The heavens declare the glory of God; and the expanse sheweth the work of his hands". We have to go back and think of the Creator -- what He had in mind and then how far we can amplify that in view of what has come out since; for the Lord Jesus in coming out from heaven has told us what is there.
{335}
So that He says, "The Son of man who is in heaven", @John 3: 13. He said that when He was down here. We, therefore, have to begin to be intelligent in what we are saying, with the primary thought of David here. We have to remember that "by his Spirit the heavens are adorned", @Job 26: 13. We have just to understand whether, in the coming in of Christ and through angelic ministry, the idea of heaven has not been greatly enlarged since Genesis, and even since the Psalms, because the Son of man who is in heaven has come down to tell us about what is there, and now He has gone up there as Man, and the Spirit has come here to tell us about Him up there.
A.R. Would Luke give us a clue as to what is in heaven?
J.T. I think he does. He speaks much of it.
A.B. Would Colossians fit in? "Who is image of the invisible God" (@Colossians 1: 15), and Hebrews, "who being the effulgence of his glory and the expression of his substance", @Hebrews 1: 3.
J.T. Well, He has come down within our range and He said to Nicodemus, "If I have said the earthly things to you, and ye believe not, how, if I say the heavenly things to you, will ye believe? And no one has gone up into heaven, save he who came down out of heaven, the Son of man who is in heaven", @John 3: 12, 13. Well, it is to be hoped that we do not have to be spoken to like that. Having the Holy Spirit as believers, we ought to be able to speak about this psalm, the first part telling us about what is in heaven and the second telling us about what God has effected in our own hearts here below. The first part is connected with God, as the brethren will observe in verse 1. It is connected with God, whereas the remaining part is connected with Jehovah. The word 'Lord' (in A.V.) is 'Jehovah' from verse 7 onwards. The second part of the psalm involves the covenant that God made with His people, and their
{336}
enjoyment of it is now what we should enter into; how they value it.
J.A.P. Does Stephen take all this up in his address? He told them what he saw: the Son of man standing in heaven, but then he was in the enjoyment of that himself.
J.T. Well, he evidently was. His face shone like an angel's, which would indicate that he had close participation in heavenly things. They saw his face as the face of an angel, which would mean he had been taking on the impress of heaven. It was on his countenance.
G.H. Nebuchadnezzar acknowledged that the heavens did rule. Is that what the heavens suggest to us -- the idea of rule?
J.T. They do. They represent the idea of rule and Nebuchadnezzar had to learn that. He learned that the heavens rule, and that is what each one of us has to learn and the nations have to learn it, too.
-.P. Do the heavens, apart from revelation, set out some feature of God?
J.T. I think they do. Just stop to think of what anyone could take in. For instance, the lower creatures -- take a sheep or a horse or a dog -- what do they know? If they looked up to heaven what would they say about it? What could we say about the heavens by what we see? Of course, we see certain movements and, no doubt, the natural mind of man can take in something of those movements, but what could we take in intelligibly about it without some teaching from God? And, therefore, I would say that God, in forming man, began to teach him. He did not leave him to himself to learn. He began to teach him; so that we are told in the New Testament, quoting from the Old, "they shall be all taught of God", @John 6:45. However clever we might be, what could we say about what is visible in the heavens unless we are somewhat taught of God?
{337}
-.P. I was thinking of Romans. "Because, knowing God, they glorified him not as God", @Romans 1: 21. In what sense would the apostle speak of persons knowing God apart from His revelation in Christ?
J.T. The allusion in Romans is to what came in after Noah; the teaching that was there from Noah onwards. So that they did not like to retain the knowledge of God. They had it, but they did not like to retain it. They had it at Babel. It was there. There was some light and some teaching, but whatever it was, they did not like to retain God in their knowledge and, therefore, He gave them up. So that the knowledge was there and they turned to idolatry. There was no idolatry before the deluge as far as Scripture shows, but there was afterwards. Therefore, I think that as soon as God made man there was something in the way of teaching. There was something in what God placed in man as He made him, and so He would bring out what He had placed in him, because He asked him to name the animals. He told Adam to name them and whatever he named them that was the name of the creature. That would indicate, I suppose, that what was in Adam was capable of taking in things; but then there had to be teaching along with that; so that we find with Enoch that his name indicates a person who is taught.
A.R. Was not Job converted through the presentation of the creation?
J.T. Quite so. He was taught; he observed.
W.W.M. In relation to being taught of God, the Lord uses that scripture, I believe, at the time when He spoke of the bread that had come down out of heaven. The idea of heaven would have to come into our minds on the divine side, because they had said, 'Is not this Joseph's son?' But we are taught of God to understand He comes out of heaven.
J.T. That is just the point for us now; that we
{338}
are taught of God, and this psalm supposes that they were being taught of God. There can be no doubt that the intelligence God gave man, that is Adam, was that he was capable of taking in things, that is, by observation. But after sin came into Adam and Eve and their posterity, it was a question of whether they would have a right thought of anything unless God taught them; and God did teach them. That is what is meant by God's first conversation with Adam and Eve, and then by what He did by making them garments. The principle of divine teaching came in at once and it is here. "They shall be all taught of God", @John 6: 45. That is the point for us this afternoon, as to whether we are taught of God or not. "The heavens declare the glory of God; and the expanse sheweth the work of his hands".
C.N. So that Abel's action in the kind of sacrifice he offered to Jehovah would prove that he may have had some teaching which corresponded with what happened in the garden with his parents.
J.T. It would look that way. It says in chapter 4: 3: "And in process of time it came to pass that Cain brought of the fruit of the ground an offering to Jehovah. And Abel, he also brought of the firstlings of his flock, and of their fat". Well now, where did Cain get this suggestion to bring something, and then where did Abel get the suggestion to bring something?
Cain had some suggestion, but he was defective. He did not do what was right, whereas Abel did. It is said, "Abel, he also brought of the firstlings of his flock, and of their fat. And Jehovah looked upon Abel, and on his offering; and upon Cain, and on his offering, he did not look". Cain brought of the fruit of the ground, but Abel brought of the firstlings of his flock, which is a nice touch. It does not appear that there was any idea in Cain of possessing anything, but there was in Abel. I would say, therefore, there was some suggestion of teaching in Abel. He did
{339}
what was right. He observed what he saw in his father and his mother; the kind of clothes they wore and whence they came and how they were made.
W.C.R. Would it appear in @Isaiah 28 that God teaches a farmer how to plough and how to sow?
J.T. I am sure that is all very suggestive, and how wide it must be. If you think of the lower creatures from man down, how much there was to learn in themselves, and how they were to do things; so that God stood by them, I would say, covering that word, "They shall be all taught of God". So that even a farmer is taught of God and he learns that if he puts a certain grain in the ground it will come up of that kind and God has to do with it, because He gives it a body as it pleases Him.
V.C.L. Is the psalmist in the good of what he writes here, or is he writing prophetically, awaiting the incoming of the Spirit for the real knowledge of this to take hold of our souls?
J.T. That is the way I would take it. David, of course, was instructed. He had the Spirit himself, indeed. He says, "Take not the spirit of thy holiness from me" (@Psalm 51: 11), alluding to the pattern he had of the temple. He said he had all the features of the temple, by the Spirit, so that he was taught himself, and he would look up at the heavens in a different way from what an astronomer would look up at them. I can imagine that David would say in looking at the heavens, God garnished these heavens. He adorned them by His Spirit. He would view them from that point of view.
A.R. As looking at the sun, it would suggest Christ.
J.T. That is the thing I thought we might come to, that the first six verses involve the type of Christ. It says, "Day unto day uttereth speech, and night unto night sheweth knowledge". There is no speech and yet their voice is heard. There is a silent voice,
{340}
as it were, in the heavens. "There is no speech and there are no words, yet their voice is heard. Their line is gone out through all the earth, and their language to the extremity of the world". The great line implies where they start, where the thought begins. And they have a language. "In them hath he set a tent for the sun". Now we come to Christ. "And he is as a bridegroom going forth from his chamber; he rejoiceth as a strong man to run the race. His going forth is from the end of the heavens, and his circuit unto the ends of it; and there is nothing hid from the heat thereof". That is the end of the objective side, and the end is in Christ in the type. That is, in the sun.
A.R. Everything is under the influence of the sun.
J.T. Just so.
F.H.L. One can see the need for the solemn warning about worshipping the heavenly bodies when they are so glorious. We must look beyond the creation to the Creator.
J.T. Just so. If God were working with a man he would begin to reason that way. There must be more than I see.
-.E. I suppose man in his natural state comes short of all these things.
J.T. Scientific men know much more than we do in a certain way, but they do not know anything spiritually. That is what we are here for this afternoon, to get a spiritual thought.
A.B. Would @John 1 fit in? "And the light appears in darkness, and the darkness apprehended it not" (verse 5). "But as many as received him, to them gave he the right to be children of God" (verse 12). There are those that take it on objectively.
J.T. In that passage it says, "He was in the world, and the world had its being through him, and the world knew him not" (verse 10). The word 'world' would include the heavens as well as the earth, because
{341}
it means ornamentation or order. The Lord was the Author of it all, but it did not know Him, meaning morally that darkness had come in and they did not know anything right. They did not know the Creator Himself.
G.V.D. Would you say the magi in Matthew, having seen His star in the east, and coming to worship Him, were moving on spiritual lines?
J.T. That will help us to reach the next part, because they were on the line of worship, and that is what you get in verse 7 onwards. They did not have the Scriptures as far as we know, but they had seen His star. They knew that it was His star, showing that God was operating in them. The subjective side was there. Take those men -- we are not told how many of them there were. They were probably astronomers by profession, but they saw His star. That would be a great objective idea. They saw it; it appeared at a certain time, and it ceased to appear, so that it directed their view, because they had gotten out of the way. They needed the subjective to keep in the way of the star. They represent the second part of the psalm. They went to Jerusalem and the star was not there. The second part is the law or the Scriptures. They might have stayed in their own country and gazed up at the star and enjoyed the thought of it. The word 'His' is there: "his star". They communed together undoubtedly, because something was happening in their souls. How did they know?
The heavens themselves did not tell them. "His star". It is the Messiah's star; the star of the King of the Jews. Now, they came a long way, and I think we might fit in from verse 7 to the end of the psalm here with their long journey, because they required the law; they required that principle. "The law of Jehovah is perfect, restoring the soul; the testimony of Jehovah is sure, making wise the simple" (verse 7). There would be something like that going on in their
{342}
souls; something corresponding with what they saw objectively in the star.
A.R. In verse 7 you have wise men: "making wise the simple".
J.T. Just so. They were becoming wise. That is what I think we might get to here, what corresponds with the subjective side in beginning with verse 7.
T.H. "Night unto night sheweth knowledge". You would be impressed with the peculiar grace afforded through the night in order to find knowledge. Our night seasons are often disturbed and we should gain from them in receiving knowledge. There is something God has for us in the night season.
J.T. That helps us as to the wise men. Had they stayed in their own land and communed about what they saw, there would be a certain amount of enjoyment, but they were not content with that. They came to the west to see the King of the Jews. They wanted to see Him, and they talked about Him on their way. What did they say? And when they came to Jerusalem they made inquiry. I think they would, in principle, begin to see what the psalm means from verse 7 onwards. That is to say, for instance, the word 'knowledge'. "The law of Jehovah is perfect, restoring the soul; the testimony of Jehovah is sure, making wise the simple; the precepts of Jehovah are right, rejoicing the heart; the commandment of Jehovah is pure, enlightening the eyes; the fear of Jehovah is clean, enduring for ever; the judgments of Jehovah are truth, they are righteous altogether they are more precious than gold, yea, than much fine gold; and sweeter than honey and the dropping of the honeycomb" (verses 7 - 10). Well, it seems to me as if these men from the east would begin to see something of these things. Though they did not give the right names, the Spirit of God was working in their souls and if He is not working in our souls we will not get much help from this psalm, but if He is we will.
{343}
W.C.R. The apostle wrote to Corinth and says, "Thus there is not a wise person among you", @1 Corinthians 6: 5. Is that a strong rebuke?
J.T. That is good negatively. This thought is that we should be marked by wisdom. As has been already said, "The testimony of Jehovah is sure, making wise the simple". Why should we be unwise as professing to be christians?
F.H.L. There seem to be six great features shining out there. It would take the day of the Spirit to bring out the perfect seven.
J.T. It is now a question of what the Spirit works in us, so that the book of Acts is, as it were, a counter part of the gospels and then the epistles. The book of Acts and the epistles correspond to the second part of this psalm. Christ is in heaven according to the first part of it, but the second part involves the Spirit here working these things out in us.
J.A.P. Is that why in @Revelation 22 it says, "And the Spirit and the bride say, Come" (verse 17)? Is that an answer to verse 5 of this psalm -- the bridegroom? There has been a subjective work in us.
J.T. Just so. I believe the Spirit enables us to grasp the idea of the bridegroom. John the baptist had it. He had it before Paul brought it out. He says, "He that has the bride is the bridegroom",
@John 3: 29. The bridegroom would be the first part of this psalm, but the bride would be seen in the working out of the second part. John the baptist had the idea of the bride. If there is a bridegroom there must be a bride, and Paul brings in the bride, but John the baptist had the idea.
-.P. How would @Acts 27 bear on what you have before you? Paul on his way to Rome experienced a storm on the ship and neither sun nor stars appeared. There were no objective lights, as you were remarking. They had to go by some other means.
J.T. Paul says, "For an angel of the God, whose
{344}
I am and whom I serve, stood by me this night" (verse 23). There were neither sun nor stars. There were no objective guides during the storm, but Paul was not without a Guide and that is the second part here. There is a time comes when the believer comes to the idea of the Spirit, walking by the Spirit; not simply by the objective of heaven but by the Spirit, and John's epistles work that out for us.
A.R. There are four parts affected by the truth the soul, the heart, the mind and the eye. Wisdom is for the mind.
J.T. These things help us. The psalmist says, "even in the nights my reins instruct me", @Psalm 16: 7. How can that be explained? They are not the heavens; they are the inwards of a christian in which the Spirit operates and instruction is there; guidance is there. "For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, *these* are sons of God", @Romans 8: 14. That is, the Spirit of God in the person. It is not the Spirit of God in heaven. It is the Spirit of God down here that leads.
A.R. Verses 7 and 8 are what is going on in the believer.
J.T. Just so. What guidance you get yourself from your inwards. It must correspond with what is objective, but still we must learn to make way for the Spirit.
C.N. Referring to the magi, they seem to have made progress after finding out exactly where the Lord was to be born. It says in @Matthew 2: 11, "And having come into the house they saw the little child with Mary his mother, and falling down did him homage. And having opened their treasures, they offered to him gifts, gold, and frankincense, and myrrh. And being divinely instructed in a dream ..."
J.T. They have now not come to the star, although the star was there; it hovered over them; but they
{345}
came to the Person. That is exactly what the Holy Spirit does to us to lead us to Christ.
C.N. Our activities thus are suitable, involved in these gifts and their worship of Him.
J.T. They had them with them. All that fits in with the second part of this psalm, so that when we come to the assembly to carry on and have part in the service of God, the objective must be with us. We look for the Lord to come to us. He comes out of His chamber. That is all objective; and He rejoices as a strong man to run a race. He moves on the first day of the week among the gatherings. All that is objective and that is what is needed. The second part of this psalm is that we have the inward teachings and feelings and affections. These come in directly from heaven, but by the Spirit operating in us. There are nine different fruits of the Spirit mentioned in the epistle to the Galatians, and these do not come directly from heaven. The fruit is here. It is effected by the operation of the Spirit in our hearts, and that is what the Lord comes to, as it were. He knows where that is and it attracts Him. The idea of the Lord as a strong Man coming out of His chamber is all an objective thought.
C.N. Verse 10 is experience. "They are more precious than gold, yea, than much fine gold; and sweeter than honey and the dropping of the honeycomb".
J.T. That is the way it works out; so that the assembly is precious to Christ. He looks for something there. The Spirit has affected her and He comes to where that is. That is how the truth works out in the service of God.
V.C.L. While the first position is objective, would you ever have the sense of the bridegroom in you livingly unless you have been through the second portion of this psalm?
J.T. That is just what I was thinking. The Lord
{346}
would help us to look into it more carefully, as to what the Lord comes to as the Bridegroom. What He comes to; what is in His mind. It is all a great objective thought from our side. He is looking for what is in us which we may speak of as the subjective; that is, the fruit of the Spirit. We have room for expressions here; the restoring of the soul and the testimony sure making wise the simple. "The precepts of Jehovah are right, rejoicing the heart".
These all contemplate richness in us. "The fear of Jehovah is clean, enduring for ever; the judgments of Jehovah are truth, they are righteous altogether they are more precious than gold, yea, than much fine gold; and sweeter than honey and the dropping of the honeycomb". These are all rich thoughts, and the Lord knows where they are. It is the Spirit of God that effects them in us, and the Lord comes to us in that connection.
A.P.T. Are they not positive; not so much corrective but positive operations of the Spirit of God in us?
J.T. Just so. The precious positiveness of the testimony or the word of God effected and operated on by the Spirit.
A.P.T. "He restoreth my soul", @Psalm 23: 3. It is more how the Spirit of God is operating in us.
J.T. It does not really mean you have gone astray.
It is more the idea of replenishment. We are set up afresh.
Ques. Are all these things contemplated in @John 14 in connection with what the Lord said about the coming of the Spirit as the result of His ascension?
J.T. It depends on that. The Lord had all this in mind when He said, "And I will beg the Father, and he will give you another Comforter, that he may be with you for ever, the Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it does not see him nor know him; but *ye* know him, for he abides with
{347}
you, and shall be in you. I will not leave you orphans, I am coming to you", @John 14: 16 - 18. And then again He says, "Because I live *ye* also shall live" (verse 19). All these depend on the Spirit's coming in.
A.R. He came to where the disciples were. The doors were shut for fear of the Jews.
J.T. The Lord had in mind just what we are saying. The Lord had that in mind, but how much more so in His ministry and teaching.
A.B. "We being assembled to break bread",
@Acts 20: 7. They are moving in the Spirit's power and the understanding of the law of Jehovah.
J.T. The chapter contemplates the rich state of things at Ephesus; not that the chapter contemplates Ephesus only, but it is full of love, full of affection from the beginning to the end; and that is the idea of the assembly. The Lord comes to that.
T.H. The first fruit of the Spirit is love and the last fruit is self-control. I was wondering if what lies in between would help us in that way to consider these precious features in our souls so that we see that we have some of them shining out.
J.T. That explains the admiring language which the Lord uses as to the second person, the feminine person, in the Canticles. What He describes in His admiring language really is the fruit of the Spirit; what the Spirit effects in us.
F.H.L. You spoke of the riches here. Do you think the apostle had something of this in mind in Romans: "O depth of riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God!" chapter 11: 33?
J.T. You are impressed in Romans with the doxologies. They refer to the richness of the Spirit's work in the saints. You get one at the beginning of the book and then you get that one which you allude to, and one in the last chapter, too. It is the overflowing of the Spirit in a believer; and, of course, the Lord values that and comes to that.
{348}
A.R. Why is it so difficult to control the tongue?
J.T. You mean that the speaking is silenced? I would say the speaking is silenced. Control is a necessary thing with us, especially in the assembly, that I do not admit anything that is unsuitable to the assembly. There is much that could be used elsewhere legally, but not in the assembly; it is the power of self-control and enables me to confine myself to what the Lord values.
T.E.H. The psalmist ends up with a wonderful suggestion of self-control: "Let the words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart be acceptable in thy sight, O Jehovah, my rock, and my redeemer" (verse 14), as if he would silence them in the sanctuary.
J.T. Very good. "Never man spoke thus, as this man speaks", @John 7: 46. The Spirit of God effects that sort of thing with us. We know what to say to the Lord and to the Father, too, in the assembly.
A.N.W. In relation to what you have been saying as to what comes to us by the Spirit, would you say something as to those who have heard the Father Himself? It follows what we referred to earlier in @John 6. It is the coming to the Lord.
J.T. So the Father prepares us really for that. On the other hand, the Son prepares us for the Father, so that there is mutual workmanship in us in that way. The Lord says, "the men whom thou gavest me", @John 17: 6. He says that to His Father and then on the other hand, He brought the men to His Father, too; He brought one after another to the Father.
C.N. Does the end of the psalm suggest there is ever the need of self-judgment?
J.T. Just so. Beginning with verse 12 it says, "Who understandeth his errors? Purify me from secret faults. Keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins; let them not have dominion over me: then shall I be perfect, and I shall be innocent
{349}
from great transgression. Let the words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart be acceptable in thy sight, O Jehovah, my rock, and my redeemer". These are all wholesome, as you might say, cogitations in the believer as to what we have had. How great the need for balance and my comparing spiritual with spiritual so that we know where to say things and where not to say them. "Presumptuous sins" are so apt to arise with us. "Keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins".
A.P.T. There seems to be the thought of order as we had at Montreal and elsewhere -- one, two, three in this chapter.
J.T. Quite so; learning in order. Paul proceeded on those lines in his letters to Corinth and stressed the idea of directions; and the instructions generally are in the order of one, two, three. So that he said, "For I did not judge it well to know anything among you save Jesus Christ, and him crucified", @1 Corinthians 2: 2. That would be number one in his mind, so to speak. And then in speaking to the Ephesians he would have them understand his knowledge of the mystery. He kept back nothing from them.
G.V.D. God is not the author of confusion. I was thinking of what is said in Isaiah. We learn line upon line and precept upon precept. Is there not the fulfilling of order in that?
J.T. Just so.
-.C. Speaking of presumptuous sins, when Peter would discourage the Lord from going to the cross -- he said, "This shall in no wise be unto thee". Would that be presumptuous sin? The Lord says, "Get away behind me, Satan", @Matthew 16: 22, 23.
J.T. It was presumptuous for him to say to the Lord, "This shall in no wise be unto thee". It was an implied rebuke to the Lord. Very presumptuous, surely, and sinful; so bad that He called him Satan.
W.W.M. Would the secret faults be more connected
{350}
with natural aspirations that might not belong to others? The Lord asked them what they were speaking about on the way and they were talking about who should be the greatest. That is something in a person's mind that has to be rigorously judged.
J.T. Think of something like that coming up in the assembly! A brother might get up to speak and speak well and I might be jealous of him. So these closing verses are very salutary. "Who understandeth his errors?" They might be there and you do not discern that they are so bad.
J.A.P. Paul says, "I am conscious of nothing in myself; but I am not justified by this: but he that examines me is the Lord", @1 Corinthians 4: 4.
A.R. Is it by the Spirit that you discover what is going on in the heart?
J.T. Quite so.
T.E.H. Would it be right to say that the greatest declaration of love in the Supper discloses the awful ness of what is in my heart? The idea of rivalry may come in at the Supper, and we need to pay attention to the word you have quoted us, to be able to see what is inside and be free from these thoughts.
J.T. These closing verses are intended to sober us as to our part in the services, so that we do not grieve the Lord, or grieve the Spirit, in the thoughts and meditations of our heart. "Let the words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart be acceptable in thy sight, O Jehovah, my rock, and my redeemer".
A.P.T. Isaac was ready for the subjective side. He was meditating in the field. He was ready for the bride.
J.T. It presents a beautiful scene as Rebecca was arriving; that is, the assembly typically. He was coming from going to the well at Lahai-roi. He was, as it were, going and coming back, suggestive of the Spirit. That is, it is from the Spirit we get all right thoughts. That is where he was when Rebecca was
{351}
arriving. And then Rebecca knew what to do, so that at the end of @Genesis 24 we have arrived, typically, at a most spiritual scene. How the Lord was seen typically in Isaac meditating in the fields in relation to the well; and then Rebecca, it is said, sprang off the camel, meaning also the Spirit; not for the understanding but for power and freshness.
-.P. At the Supper, the Lord put all of them to self-searching. Why did He not point out Judas from the eleven?
J.T. That is a good word. Why did He not?
Are you alluding to the end of @John 6?
-.P. I was thinking of the time when they were together and the Lord said that one of them would betray Him.
J.T. That was at the Supper.
-.P. He did not put Judas out then and I was inquiring why He did not.
J.T. Is it not the principle that we are all searched by a challenge like that? "One of you". Each one would be challenged inwardly as to whether he might be capable of betraying the Lord; a very wholesome thing, too, because when we consider what such a man as Peter did and a man like David did, we should each of us be challenged as to our capabilities, and hence this prayer: "Who understandeth his errors? Purify me from secret faults. Keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins; let them not have dominion over me; then shall I be perfect, and I shall be innocent from great transgression". It seems to me these verses fit in in relation to your question.
-.P. They do.
F.H.L. Peter in @Acts 10 would be separate in connection with what was clean and unclean.
J.T. Just so. He was not equal to the moment. He was not equal to what was presented to him. In fact, he was really judging the gentiles unfairly and
{352}
no doubt he arrived at that later. But, 'No', he said, 'nothing common or unclean has come into my mouth'; ultimately meaning he abhorred a gentile. He had to learn to judge that. He said to Cornelius later when he came to his house, when he was adjusted, in @Acts 10: 34, "Of a truth I perceive that God is no respecter of persons, but in every nation he that fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him". You can see he is adjusted now, but earlier he would not say that. He would not sit down with a gentile. He would not be damaged by him. But now he says, "I perceive that God is no respecter of persons, but in every nation he that fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him". So that there are many instances of that in the Scriptures; how brethren are adjusted even on the spot, and the need of being ready for adjustment as it is needed -- to be ready for it.
-.E. I suppose what we see in Peter here is the national barrier being removed.
J.T. Exactly. It is said in verse 11, "And he beholds the heaven opened, and a certain vessel descending, as a great sheet, bound by the four corners and let down to the earth; in which were all the quadrupeds and creeping things of the earth, and the fowls of the heaven. And there was a voice to him, Rise, Peter, slay and eat". And Peter said, "In no wise, Lord". This is the point I was thinking of; how this had to be judged in him. He says, "I have never eaten anything common or unclean. And there was a voice again the second time to him, What God has cleansed, do not thou make common. And this took place thrice", showing what pains were taken to adjust the servant so that he might open the door gracefully and righteously to the gentiles. And then it is said, "But as Peter continued pondering over the vision, the Spirit said to him, Behold, three men seek thee; but rise up, go down, and go with them, nothing doubting, because I have sent them". So
{353}
that God answered the matter in sending these men, and the whole matter is clarified. "Go with them, nothing doubting".
A.R. Respect of persons is a very bad thing.
J.T. I thought this psalm, looking at it as we have done, would help us as to the service of God, and especially as to the Lord coming in amongst us. He is represented as a strong Man to run a race, the idea of the sun extending back to Genesis. God Himself is mentioned as "like a mighty man that shouteth aloud by reason of wine", @Psalm 78: 65. Now we have the strong Man in Jesus; the Bridegroom going out of His chamber to run a race. That is, to be with the assembly, to meet with us. And then the second part of the psalm fits us for the meeting, so that He has nothing to complain about in us but enjoys being with us.
V.C.L. Did you have in mind any thought of falling short? God could use the psalm as a yardstick to find out on which part we have been deficient, whether it be the objective, or the working out of the truth, or the ability to search ourselves inwardly in the power of the Spirit.
J.T. So that one challenges oneself and discovers whether he is really applying the truth or whether it is merely mental.
A.P.T. Paul says, "Let your heart also expand itself", @2 Corinthians 6: 13. That would be in the full light of love.
J.T. "But for an answering recompense, (I speak as to children,) let your heart also expand itself".
G.V.D. It is very salutary to consider what our brother has just said. There is comfort for us in considering that in difficulties the Spirit and the bride will say, "Come", which would be the complete and final answer to the bridegroom's coming out of His chamber.
J.T. It will be the real physical coming of the
{354}
Lord. This is His spiritual coming. We cannot say He comes corporeally to us in this sense. He comes by the Spirit; the Spirit being the Medium, so that He is really known amongst us.
W.W.M. In regard to the last clause of this prayer, "Let the words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart be acceptable in thy sight" -- we have spoken of self-control. Do you not think that it should be a great exercise to every one of us to have our minds under control so that our thoughts when we are alone may be acceptable to God? I believe we get formation in that way.
J.T. That brings up another matter; that is the matter of @Romans 7 that we have often referred to in meetings like this, the analytical process in that section of the chapter which really fits in with this second part of the psalm; how the believer arrives at what is within him and labels, to so speak, every item, names each thing, so that he knows and can say as Mary did, "My soul magnifies the Lord, and my spirit has rejoiced in God my Saviour", @Luke 1: 46, 47. You are able to say your spirit does this and your heart does that and your soul does that. That is the result of an analysis by the Spirit of what is within. Hence, one says he calls upon all that is within him. There are no impure things; everything is as we get it here.
J.A.P. "For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has set me free from the law of sin and of death", @Romans 8: 2. That is the idea. We get liberty.
J.T. Just so. You know now what it is; the liberating element is the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus. You say, Why is it not enough to say the Spirit, or just the law? But it is the law of the Spirit of life. It is the full term of the thing.
{355}
"REMEMBER THY CREATOR"
@Ecclesiastes 12:1 - 7
I have in mind to speak to young ones here, and I have read this part of the last chapter of Ecclesiastes in view of this. It addresses young people, but the contents are almost entirely about old people. I know young people are not particularly concerned or interested in old people. It is usual that they should seek to get out of the way of old people and get with their own kind, as they think, persons of their own age. They do not help each other morally. They had better stay with the old as much as possible. I say this particularly to young Christians, and there are many here. Your safety largely lies in keeping with the old, but, as I said, the chapter is addressed to young people, and they are asked to remember their Creator. The word 'Creator' is in the plural in the passage, as if God would stress His Creatorship, so as to warn the young ones here -- "Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth", and then it proceeds to speak of things before they happen, meaning before you become old, because the things mentioned are the things that belong to old people, and it is because most of us, if we remain here, shall become old. Every minute increases your age, and correspondingly increases your responsibility to your Creator. So that, to be as brief as possible, and yet not to omit anything that may be helpful, we have "before the evil days come, and the years draw nigh, of which thou shalt say, I have no pleasure in them". That is to say, you are reminded of something that you do not yet experience -- the evil days and the years in which you have no pleasure. Of course, you say, in my young days I have pleasure, and if I have not I hope to have, and the world is bent on you having pleasure.
{356}
I am not speaking of that kind of pleasure. That kind is the pleasures of sin for a season and that is the time of it, but later, "thou shalt say, I have no pleasure in them". You are not saying that yet, and that is why it is put down here thus. Others are saying it. Perhaps in this room there are some who are saying, 'I have little or no pleasure in my life; I am full of aches', and I ask you, how old are you? Well, I remember asking an aboriginal in Australia the question, as he came down from the wilds, how old he was, and he said, 'Many'. He meant that. He perhaps did not have language to say more, and so if I were to ask some people here, How old are you? they would answer, 'Many'. Well, they have the experiences contemplated here. That is, the evil days have come, and the years have drawn nigh or have come when they say, "I have no pleasure in them". And, of course, we look with a measure of compassion on our old people. I am speaking somewhat of what I know. I am not so young. I am older than most here. 'Many', as I have said, more than most here; but many are here that we would look on with compassion and our compassion is drawn out because they are old, decrepit, with, it may be, poor hearing, poor sight, poor taste, poor digestion, and many other such things, and I am speaking to you young people, because age is creeping on, too, in your case. You have not felt it yet, but it is coming. Presently it will be on you, and that is the point of the exhortation here, "Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth", before these things come upon you, "before the evil days come". And then the writer who, I would say, is Solomon (thank God for Solomon), is called the Preacher and, of course, I am endeavouring to preach, following his way. Hence what I am reading is his word as the Preacher: Solomon was a preacher. Nebuchadnezzar was a preacher, and Solomon was; not that he had much age. I should
{357}
say he did not exceed sixty. He hardly came up to these years that he speaks of here. David did. He said, "I have been young, and now am old", @Psalm 37: 25. He could speak with experience; I am not saying that Solomon could not, for he may have grown old in youth. He had a strenuous life. You marvel at what he did, but then I am not stopping to speak much of Solomon in that sense. I am endeavouring to speak of what he said now as the Preacher. And he was a former of assemblies. In other words, anyone who preaches the gospel should have in mind to form the assembly, or if he does not form an assembly, certainly to add to the assembly. If he has a convert, that is what he has accomplished. The Lord says, "On this rock I will build my assembly", and every preacher who adds one stone, adds a convert, is helping on the building. And Solomon was a builder, and the word implies that he was a former of assemblies, and I would not think of being here tonight save with a view either to help on souls in a knowledge of the assembly, or to convert one with a view to his being a member of the assembly.
Well now, the subject matter here, as I said, is to youth, but it is of old persons, so that these things have not yet come on you, or are supposed not to have come, for you young people really are understood by the old -- a little understood by myself. I have sought at times to find out what all these things mean, and here we have, "before the sun, and the light, and the moon, and the stars, be darkened, and the clouds return after the rain". You young people do not know anything about these things experimentally. You may know them objectively by hearing of them, but the time of the darkening for you of the sun, or the light, or the moon, or the stars, has not come. It belongs to old people. The allusion is to what they experience. And then further, "in the day when the keepers of the house tremble". You have not begun
{358}
to tremble yet. You have not begun to tremble by the fear of death. If it does come you put it off. You say, 'Forget that'. You do not want people to talk to you about death or about sickness or about sorrow. You want the world. You want pleasure and the preacher here is telling you to "Remember thy Creator" before these things happen to you. They have happened to millions before you. They have not happened to you, and hence the word to you is to remember your Creator now, and the word 'Creator' is in the plural as I said, in order to stress the idea of God's rights over you as your Creator. Remember thy Creator. That is what we get here. It is not *the* Creator. People do not often refer to the Creator in that sense, but He *is thy* Creator. And then it is, let that memory be with you, remembrance of God as your Creator from the time you began to think. He has a right to you from the time you began to think and read and so forth. He has a right to you, and He would assert that right to you; and the devil would darken it, blot it out of your speakings and your readings and your writings, and your conversations. The devil would blot out the idea of the Creator, but the Spirit of God is bent on keeping (the word being in the plural here) that idea constantly in your mind. Presently you will begin to fear Him. Presently you will know more about Him than you do now. Presently you will understand that the Creator of the universe is Jesus, but then I am not speaking of that here because it is God that is alluded to here. The word 'God' in the first chapter of Genesis is in mind. That also is a plural word, for God would impress upon us His rights, and the use of the plural of Himself has in mind that He should be in your mind day and night, at all times in the days of your youth. God is seeking you now, and therefore these things are mentioned before they come. He is telling you they will come. To millions they
{359}
have come. Millions have gone into the grave -- some of them into everlasting loss -- the Lord Jesus says, into everlasting punishment. Do not put that away from you -- everlasting punishment. He has got a right to punish everlastingly when you die. "These shall go away", the Lord Jesus says, "into everlasting punishment: but the righteous into life eternal", @Matthew 25: 46. Let that come into your soul. There are two roads -- one leading to everlasting punishment and the other to life eternal. Let that come into your soul. You begin to love it, presently to glory in it, that you are secured eternally and that that is by God. He has found a way into everlasting life. He has ordained it, and He has found a way into it. And so He is warning you here that you may not miss it, that you may not be, as you grow old, in these experiences that are described, and you will grow old, and you will experience these things. He is warning you now while you are young, as you are sitting in those seats. It is for you, before these things come, and I go on to mention them.
I have already mentioned "while the sun, or the light, or the moon, or the stars, be not darkened, nor the clouds return after the rain: in the day when the keepers of the house shall tremble". You say, whatever does that mean, "the keepers of the house"? Well, the house is you when you grow old. It is an old person, a very old person, that is in mind. The house is not brick or mortar, or wood, or stone, it is yourself. It is flesh and blood. It is you, and you are the keeper, and do you try to keep it? When you were young, you dressed it as well as you could, painted it, may be. Shame on anybody who does, endeavouring to improve the Creator's skill of beautification. "By his spirit he hath garnished the heavens", we are told; @Job 26: 13. He beautified the heavens, and why should you endeavour to beautify yourself apart from the beauty which God
{360}
has put upon you? It is a common thing now, but it is of the devil. The devil has his paint. Choose your paint, his emissaries would say, and make yourself attractive to the world. But what is in mind here is "in the day when the keepers of the house tremble, and the strong men bow themselves, and the grinders cease because they are few, and those that look out of the windows are darkened". Now that is a description of a human being, not a young person. No young person has such a description as this. "In the day when the keepers of the house tremble". You are not trembling yet. You are vigorous. You play cricket well, and all the other things that young people do, you do well, or try to. It is an old person that is described, and it is described to tell you that you are getting on there. Although you think you are young and, of course, you are, and you do your best to figure in the community as a skilled person, but here, "the keepers of the house tremble". Some day your cricket may mean your death, or your swimming, or many things that I could mention may bring your death, and then you tremble -- not while you are cricketing, or playing ball, or shooting. You are not then afraid as the keeper of the house. You say, I am in good condition. My doctor says I am tip-top. You think you are, but one day you begin to tremble. You will begin to groan because of the pains of old age. Do not forget that. They are coming rapidly. Every minute is bringing them forward in your case and presently you begin to shake and fear and so you begin to count your years. You pass sixty, you pass, maybe, sixty-five; and people hear about it. You pass seventy, and Moses would tell you, if he were here, but he tells you in the unfailing writing, @Psalm 90, "the days of our years are threescore years and ten" (verse 10). You may as well begin to fear, to tremble, you can tell yourself. We are told to count our days, so that we may acquire a wise
{361}
heart. But then the preacher here, Solomon, says, one day you are going to tremble, not because you are in the front rank in battle; that is not the point, although, of course, you may tremble there, but this is a reference to a person who is sitting in his own house -- it may be smoking, endeavouring to gratify himself with that thing, and many other things like it, but you are trembling. That is what the wise man says. "The keepers of the house shall tremble"and the strong man, that is you -- you cricketer -- pardon me for alluding to these things. You might imagine I am speaking to a lot of unconverted people. I do not think I am, but I think it well to tell you these things, because young people need to know the trembling time is coming.
And all the other things I ought to touch on here"The strong men bow themselves" -- many are regarded as this. "The grinders cease because they are few" -- that is to say, the teeth. The doctors make a living on your body, the dentists on your teeth. Otherwise, I know it is the same man, and I do not forget it. I am made to feel it, too, and you will be made to feel it presently. And therefore my point is that you may be converted, and I believe most of you are, and get on in the truth, get on into everlasting life, and go in for it fully when you are not afraid of these matters, when you are not trembling when death draws near. When you will enter the Jordan you will not be afraid of it. The prophet says, "how wilt thou then do in the swelling of the Jordan?" "If thou hast run with footmen, and they have wearied thee, how wilt thou then contend with horses? And if in a land of peace thou thinkest thyself in security, how wilt thou then do in the swelling of the Jordan?" @Jeremiah 12: 5. That is to say, death coming in and the doctor cannot help you. He gives you up -- gives you perhaps a few months to live, and there is no hope. The waters of Jordan are
{362}
coming in, and coming in, and presently they will overwhelm you. How will you do then? You ought to prepare for that. You young people here tonight, you need to be reminded that christianity is a real thing, that the gospel is a real thing, that it is the only thing by which you can meet these conditions which are described by the Preacher.
And I go on further and further. He says, "the grinders cease because they are few". We all know something about that; not far away from that. You know a dentist's name in your neighbourhood, and a doctor. And so it says, "those that look out of the windows". You know the oculist, too. We need all these things, but what do they remind us of? They remind us of what is rapidly coming. These things are rapidly coming upon us, and it is a question of preparing in view of them, getting ready so that you lift up your head with a helmet of salvation upon it, and you have got no fear of these terrible things, that are terrible to others. And so he goes on to say; "and the doors are shut toward the street; when the sound of the grinding is subdued". That is, there is not much in the food that you are eating; it is not satisfying you very much. And then it goes on further, "and they rise up at the voice of the bird, and all the daughters of song are brought low". Singing is no more a remedy -- and the voice of the bird. Why do you get up so early? You know, old people need much less sleep than young people. Perhaps some of you do not think that, but it is the truth. They rise at the voice of the bird. Young people cling to sleep; they love it; it is hard to get them up in the morning, but not old people. It is a rare thing when an old person is hard to wake. I am speaking from experience; but the prophet, as I may call him here, is speaking prophetically to you, telling about things that are coming as sure as possible. Sometimes we say, 'as sure as death', but death is
{363}
not sure, not to the christian. We look for something else than death. It is the triumph of christianity that it provides against death. But then I am going on to that, and I want to just touch on all the points mentioned. And it says here -- we have spoken about rising at the voice of the bird, and that the daughters of music are brought low; then again in verse 5 it says, when "they are also afraid of what is high".
You say, I am not afraid of that. I am able to clear any height. I can jump any height, that is, any reasonable height. Jumping, of course, is an important matter in athletics. Indeed, all these things that I am speaking of have their application to athletics; but now, they are afraid of what is high. A man of sixty or seventy is not very agile, nor does he wish to take any high jump. I know it well enough, and it is all ahead of you, with all your alacrity now and your skill in these matters. All these things are ahead of you. You will soon become decrepit when you cannot jump, nor can you do anything in athletics. You cannot compete with any and, of course, the point is to prepare against these things that you are not afraid of now, but you will soon be afraid of, because they point to one thing and that is death. The description here by Solomon, and it is a marvellous description -- it is an inspired one intended for you young people, not intended for us old people. It is all for you young people. It is the young people that are in question in this chapter. They are addressed. They are the ones to remember their Creator in the days of their youth; and so it goes on to say, they shall be afraid of what is high, and "terrors are in the way, and the almond is despised", which probably refers to grey hairs. The Spirit of God is not above that, to come down to the very thought of grey hairs in order to impress you in these things with the imminence of death and the terribleness of what is coming after death. The Spirit of God will Say, one sinner is
{364}
worth right food, and it is certainly worth my time to preach to you on them. And, of course, young people do not like grey hairs, but when you are very old you do not mind. That is a small thing to you. You can point to that as giving you distinction. Some people do, and we are enjoined indeed to respect the grey hairs. "Rise up before the hoary head", so that it is a distinction, but then that is nothing as compared with death and what they point to, the imminence of death because really and truly your grey hairs denote the absence of life. You are dying as soon as you begin to live. These grey hairs point to the state of death in the body, and it is going to overwhelm the body, as the passage says. And so it says, "the almond is despised, and the grasshopper is a burden", which means you cannot carry much. If you ask an old person to do something, he is liable to put it on somebody else -- rightly, too. "The grasshopper is a burden". It is not very heavy, but the weight of it is a burden to an old person. It all points to the old person, and it points to the young person, too, because he is going to be old, and it is pointing to something else, namely death, and what is after death, which is the judgment. That is the point, and so it goes on, "the almond is despised, and the grasshopper is a burden, and the caper-berry is without effect"; or "desire hath failed". That is another thing. Have you begun to lose your taste for certain things? You need more condiments to make your taste fit, to make your food enjoyable. I am not speaking of things for the sake of speaking merely, but as I said before, because they point to death, and what is after death, and as I am speaking to young christians that you may go in for the real thing; that these things, therefore, as they creep on you, may not annoy you or distress you; that you may lift up your head with the helmet of salvation upon it; that you may say, I am safe. That is the gospel, the gospel
{365}
is for that purpose, to show how you can put on the helmet of salvation, and be victorious in meeting everything. I have settled all these matters. None of them move me. I am already secured for heaven through the death and resurrection of the Lord Jesus Christ. I am secured for earth, too, ready to witness for Him here, but I am ready for heaven as well. The Lord Jesus is coming from heaven to take us to be there, and you want to be there according to His will and to His pleasure. And so I said, these things are to be noted, because they warn us to be ready for these matters that the gospel speaks of.
And so it says further, "the grasshopper is a burden, and the caper-berry is without effect" (or "desire shall fail" ), keen taste and the like, and other desires -- you care little or nothing for them, when you used to run after them. You can all see, if you are accustomed to old people, how little they care for the things they used to crave for, and used to desire keenly, and spend their money on. That is what makes commerce -- the desire of people -- the desire for this, that and the other thing -- fashions in hats, and in coats and in suits and in shops; all these things, youth loves them. They work to get them, and leave out the real thing, that is, what the gospel brings, and if they are really afraid, they find pleasure, and they fail to go in for the truth, so as to be in the enjoyment of the truth, to be in the fellowship, too, to find their companionship amongst the Lord's people, and not in the world. That is the idea of these things being brought to our attention.
And so it goes on further to say that desire shall fail, and then it goes on to say, "for man goeth to his age-long home, and the mourners go about the streets". That is the crux of the matter, and now I want to show you that in the New Translation you have a parenthesis there in the matter of death, that the Spirit of God is almost in a hurry to get to it, and
{366}
He mentions it before He finishes the description of the old person. If you look at verse 5 you will see, if you have the New Translation, that it has brackets -- a parenthesis. When this translation says "and desire shall fail" it says, "the caper-berry is without effect". There is no power to stimulate desire. That is the mark of old age. It is not very serious in itself, but it is serious as pointing to the imminence of death and what is after death, and so the word is to stir us! up as christians to go in for things that are living, where these things do not affect us at all. It does not affect us at all in old age when we have the Spirit of God. Think of the Spirit of God operating in us! What does it matter whether desire fails or not? We have eternal life. We have all that satisfies the believer, and more. "Things which eye has not seen, and ear not heard, and which have not come into man's heart, which God has prepared for them that love him", @1 Corinthians 2: 9. What does it matter to me whether desire fails or not, whether the caper-berry is of no effect? But then, I wanted to speak of this bracket. It says in the end of verse 5 "(for man goeth to his age-long home, and the mourners go about the streets)". That is after it says"desire fails". It cannot be improved. If he is a christian it matters nothing to him. He has something else, something that is eternal, something that he will never lose, something that even if he dies he enters into in measure, for he departs to be with Christ which is far better than the best that you have. Therefore, the believer is never overcome by these things, and I want all you young believers to be victorious in the knowledge of these things and not depending on the rare fashions and things that minister to your pride and your taste, and your fancies, and your pleasure, and so on. I want to make you independent of all these things. But I was now pointing out the importance of this matter of death, how the Spirit of God reaches up
{367}
before He finishes his description. That is, the bracket begins in the last clause of verse 5 after it says the caper-berry is without effect. It says "(for man goeth to his age-long home, and the mourners go about the streets)". The mourners -- that is your children -- for an old person, your young children, your middle-aged children, your boys and your girls and the neighbours, they go about the streets as mourners. You are not sharing in it. The Spirit of God is in a hurry to tell you that, and therefore He tells you so in the bracket. He is going to say more about death, but He is in a hurry to tell you that death is the real issue, and to you death is the real issue, and you can only meet death through the gospel, that is through the death and the resurrection of the Lord Jesus Christ who met death; He tasted death for every thing. He was made sin for us, so as to fit us for all these things and make us independent of any other; and hence this bracket is to touch you before the thing is finished, and the remaining part has set in, "before the silver cord be loosed, or the golden bowl be broken, or the pitcher be shattered at the fountain, or the wheel be broken at the cistern". I would say that that bracket means that the believer understands that if the undertaker is brought in, he just deals with this matter of death itself. The man goes to his age-long home, and the undertaker takes him up and puts him in the grave, puts the graveclothes upon him. The mourners are there -- the weepers are there, but man goes to his age-long home, but there is more than that. He does not die like a dog. He does not die like a cow. He dies as a man, and a man has a golden bowl. That is to say, it is an allusion at least abstractly to what a man is. The Spirit of God would not let the opportunity pass in this remarkable scripture to tell us about what is said -- the silver cord and the golden bowl. These belong to a man. They do not belong to an animal
{368}
that is the lower animals. They die and their spirit goes down, but the spirit of a man goes upward and there is therefore in him something corresponding with the silver cord. So that we older persons here enjoy this thought "before the silver cord be loosed or the golden bowl be broken". As believers, we understand that. We have holy conversations with our younger ones, before we breathe our last. We are not in dread of the Jordan. The brackets finish that part of it, but the continuance goes on to the silver cord and the golden bowl, and then further reference in the same strain, "and the dust" -- to make it all clear -- "the dust return to the earth as it was, and the spirit return unto God who gave it". That is not a lower animal, a dog, or a pig, or a cow. It is the death of a man -- a redeemed man, to whom the silver and the gold belong. They do not belong to the lower creatures. They belong to man, and we want to rise to the thought in view of death, and how all is met in the death and the resurrection of a Man. So that we are to be raised, and Scripture is full of it. You shall be raised up in the last day, the final day, and that is the point here. Although the dust return to the earth as it was, the spirit returns to God who gave it, but the dust shall be raised, too, so that resurrection may be introduced into these words, and therefore it is the point in the whole passage from the point of view of the Spirit of God. There is the silver and the gold, but there is the dust, but whilst the dust returns to the earth, there is something that returns to God, and God gave that, and in that sense my spirit rejoices in God my Saviour.
So that, dear friends, and dear brethren, what I am saying is the gospel for believers, and I believe the gospel for young believers, but I say to the old believers that these closing words are very precious, that although the dust returns to the earth, the spirit is going to God who gave it. The Lord Jesus would
{369}
say, indeed, Paul would say, "to depart, and to be with Christ", and so the Lord says to the thief on the cross, "Today shalt thou be with me in paradise", @Luke 23: 43.
May God bless these thoughts to us.
{370}
CHRIST AND THE ASSEMBLY IN A CONTRARY SCENE
@1 Samuel 16:11 - 13; @1 Samuel 25:1 - 3
J.T. It is thought that as these scriptures are fairly familiar to us, and as chapter 25 is especially long we might read these two passages, not to confine ourselves to them, but to bring the subjects contained in them before us. The thought is to see how when occurrences arise affecting the saints, tending to sadden, and perhaps to weaken our faith, the Spirit of God brings Christ and the assembly before us. Not simply Christ, but Christ and the assembly; because, the nearer we get to the end, to the coming of the Lord, the more the thought of Christ and the assembly becomes prominent.
So that we find in chapter 16 that David is on the scene, Samuel yet alive and serving, but we are told in the end of chapter 19 that he went to Naioth by Ramah, and in chapter 25: 1 he is said to have died. That is to say, his death was pending, his service was well-nigh finished. In the interim, David is on the scene, and the Spirit of God had said "this is he"; "Jehovah said, Arise, anoint him; for this is he", chapter 16: 12. That is to say, he is the one, the person who fills the scene at all times. That is what I had in mind, which I hope the brethren will understand in its application; for the Lord would Surely be with us in view of our loss¦; and yet we would not be thinking unduly of it but would understand the full position that "Christ is everything, and in all", @Colossians 3: 11. He fills the scene, He fills the divine realm of interest, but not by Himself; the assembly now is understood, and in this chapter the
¦Death of C.A.C.
{371}
assembly in type which we understand is filled out, so that the ministry and the service from heaven all tend to make much of Christ and the assembly. Hence, in chapter 25, when Samuel is said to have died, "David arose", we are told, and then Abigail comes into view. Nabal comes into view first as rejecting David. David comes into view, but not until the assembly in type is brought forward: "the name of his wife Abigail; and the woman was of good understanding, and of a beautiful countenance; but the man was churlish and evil in his doings; and he was a Calebite" (verse 3). I think the brethren will discern that there is considerable help for us in this passage at the present moment.
J.H.T. "Remember your leaders who have spoken to you the word of God; and considering the issue of their conversation, imitate their faith", @Hebrews 13: 7. Then immediately, "Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, and today, and to the ages to come" (verse 8).
J.T. I thought of that passage today as fitting in view of this reading. The Lord Jesus continuing, and filling the Scriptures; heaven comes into view as aglow with not only Christ, but the assembly, for she is His fulness: "the fulness of him who fills all in all", @Ephesians 1: 23. Hence the book of Revelation sees her "the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down out of the heaven from God, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband", @Revelation 21: 2.
J.H.T. Would Timothy being set at liberty, as in @Hebrews 13: 23, envisage our position with Paul and all that he reveals as to Christ and the assembly?
J.T. As set at liberty, too; another element of the moment as to our dear brethren who are restricted in government services gradually being set at liberty. At the moment, two of the most cheering things are the young men that are coming forward released, and others gifted from above to serve the saints in view of the completion of the assembly.
{372}
H.F.N. Is that seen in regard to the young men in chapter 25? Is that in your mind?
J.T. Well, I thought of the young man especially that made known to Abigail what Nabal had done. Then, I suppose you have in mind that David having heard that Nabal was shearing his sheep, sent out ten young men. We are reminded of Abraham's servant and the ten camels, would you say, in view of Rebecca? The setting there was as here; it is in view of Abigail.
J.H.T. So that is there a very interesting suggestion in verse 19: "she said to her young men, Go on before me; behold, I come after you"?
J.T. You have something more to say?
J.H.T. I was struck with your remark as to the young men, whether the service that you spoke of would not have distinctive relation to the assembly? They would go on before in that sense, like Timothy with everything committed to him from Paul.
J.T. I have thought at times of Paul's announcement from time to time of his coming to Corinth, that it would have an allusion to what the Lord has in the way of ministers and those who can help the saints. How the Lord's coming is foreshadowed in these, we may say, gifted young men, who have been raised up. So Paul several times tells the Corinthians that he has in mind to come to them, evidently to stir them up. I suppose Corinth was initiated to represent the assembly in some sense; but it shows the patience of the Lord with us in staying away, not to cause undue commotion amongst us. Young men are inclined to be distressed fatally, but Paul stayed away. Some thought he was prevaricating, but it was not so; it was to spare them, because of his love for them.
H.F.N. Are there two sets of exercises? One in regard to Paul coming to us as seen in Romans, Thessalonians and Corinthians; and would there be
{373}
another side in regard of Timothy coming to the various assemblies?
J.T. I have thought of that. Take, for instance, Samuel, who had a circuit every year, coming to a place at a definite time; and we know from one instance at least that the people trembled at his coming (see @1 Samuel 16: 4). It would be necessary in some cases. We ought to be on our guard lest we should not be found in peace and going on in the things of God. Samuel came every year. Of course they would expect him, I suppose, he made the rounds, and he would come to them. So the Lord in the days of His flesh, it is said, "came in and went out among us ... . until the day in which he was taken up from us", @Acts 1: 21, 22. He was coming in and going out; and so after He rose from the dead, He came in amongst them and went out. Also in the gospel of John especially we see how He comes in to us, He does not leave us orphans, comfortless, He comes, not yet for us, but to us.
So we see in the history of Paul's ministry that he sent Timothy instead of going himself. He sent him, but not with a rod, that they might know his ways as they were in Christ; @1 Corinthians 4: 17. So he writes to Timothy himself that, pending his coming, he might know how to conduct himself in the house of God. So, with the Lord Himself when He comes to institute His supper in the gospels of Matthew, Mark and Luke, the twelve are seen there; not only Himself, but the twelve, those who would care for things in an administrative way.
Now we have here, as already remarked, these young men going before Abigail. In that connection one of them reported in verse 14, "one of Nabal's young men" -- he was Abigail's, really, he was watching her interests -- "Behold, David sent messengers out of the wilderness to bless our master; and he has insulted them". How serious a matter that is for
{374}
anyone to insult the Lord Jesus, or His people and those who serve Him! "And the men were very good to us" (verse 15); that is a warning to those who serve the Lord and His people: we should be very good to those we serve. "And we were not hurt, neither missed we anything, as long as we companied with them, when we were in the fields. They were a wall to us both by night and day, all the while we were with them feeding the sheep" (verses 15, 16). Now the young man says to Abigail, "And now know and consider what thou wilt do, for evil is determined against our master, and against all his household; and he is such a son of Belial, that one cannot speak to him" (verse 17). So that is the position that Abigail is to meet, this whole position. It is a question of the assembly, really; how we are to meet emergencies. Samuel is dead: this is not to be forgotten in all this section. But the Lord Jesus says, "I became dead, and behold, I am living to the ages of ages" (@Revelation 1: 18); and He adds, "and have the keys of death and of hades". So He is our protector, we are not to fear.
J.H.T. Would verse 15 suggest the truth of the kingdom and His benign rule before the truth of the assembly comes out?
J.T. The kingdom; quite so. It is a gracious kingdom: "righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit", @Romans 14: 17. Not just the assembly, it is the kingdom.
H.F.N. What would be the distinctive feature of the assembly as seen in Abigail here?
J.T. I think she represents the work of God in connection with the history of David. She was allied to Nabal, and therefore at a great disadvantage with such a husband; but at the same time she progresses, she represents the progress of the work of God in an exemplary sense. David being already on the ground, in due time she is to be his companion.
{375}
She is not that at once. She grew up in the ordinary way, married and that; but all the while she knew something about David. She was able to talk to him of himself and to indicate what he was as raised up, as he was, on God's behalf. Young people among us should learn from David, get acquainted with David, so to speak. Consider the young women in @1 Samuel 9; Samuel comes to their town, and they are going out to draw water -- not to play cricket and the like -- and they meet Saul and his servant and they tell them about Samuel. These young women are a very fine example for young sisters as to what we are engaged with before the coming in of David and Abigail. Because Christ and the assembly is specially in mind in our time. It is a question of finality and everything coming to an issue in Christ and the assembly. So the young women were able to tell Saul about Samuel, and where he could be found.
E.R. What would Nabal represent?
J.T. I suppose it is the clerical system; what is stubborn and unreasonable. The whole system is unreasonable and apt to provoke us. What do you think?
E.R. I should think so: an interesting thought.
J.T. He has a good history, as the clerical system had a good history: he was a Calebite, showing what the offspring of a great man may or may not be. The great man is in the eye of God, but his offspring is also in the eye of God. I think the offspring of the assembly, the apostles and prophets of the early days, develop into the clerical system; I think this can be traced out in the book of Revelation.
J.H.T. Abigail names Nabal with truth, and then she calls Saul 'a man', and she calls David 'my lord' fifteen times.
J.T. It is well worth going through the chapter to read it, as also @Genesis 24, which is very long and may be unread or not understood. But it is the assembly's
{376}
chapter, it is really Christ and the assembly. Nothing can be greater for those who love the Lord.
R.B. Does verse 3 suggest that Abigail answered to David in some sense?
J.T. That is it: Christ and the assembly. "The name of the man was Nabal", meaning a fool, ungodly, and so on; and then, "the name of his wife Abigail and the woman was of good understanding, and of a beautiful countenance".
H.F.N. The chapter opens with the fact that Samuel was buried in his house at Ramah, but "David arose and went down to the wilderness of Paran" (verse 1). What are we to understand as to that?
J.T. I suppose the wilderness would mean the contrary scene which is seen here, and then the enemy is there. We all know from Numbers what enemies developed in the wilderness, and what we may look for and prepare for. So this is a real enemy; let us hear his words: "And Nabal answered David's servants and said, Who is David? and who is the son of Jesse? there are many servants nowadays that break away every man from his master. And shall I take my bread, and my water, and my flesh which I have killed for my shearers, and give it to men whom I know not whence they are?" (verses 10, 11). He says, "my shearers"; they were persons from whom he would get something from their work. There is nothing about his wife and his children, the objects of his love. His speech shows at once what he is. "Shall I ... give it to men whom I know not whence they are?" (verse 11). We have already pointed out that evidently Abigail knew who David was, could speak of him to himself, and knew what he was in the divine mind. But Nabal is an enemy, an unfair enemy. David's message was most gracious, would you say?
H.F.N. Would it be right, taking the condition of things that you have pointed out in this chapter, to
{377}
say that God would shine out in the light of Christ and the assembly?
J.T. A very beautiful touch; God shines out here. I think He shines out prophetically, typically, as to what Christ and the assembly is to the Father. The Lord's supper affords an opportunity for Christ and the assembly, what they are to each other; but then the service of God ought to bring out what Christ and the assembly are to the Father and that ought to enter into the service. Not simply Christ but Christ and the assembly. I think what we have been speaking of bears that out, because it is a question of man in John's gospel -- men and what God provides for them in view of their being in every way suited to Christ. Adam was a figure of Him that was to come. It does not say that Eve was a figure of her that was to come; but Adam as on the masculine side represents Christ personally, and John has that in mind, I am sure. So we should get clearly in our minds the thought of man; and angels, if not hostile, are at least subservient to fill out the position. As we see here when David sent for Abigail and would have her to be his wife: "And when David heard that Nabal was dead, he said, Blessed be Jehovah, who has pleaded the cause of my reproach from the hand of Nabal, and has kept back his servant from evil; but Jehovah has returned Nabal's evil upon his own head. And David sent and communed with Abigail, to take her as his wife. And the servants of David came to Abigail to Carmel, and spoke to her, saying, David has sent us to thee, to take thee as his wife. And she arose and bowed herself on her face to the earth, and said, Behold, let thy handmaid be a bondwoman to wash the feet of the servants of my lord. And Abigail hasted, and arose, and rode upon an ass, with five damsels of hers that followed her" (verses 39 - 42). These are accompanying persons; Rebecca had the same. Angels are our servants: "Are they not
{378}
all ministering spirits, sent out for service ... ?" @Hebrews 1:14. That is, Christ and the assembly, or whatever would contribute to or enhance the position of Christ and the assembly, are the objects of angels. Whatever servants or agents they are, they are just there because of Christ and the assembly. So we learn here how, inwardly, Christ and the assembly are there; and there are, too, the necessary accompaniments. If it be man, there are men; if it be woman, there are women. Let it be accentuated. It is accentuating the feminine side here in these damsels of hers that followed her.
E.R. Does that correspond with "the virgins ... her companions", @Psalm 45:14?
J.T. That is just what I would think, Mr. R.; and also those Rebecca took with her.
E.R. I should be glad if you would make it a little clearer as to this accentuation of the feminine side.
J.T. I hope all the young sisters will think of that. That is the idea; the ministry brings in the sisters. They are of the same kind as ourselves, only the feminine side. If it be the man's side, or the woman's side, what is needed is there. If the feminine side is to be accentuated, well, you see it here. How right it is that Abigail should have these persons; they are hers. Then it says, "and she went after the messengers of David" (verse 42). If young men are necessary, let them be there; if old men are necessary, let them be there: they have experience the young men cannot have.
E.R. You would distinguish between these young men and these five damsels?
J.T. I have not thought much of it; but you have the ten young men and then there is one that informs Abigail. I would say he is an intelligent young man, which is a great matter. She had a servant here, a private, confidential man. He ought to be intelligent,
{379}
too, for she was a "woman ... of good understanding, and of a beautiful countenance" (verse 3).
H.F.N. Is it emphasised in the book of Ruth? Boaz said she was to be with the damsels, and the young men were to draw water there; @Ruth 2: 8, 9. Is it the same idea?
J.T. I would say that Boaz, as a man of wealth, having servants, would know how to distinguish between the young men and the young women. "Younger women as sisters, with all purity", @1 Timothy 5:2. It is necessary that these things should be brought before the brethren.
H.W. In verse 19 reference is made to Abigail's young men, as though they are distinct from David's young men.
J.T. Well, they were her servants. It was quite right she should have servants, as the queen of Sheba had them, too.
H.W. Why do you say it was necessary for her to have servants as the queen of Sheba?
J.T. Nabal was about; she needed them. It is something like the servants of Rebecca: she fills that place now.
E.R. Would it be a matter of principles, not necessarily young brothers and sisters?
J.T. If you are thinking of the feminine side, you can only get it in women and girls; if you are thinking of the men's side, you can only get it in men -- men who can do things in such circumstances.
W.E.W. Why is it ten young men, and five young women?
J.T. It is a question of numerals. Five is human weakness: five fingers, five senses; whereas ten is human responsibility. But the five senses are very intelligible to us as entering into the thought of the five young damsels. It is a question of right feelings.
H.F.N. Would the thought of the damsels really underlie what Paul says to the Corinthians; not
{380}
merely a virgin, but "a chaste virgin to Christ", @2 Corinthians 11: 2?
J.T. It bears out what we are saying; how much Paul brought into those two letters, how they deal with youth, and so on. That is a peculiar word in that chapter, because the allusion is to Eve; reminding all the saints really, because they are all included in the idea of the virgins. It is the assembly now, and there is the danger of listening to another head; anything that is not Christ in some sense.
Ques. She "became his wife" (verse 42). Is it that she is now ready to follow the principles of subjection and obedience? Is she now the Calebite? The Spirit of God says three times that Caleb "wholly followed the Lord", @Numbers 32: 12. "She went after the messengers of David, and became his wife" (verse 42).
J.T. Quite so. I would say, however, that if we are to get Caleb's character as a man we would have to go to Achsah, Caleb's daughter. Abigail has something else in mind, the collateral thought.
J.G. David said, "blessed be thy discernment, and blessed be thou" (verse 33).
J.T. She was current collaterally with David, and fitted when the time came for them to merge together.
F.D. Is what Christ and the assembly is to the Father included in the thought of God dwelling eternally with men?
J.T. Quite so; because the idea of man is of dual character covering both the woman and the man, and God has pleasure in both. Hence the reference in @Matthew 22, "a king who made a wedding feast for his son" (verse 2). We are not told who the bride was but she must have been there abstractly in principle but how pleasurable it was to the king! The King is the Father of Christ. Eternity is to be marked by that. It is man according to God in the male and female side, only in Christ and the assembly. This came up at Croydon; it is not thought of much as
{381}
coming into the service of God on a Lord's day, whether it is a question of the brethren or the assembly coming in after the Lord's supper. It is quite a question and must be answered in our souls. But I would say that what is personal must take precedence. Brethren is relationship, but the assembly constitutes a person in the eyes of God, which is more important than the brethren.
R.B. Is sonship, in relation to this thought of man, a collateral thought, the great prime thought being Christ and the assembly?
J.T. The idea of sons is a prime thought, too, although it is not mentioned as man is; but it is a prime thought. Of course, He is leading many sons to glory. "For it became him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many sons to glory, to make perfect the leader of their salvation through sufferings", @Hebrews 2: 10. Therefore, it is, I would say, a prime thought, comprising many of them, who are brought to glory. That is to say, they have travelled, they are brought to glory; and their Captain is made perfect through sufferings. So the thought of sufferings must enter into the idea of sonship. Evidently it ought to enter into sonship; because our Captain has been made perfect through sufferings. It is a great matter that we should understand that He is made perfect through sufferings (see @Hebrews 5: 7 - 9).
E.R. Which is the greater dignity, the dignity of sonship or our place in the assembly?
J.T. I think they run together, they take place together.
H.F.N. Would it be borne out in @Ephesians 3: 21 "to him be glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all generations of the age of ages"? I could not get that verse out of my mind as you were speaking.
J.T. It is a magnificent verse and comes in in the most magnificent of chapters, where Paul is dwelling
{382}
on his own intelligence of the mystery. It is a great parenthesis. It is a matter of expansion, what the minister ought to be. I believe that is the line to be taken in @Ephesians 3. Hence the apostle speaks about the Father and the families, every family; and then following on that, our inward growth. Think of the Spirit of the Father, the greatness of the thing, that He should operate in us by His Spirit. Then that we should know. He fully recognised the creature limitations. He was not equal to Christ, he could not take in everything, but he wanted them to know what intelligence he had as to the mystery. "And to know the love of the Christ which surpasses knowledge; that ye may be filled even to all the fulness of God" (verse 19). That is great enough, I think, because it is not creature limitations that are in mind, but we are brought into "the fulness of God". Then this grand thought at the end of that wonderful chapter: what you might call the doxology, "to him be glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all generations of the age of ages". I think we all of us in earlier days thought that it would be the assembly in eternity, only that it is in terms of time, because we can hardly take in anything other than that. But God has something else in His mind: He can speak of eternity.
E.R. That verse brings out Christ and the assembly together for God's glory.
J.T. So the assembly runs through. It is the assembly in Christ Jesus. The assembly would mean it is a question of power.
H.F.N. Your remark has greatly helped me; that the thoughts of the brethren and sons of God run on together and those persons form the assembly. I think that will help us.
J.H.T. I was wondering whether the word in @Ephesians 5: 26 should help us; it refers to "the washing of water by the word", and we should therefore pay attention to the ministry given to us because
{383}
in @Revelation 19 the wife is credited with having made herself ready. Would that be the answer to @Ephesians 5?
J.T. Quite so; and the kind of dress she is to wear is mentioned; she is to be "arrayed in fine linen" (verse 8), which is a voice to the saints as to our attire, feminine attire. We have got to be ready, but what an attire we are to wear! Of course, it is in keeping with our heavenly dignity, but the wife's position here in suffering is in mind, I think, because she comes out in dignity.
R.B. There is no thought of incapacity in @Ephesians 3: the assembly is fully equal to the containing of the glory of God.
J.T. Quite so; hence in that passage the angels desire to look into what is worked out in the assembly.
{384}
TRANSFER FROM EARTH TO HEAVEN
@Luke 2: 9 - 14; @Luke 19: 37, 38; @Revelation 4: 1 - 3
I would like at this time to refer to the thought of transfer from earth to heaven. The first passage read contemplates the descent, the transfer from heaven to earth, and the angel was in accord with what happened there. It would presently be the reverse order, indeed it had already begun. The Lord, having come to earth and remaining here, soon began to think of going up again; hence Luke speaks of the ascent very early in his narrative. The multitude of the heavenly host was speaking of peace on earth, but that soon became impossible, immediately impossible and hence chapter 19 speaks of "peace in heaven, and glory in the highest", and that was anticipated by the Lord almost from the outset. He had been here, of course, remaining here as a Babe, as a Boy, as a Man, and serving as never man did, speaking as never man did, working as never man did, but all was in vain immediately in regard of what the angels had said -- not ultimately, but immediately. Even in chapter 9 we find the Spirit of God saying that the days of His receiving up had come; so the narrative proceeds until He ascends, a cloud receiving Him out of their sight.
That is the general position, and the comments I have to make would refer to current events and experiences and what is needed in the saints, in ourselves, in view of these events. Peace is not in sight. We have heard much about war and the triumph of it, what is called the victory, the peace day, and we have heard much of the peace itself being won, as well as the war, but it has not been won yet, and that is a solemn matter. Rationing is going to continue and much like that, causing distress, for the peace is
{385}
not yet. I am seeking to enlarge a little on these verses so that we may learn how to face things as they are, that we may be intelligent as to what is current. The Lord intends us, as His followers, those who love Him, to have understanding of the times; not in a political sense, of course, but still not ignoring the course of things in the world, because God has taken a hand in these things in a remarkable way, and I believe that the brethren are fully accredited with it in heaven. We are ever to remember the activities of God in heaven in these provisional times when Christ is at the right hand of God, when it is said, "Whom the heaven must receive until the times of restitution of all things", @Acts 3: 21. We might conclude that He is not active, but He is active as here today. It is an extraordinary time, not the time of the fulfilment of prophecy exactly, but the time of the gospel, the time of the assembly. That is to say, the greatest things are current at the present time. Of course, the angels had it in mind in their word, their united word, for we read of a multitude of them. We can never tell how many there are. Scripture does not disclose it, but we have a multitude here in chapter 2. They are saying things, they join in with another angel, one who would take care of such as shepherds. Indeed they are all ministering spirits sent out for service on account of those who shall inherit salvation, so that we can all count on their aid; we are being helped by them, and will be helped by them. We may take courage from that point of view. They were then engaged in celebrating something, and that is now for the moment in abeyance. It was not in abeyance then, but it is now. Peace on earth is for the moment in abeyance; we have to be patient and toil on in this angelic light; we have all the light of heaven to which Christ has gone. In one sense there is not even peace there; the war is on there and so we are told that our conflict is not against
{386}
blood and flesh, but against principalities and powers in the heavenlies. That is a present matter and hence the things that are happening affect us. Perhaps we are not all conscious of it, but those of us who are spiritual are quite conscious of it; we can scarcely go out into the street without being conscious of it. I do not say *here*, because God, in His great consideration for us, has secured places where Satan is not active. The principle of limitation is imposed at such a time, so it is that the assembly has an immense influence, and yet the war goes on in heaven and on earth. Hence our conflict is not with flesh and blood, but with principalities and powers in the heavenlies. A real conflict is on; it is still on and will be on. Hence peace on earth is not a matter to be considered for the moment at all. If there be a peace as is talked of, it will be the mercy of God for a very short time. I am not prophesying, but I go by prophecy. The position is clearly defined in Thessalonians: "Only he who now letteth will let, until he be taken out of the way", @2 Thessalonians 2: 7. The man of sin is not yet in evidence; he may indeed be somewhere, but he is not yet in evidence. There is the spirit of antichrist abroad, a most solemn thing, but there is He who hinders and will hinder until He be taken out of the way, and there is *that* which hinders, too -- no doubt the principle of government, so we continue to pray for governments. I have never heard so many prayers for them as during the last five or six years, and they have been answered, so we are to continue praying for them. Actually government is not yet in the hands of Christ, but He is going on with something else, it is one of the most interesting things that I know of, what He is going on with now, what His current activities are. These meetings today are part of what He is going on with. It is well to be practical. When we come to a meeting like this we are coming to what He is going on with. He is on
{387}
His Father's throne, not His own, but He is carrying on in accord with that throne, hence the great enlargement of the thought of the Father in John's gospel. John has in mind the continuance of this dispensation and what kind of spirit is prevailing in it. So it is the Father who is dominant in John's gospel: "The Father loves the Son and has given all things to be in his hand", chapter 3: 35. The Lord carries on with that with which He loves to be occupied at the moment, He loves the assembly and those who form part of it, and He loves those who are about to be saved. As we read in @Acts 2, He knows them and He is serving them, and He is using His people to serve them. Hence it is, day in, day out, year in and year out, century in and century out, for all these eighteen centuries the Lord has been so engaged. He is not concerned with the government of this world for the moment, nor with the wars, nor the peace, but He is concerned about the assembly; He loves it, He is completing it. He is about to transfer it; it is a question of getting ready for the translation from earth to heaven. The earth is not the theatre in that sense; heaven is, although earth is in view in that He is taking out of it what belongs to Himself, the assembly. The assembly is the greatest thing there is in the universe, and it is presently to come down from heaven as if it were only there and was never anywhere else. It is not eternal, it has been formed since Christ became Man and went to heaven, but it comes down as if it were indigenous to heaven; it comes out from God, having the glory of God. What a thought! How wonderful that we ourselves belong to it!
So the peace in chapter 2 is in abeyance. The angels had spoken of it, "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good pleasure in men", and the Lord toiled on according to that until the change came, and the change is indicated in @Luke 9. You will remember what happened at that time: the days
{388}
of His receiving up had come and His face was turned towards Jerusalem, as if to say, I must go that way -- sorrowful and affecting, yet what victory is involved! Previously He went up to the mount of transfiguration and Elias and Moses were talking with Him, meaning that they were interested in what was going on in heaven, and on earth, and spoke about His death which He should accomplish at Jerusalem. It should happen there, so the Lord moved in that direction and He sent certain before Him so that they should prepare. He was a great Personage, so they went before Him to prepare, but the Samaritans would not receive Him. He was rejected here, and He accepts it. John and James would call down fire from heaven, as Elias did, but He says, "Ye know not of what spirit ye are", so we have to suffer. We cannot take the sword. The young men today are shining; God is blessing them and fitting them for greater things. It is a question of the spirit of the moment and whether we can endure the reproach attached to it. "Ye know not of what spirit ye are", chapter 9: 55. Hence He went to Jerusalem -- it was a downward course. The angels said, "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good pleasure in men"; that was their word, but it involved going to Jerusalem and the Lord's death. Thus we are engaged with His death every Lord's day; we show it. It is not simply in the breaking of bread, though that is alluded to there, but every day we are to exhibit that we belong to those who have died with Christ. The Colossian epistle is essential for us; it is full of the idea of completeness. The point I am now referring to is that we are hid, "hid with Christ in God", and that with Christ who is our life. See the magnitude of that position, and that Christ who is our life shall appear. He is the life of the universe, according to the revelation made to Joseph, but He is our life; things are confined now to those who form
{389}
the assembly. Let us value the assembly, and know how to regard each other accordingly! We cannot but love each other as we think of what we are, patterned after Christ. "When Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory". That is what we are waiting for, therefore the Lord is thinking of us, presently to have us all glorious. When we shall see Him we shall be like Him, for we shall see Him as He is. So it is that having hope in Him, we are encouraged to go forward, but I am now speaking of being like Him. Though we are hidden from public view, Christ is in our hearts, and the brethren, too, for we miss all those not available to us. I never partake of the Lord's supper without thinking of all: "Drink ye all of it". I would say, The Lord is missing you. You are not satisfied, because the cup implies satisfaction. I am only showing how the Lord was preparing to go up long before He went up, just as a person going a long journey prepares. That is exactly what He speaks of. You can understand that, if a person is about to take a journey, he prepares. It is a preparing time for us, dear brethren, the transfer time is coming, but the preparation for the transfer comes first.
So @Luke 2 occupies us with peace on earth; chapter 19 with peace in heaven. That is to say, preparation is going on up there. We should see that there is great activity up there if we could look in. If it be a gospel meeting, there is great activity, and so with a care meeting, so that the brethren may be cared for. Those of the levites called the Merarites should be active in looking after the boards of the tabernacle, suggesting the persons of the brethren. Heaven is reflecting all this, so the prayer meeting is a great time, too. Presently there will be war in heaven -- a great angel engaged against Satan, the dragon, but in the meantime it is peace in heaven, and glory in the highest -- peace in the sense that God
{390}
is going on with what He is pleased with down here. The war in heaven will begin presently; Michael will take on against the devil; then again we find the Lord Himself coming out on a white horse, as we see in @Revelation 19. It is not now transfer, it is coming down. The book of Revelation is a question of coming down. I have read from chapter 4, because the Spirit of God would put before us the place that John occupies. He is the loved disciple, representing the dispensation in its continuance, and, if meetings are getting small, as they are in some places, John would say, The places will be filled, there will be replenishment. That is the kind of prophecy John would instruct us in. If numbers are decreasing, there will be increase, as indicated by the great fishes in @John 21. It is a question of finding brethren who are worth while, not for the sake of numbers, but for quality. "Simon Peter went up and drew the net to the land full of great fishes, a hundred and fifty-three", @John 21: 11. The haul was so great, but the net did not break. Things are holding although it appears that there is serious danger of chaos, but there is a point at which things are holding; the net does not break, as it did in @Luke 5. In the ordinary course of gospel testimony there was defection, and in the ordinary course of assembly formation there was breakdown, but John is speaking now, being the beloved disciple, the disciple who tells us that, if all that the Lord Jesus did was written down, the world itself would not contain it. So he would enlarge us and give us to understand the greatness of what we are brought into. As to the fishes, the net did not break, even though the brethren were not faithful; seven had turned aside to fish, to go back to their ordinary occupation. Peter was the leader and he says, "I go a fishing", the others say, "We also go with thee", and they went and they caught nothing. That is to say, we have to experience this sort of
{391}
thing when we turn aside, but the Lord is there to restore. That is the principle with John: recovery is not far away. The great fishes, too, are in evidence.
The transfer may take place at any moment, there will be no breakdown at all; the last assembling shout will be triumphant. Every breaking of bread involves the assembling call. It is an assembly call, an assembly time, and each is to rally to his position, but the Lord is saying to us now that the final and great assembly call is triumph, the Lord Himself. It is not simply a testimony here below, but the Lord Himself will descend from heaven with a shout, the Lord coming back to earth, not to stay on it, but to take us out of it. It is a question of whether we are ready; John would say, The Lord is not far away. The spirit of John is not far away, either, for he says, "It is the Lord". I believe that voice is to be found in all these meetings. These meetings are increasing in number and increasing in quality, and increasing in ability to lead in them, too. Therefore if anyone is at all turning aside, grace would say, The Lord is not far away. The spirit of John is amongst the brethren; that spirit would say, "It is the Lord", and sure enough it was, and He calls us children. It is a remarkable fact that He does. He is "the everlasting Father" (@Isaiah 9: 6); He can speak as God to us, His children, because He is God. If it is a question of some of us straying a little, because you know there is a little of it with all of us, the Lord is saying, I will not give you up. We were speaking of persons whose sins are retained; there are such, there are those who are not to be saved, for the Spirit of God says, "let him be filthy still", but that is not general. What is going on among the brethren is encouragement, even if there be a chilliness and turning away in small measure. The Lord says, I am not giving you up. Not that He would at all encourage sin, or unfaithfulness, but at the same time the apostle
{392}
John says, "If our heart condemn us, God is greater than our heart and knows all things", so that I am not going to allow my heart to sway me.
John is timed to fill out the closing moments so that we may go on. So in Revelation, John fell at the Lord's feet as dead -- an important thing, resulting from a sense of the Lord's greatness according to what is seen in Him. John sees the seven golden lamps and the Lord is in the midst of them. They are the things to keep in mind, because He is in the midst of them, He is not anywhere else. John fell at His feet as dead -- it was wholesome reverent fear. The Lord says, "Fear not; I am the first and the last, and the living one: and I became dead, and behold, I am living to the ages of ages, and have the keys of death and of hades", @Revelation 1: 17, 18. The whole position is in His hands -- power for releasing, and especially power to say to John,"Come up". It is a preliminary situation, not final. So this book is to bring out what the Lord is towards us, what He is towards His servant, towards His prophet, toward His assembly. It is the Lord, as it were, looking over in view of transferring everything up there. John is called up, not to stay, not in the sense of going to a place of blessing, but to carry on in the sense of what is happening. We are all to be aglow with what is going on in heaven; presently we are to be up there. We are now understanding it and interested in it and praying as to it; so that John goes up -- he was caught up. It was a wonderful moment, but what he saw was a throne standing. What a comfort this is in the presence of this great democratic time, when the enemy has great advantage and there are terrible and extraordinary conditions existing! Prayer is the word for the moment; things are in our hands in that sense; Paul says, "through your prayers", @Philemon 22. I thought of that word lately and the result, what happens through our prayers. So John
{393}
was caught up and saw a throne standing. Thrones have fallen, cities have fallen. What a moment! Could any of us have foretold what has happened? No doubt we are looking back and thinking of what has happened. Some of us have not been through it at all, but many have, and those who have not are in sympathy. It is remarkable how the things have come about, but still we are going on, and the Lord is saying to us now, Go on, go on with the order that belongs to the assembly. What pleasure He has in our meetings as this is in evidence! The Lord is pleased with it, as we read in Colossians, "rejoicing and seeing your order, and the firmness of your faith in Christ", chapter 2: 5. John is the one for the last moment, a fit man; "I John, your brother and fellow-partaker in the tribulation and kingdom and patience, in Jesus, was in the island called Patmos, for the word of God, and for the testimony of Jesus" (@Revelation 1: 9) -- not 'I, the apostle John', but "I John", the loved one. He is caught up into heaven and sees the throne standing. Finally the Lord will come down out of heaven on the white horse, and the armies will follow Him. What a picture! How assuring! All this comes through the beloved one, the prophet of the book of Revelation.
You can never reach the divine end unless you apprehend the glory of Christ, and Christ reaches the pinnacle of glory whatever be the road He travels.
{394}
HOUSING IN THE UPPER ROOM
@Acts 1: 12 - 26; @Acts 2:1 - 4
J.T. This section has been before some of us several times of late and what is in mind now is to call attention to the housing of all that is needed for the inauguration of the dispensation -- the apostles and Mary the Lord's mother, with several women, and His brethren; I thought we might keep before us the importance of being housed as belonging to what represents the authority of the Lord and His relatives, His mother and His brethren, reminding us that even His natural relatives were secured in the truth. They were all in the upper room awaiting the great moment when heaven will declare itself in the coming in of the Holy Spirit to give character and support and maintain the whole dispensation from the beginning to the end.
H.P.W. Would you say a little as to what you mean by housing?
J.T. Well, the gospel of Matthew makes much of the house as a place, the Lord is seen so often speaking in houses. In one place (chapter 9) two blind men followed Him and named Him 'Son of David' asking Him to have mercy on them, but He said nothing to them until He came into the house, they followed Him and He then spoke to them. Throughout the gospel of Matthew we have the idea of the house and it is intended to work out as the assembly where the Lord's rights are preserved, maintained and asserted. As stated in chapter 18 the assembly is representative of the Lord as gone into heaven. And so here. I mean it only in that sense, the idea of a place. Here it is called the upper room, but I have used the word 'house' (as a verb) as what represents authority -- such accommodation. It says, "They returned to
{395}
Jerusalem", meaning they had been to the mount of Olives and seen the Lord go up. He goes up from Bethany according to Luke, but here He goes up from the mount of Olives, and two men appeared to the disciples. They "stood by them in white clothing, who also said, Men of Galilee, why do ye stand looking into heaven?" Then they returned and went up to the upper chamber, the apostles, several women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and His brethren -- they were all there, as if He had gone up and left them, and now they did not take up natural links and go to their own homes, but to this place, already well known, evidently the upper room of the gospels in which the passover was held.
Rem. This is the beginning of things. How does it apply to us now in these days? Have we the Lord's authority still with us, and disciples and the Holy Spirit still here?
J.T. Well, He is not here in this passage, He is not mentioned yet, but that is a good question, the answer to which the Lord may open up to us. We have not the apostles now but the Lord said, according to @Mark 13: 34, the Lord gave His *bondmen* the authority, not His apostles. The idea of bondmen attaches to us if we are true believers so that the authority comes with them. And then the Lord's relatives -- not now His natural relatives but spiritual relatives -- they are all taken care of. We are not left to ourselves, but set together under His protection and care, the principles of the house being in the assembly.
Rem. So that things are still maintained although we have not apostles and natural relatives.
J.T. That is just the point.
H.P.W. All the eleven here are mentioned by name. Would it be right to say that all they stood for spiritually was in that upper room -- Mary the mother of Jesus and His brethren -- all their interests
{396}
in this upper room, not on natural lines but on lines they had learned something about with the Lord Himself?
J.T. Quite so. The angels had not told them what to do, they just asked the question, "Why do ye stand looking into heaven? This Jesus who has been taken up from you into heaven, shall thus come in the manner in which ye have beheld him going into heaven". They could have told them where to go, but they do not. It is left to bring out what there was at that particular moment as the fruit of the Lord's handiwork before He went up to heaven. There was that which could be relied on and cared for by the Lord.
H.P.W. Spiritual instincts.
J.T. Quite so. These men would be there to set those instincts going. Peter and John went home after they had seen the sepulchre but they do not do that here.
Rem. The thought of the brethren takes precedence over the natural side. Could you help us as to that?
J.T. What is in mind is to see what was there when the Lord went up, so that we might see the basic thought of what was here at the beginning. Then, in the beginning of chapter 2, we shall see what is going on in heaven. We know from @Luke 24 the Lord was received up "into heaven", and Paul says He was received up "in glory", so we have some idea what was there as He went up. The change ten days after is to bring about conditions on earth to provide for testimony for Him here; so that we might get what is basic and work it out to get concrete conditions.
Ques. Would you say a word about the difference between Bethany and the mount of Olives?
J.T. It is a suggestion of how heaven may say one thing in certain circumstances and it differs in other circumstances, meaning that circumstances are
{397}
capable of being expanded. What God has arranged for the inauguration of the dispensation down here is capable of expansion and variation of expansion, so that these thoughts might have full place and plenty of scope for the working out of them. Bethany is the place of love. The Lord went there because there were those who loved Him there, and those whom He loved. "He led them out as far as Bethany, and having lifted up his hands, he blessed them". And He was carried up from the place of love, showing what heaven thought of Him. The mount of Olives is a suggestion of the place of power spiritually. It was an elevated position but far away from Jerusalem  -- a spiritual matter indeed.
H.P.W. Do you mean that each of those who were housed in this upper room would have certain specific spiritual impressions and the Spirit of God would use that in support and working out of things in the assembly? How do basic conditions work out with us?
J.T. Quite so. I thought we might dwell a little more on the basic side in our own souls -- how each of us works things out, even from new birth. That is where our spiritual history begins when we are born again -- that is basic and things are worked out from that.
H.P.W. Each of them would have a special impression of Christ and so should we.
J.T. Exactly. These men were called out by the Lord. He brought them up to the mountain that they might be with Him, under His influence. Then in view of His death these twelve were with Him when the Supper was instituted, both in Matthew and Mark and Luke. In Luke they are called apostles -- twelve apostles -- they are now material which He can use in due time. And then as regards His own mother, she knew things about the Lord that no other person did and that would be the
{398}
property of the assembly in time. John was as her son. She was in a peculiar position and John was, too -- he would perhaps get impressions of the Lord from her that no one else could get. There were several of the women, meaning that the feminine side was needed. The Lord's brethren were now secured by Him, they were not with Him at the beginning but He had secured them all. And all that would work out as to what each of us may experience as we go on in the truth as the Spirit of God has His way with us.
J.P.H. Would you say a word on verse 13, "And when they were come into the city, they went up to the upper chamber, where were staying both Peter, and John", and others? What about the thought of staying?
J.T. They are at liberty there. They are not under any obligation, they are not visitors. It is a building that could be taken away from them, it had been used before. This room which we are in might have been destroyed like others, but it has not been.
God protects such things as are needed in the testimony. The Lord Himself had inaugurated this upper room, He had told them where to find it.
G.H.M. Does the expression 'guest-chamber' used by Luke refer to the atmosphere of the place?
J.T. There is evidently liberty with the Lord, "Ye shall say to the master of the house, The Teacher says to thee, Where is the guest-chamber ... ?" It shows what can be brought about for the Lord's interests here. This matter of housing the brethren is a great thing -- getting the right place for them.
S.M. Does it take the assembly to fill this basic thought out?
J.T. The whole dispensation would be involved with this. We are dealing now with the very greatest things which have been here for eighteen hundred years or more. The Lord had this in mind, it was not
{399}
an accident. These disciples turned and went to the upper room where they were staying. They were authoritative persons and reliable persons whom the Lord could trust.
Rem. What you are saying involves that each one of these had been under the Lord's hand, formed by Him.
J.T. Exactly. His own handiwork. No others will have it as they had it, "*Ye* are they who have persevered with me", @Luke 22: 28.
Rem. The assembly can represent the Lord here.
Rem. They "gave themselves all with one accord to continual prayer".
J.T. They felt the Lord had gone. That is the setting in which the Lord's supper stands. We have to go on to the second chapter to get what is going on in heaven. He went in there and a cloud received Him out of their sight -- they did not see much, what is in mind is what comes out of heaven.
Ques. Is it necessary to have these basic matters in our souls to get the good of what comes out of heaven?
J.T. Quite so. They did not see much of what went into it. They all saw Him go up, now the next thing is what comes out of heaven and what is going on there; so you have this powerful breathing. But I do not want to go on immediately with the second chapter, although that is the thing to be reached.
Rem. The setting in the first chapter is a definite necessity for the coming out of heaven of the Holy Spirit, there is complacency found there that the Holy Spirit could sit upon.
J.T. It was what the Lord left here. He had taken great pains with it. The persons who were to be nominated for apostleship should have "assembled with us all the time in which the Lord Jesus came in and went out among us, beginning from the baptism of John until the day in which he was taken up from
{400}
us, one of these should be a witness with us of his resurrection". That refers to the persons who were there that the Lord had formed for a purpose.
Ques. Would you say why Peter speaks of Judas thus?
J.T. It is to bring out the awful things that we have to deal with now.
Rem. Do we not see that the one thing has to go out before the other comes in?
J.T. It has to go completely out, and what a terrible character it has -- "bowels gushed out". It suggests what the devil can use, employ and hire; the saints can keep themselves free and refuse to be hired. So this brother who is to take Judas¬ place is a man of experience who has "assembled with us all the time in which the Lord Jesus came in and went out among us, beginning from the baptism of John until the day in which he was taken up from us" -- the whole period of the Lord's ministry.
R.T.H. Peter refers to what the scripture had said.
J.T. That is another thing that must be made room for -- the Scriptures. The brethren would do well in every locality to become Bereans and look into the Scriptures when anything is said that seems contrary, it does not matter who said it.
Rem. We have the unction from the Holy One; @1 John 2: 20. Is your thought that the upper room prepares us for this?
J.T. The upper room is not exactly on the earth, it is elevated.
Rem. You were speaking of what is going on in heaven.
J.T. That is going to come out. In the meantime the Holy Spirit is come, He proceeds from the Father as a testimony to what is there. He will testify of Jesus and tell us all things to come. We will be enlightened about everything we should know -- He will guide us into all the truth; @John 16: 13.
{401}
J.H. Just as these were basic things for the Spirit to come to, do you look for persons with these normal features amongst the brethren so that the Holy Spirit, having now come, may be completely free in the service, unfolding the truth to us?
J.T. Yes. We have to wait for Paul to give the full thought. We have to wait, maybe for years, before we get the full truth. Sometimes the brethren are apt to be hasty instead of waiting.
J.P.H. Is that the thought of leading -- the Spirit leading?
J.T. He is guiding, too -- "He shall guide you". The blessed Spirit becomes our guide.
Rem. In the upper room there is something on earth corresponding with heaven.
J.T. Yes, if things are not clear, wait. The Lord will give us understanding if we consider what is said. If the Holy Spirit is operating, listen and the Lord gives understanding.
Ques. Is it not important that we should have an ear? "He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies", @Revelation 3: 13.
J.T. And then we have Peter here -- he is not just one of the eleven, he is Peter.
H.P.W. You are really stressing that the personnel that you refer to in this upper room would bring a contribution to that upper room as having come under the personal tuition of the Lord. Is not that a very great thing for us all, every brother and sister, that our secret links with the Lord should be such that they bring out certain characteristics that should be usable by the Spirit and contribute to the position?
J.T. Quite so, not forgetting the sisters.
Ques. Is the thought of housing carried forward until the Lord Jesus comes?
J.T. Quite so. "If ye have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my house and abide there". They were to seek out sons of peace.
{402}
Ques. Would it be a support in each gathering if we have these features? Should we not look for it and pray for it?
J.T. Yes. In verse 14 it says, "These gave themselves all with one accord". We shall see that in chapter 2 before the Spirit came.
Now in chapter 2, "And when the day of Pentecost was now accomplishing, they were all together in one place. And there came suddenly a sound out of heaven as of a violent impetuous blowing, and filled all the house where they were sitting", and then in the end of the chapter they are all together -- they are together at any time, whether physically or not, they are all of one mind, one thought. That is a very important side. So they "gave themselves all with one accord to continual prayer, with several women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his brethren. And in those days Peter, standing up in the midst of the brethren". That is another point, it would suggest the idea of what we call a ministry meeting, according to 1 Corinthians. "Standing up in the midst of the brethren, said, (the crowd of names who were together was about a hundred and twenty,) Brethren, it was necessary that the scripture should have been fulfilled, which the Holy Spirit spoke before, by the mouth of David, concerning Judas, who became guide to those who took Jesus". So we have a word from Peter here, and it is to be noted that it is Peter, not any one of them; and he gives us instruction as to Judas which we need, because it is the kind of man that antichrist would spring out of -- he is the "son of perdition". Then the next thing is the matter of apostleship -- the completion of the apostolic number. "Of the men who have assembled with us all the time in which the Lord Jesus came in and went out among us, beginning from the baptism of John until the day in which he was taken up from us, one of these should be a witness with us of his resurrection".
{403}
Now they have something here which the Lord could have settled if He had wished to; but He did not. There is no need to write thousands of miles away to find out something, there is the assembly of God to settle matters for us at all times.
Rem. All this occurred whilst they were awaiting the promise of the Father -- waiting for the intervention of heaven.
J.T. They did not decide to wait until the Holy Spirit would come, they went to work immediately so that the number might be complete.
J.H. Is this in a sense a model to us; they exercise every concern to do all that they could, but they could not go beyond selecting two, leaving room for the Lord to add His thought? Is that how we get the Lord's thought about a thing -- fully exercising our concern about it in a godly way?
J.T. He had already opened their understanding. That was a remarkable thing. But they do not yet get the Spirit, and therefore they are models for us now. The Lord is perhaps testing us as to what we know.
G.H.M. We must turn to One who is the "knower of the hearts of all".
J.T. Yes. We are on the borderline of the new dispensation. There were principles that obtained in the old dispensation which were still authoritative, such as the lot -- it is used here.
Rem. It is a beautiful principle -- first prayer and then looking up the Scriptures. It was written in the book of Psalms -- the Psalm tells them what to do and they do it.
J.T. Just so. They appointed two and gave their reason; a man of experience with Jesus, you might say -- the way He did things from the beginning -- that which was from the beginning and He who was from the beginning. This man would know Him as from the beginning.
{404}
Rem. In selecting these two do they select them as those who have already got what you speak of as basic?
J.T. "All the time in which the Lord Jesus came in and went out among us" -- the Lord is doing that now in a spiritual way. "I am coming to you" that is the idea. Sometimes He went to the mount of Olives alone, and came to them in the morning -- it is the way He did things, the life of the Lord Jesus.
Ques. In what sense is the principle of the lot carried forward into this dispensation?
J.T. It is a tried principle, used here but not afterwards. It is a principle that fits in here. Some old things have a hold.
Ques. Does it take on a different turn when it says, "The Holy Spirit said, Separate me now Barnabas and Saul", @Acts 13:2? That is on the lines of today.
J.T. Quite so, more the present time.
H.P.W. It is very beautiful to see that heaven took note of all that had happened, because when the Spirit came It sat upon each one of them, so that each one should have this personal impression from the Lord Jesus Himself which is ratified and confirmed by the coming of the Holy Spirit.
J.T. Although there is a crowd here, we have each one of them mentioned.
G.H.M. Each one of them would involve the hundred and twenty?
J.T. Yes -- brothers and sisters.
H.P.W. Emphasising again the importance of brothers and sisters bringing something to the common wealth.
J.T. Yes. These are great matters. We are on the borderline of another dispensation. This dispensation is not going to be replaced by another of its own kind, but there is another matter coming in -- a Jewish system.
Ques. Have we not to be ready in view of all this
{405}
for adjustment? God is sovereign and raises up whom He will to help us.
J.T. If there is a Peter who can tell you, listen to him, but test what he says by the Scriptures. He is not asked to say anything but does it as if it is the right thing to do.
G.H.M. The one that was chosen had part in service and apostleship. What do you understand by the service?
J.T. What they carried on in the time of the Lord. The service the Lord carried on which they had part in. Verse 24 says, "Thou Lord, knower of the hearts of all, skew which one of these two thou hast chosen, to receive the lot of this service and apostleship". It must include more than apostleship, "from which Judas transgressing fell". It is viewed as one thing. In @Luke 4 the Lord stood up in the synagogue at Nazareth saying, "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me". One and another came unto Him including Judas himself.
G.H.M. Does it not seem akin to what the Lord carried in His affections -- His Father's business?
J.T. Quite so.
Ques. Might these men be of the seventy?
J.T. Yes, they were sent ones.
Ques. Do you make a difference between the house being filled and the cloven tongues of fire that sat upon each of them?
J.T. We can now pass on to the second chapter. The sound would be one thing and the parted tongues would be another thing. The sound filled the house -- it is an allusion to other things -- the ointment of Mary of Bethany filled the house. It is the sound of the wind, which would allude to the inwards of God, speaking reverently. God was moved in such a powerful way in regard to the Lord Jesus having gone into heaven and in regard of His request. "Having
{406}
received of the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit" -- they were all brought into this.
H.P.W. It is a unifying matter and they are all in it, and yet in spite of that the cloven tongues sat upon each one of them giving individual spirituality and yet unified, providing the atmosphere in which God Himself was.
J.T. One of the most marvellous days in the history of the universe -- the Holy Spirit coming in at the behest of Jesus from the Father. The Father is involved in the mighty power that was moving.
Ques. What is the significance of the day of Pentecost?
J.T. It must have been the Father's thought in heaven. In @Matthew 11 "Jesus answering said ...". What did He answer? There must have been something. Such things as that would suggest that the Lord understood what was going on in heaven. There were dates there, and it was fixed that this should happen on this particular date. The great fact is here that it had happened. It shows that the idea of time comes into heaven -- it will not be always there, but at the present time it has in view the testimony.
L.H.R. Does it link with @Leviticus 23 -- the new oblation -- so many days after?
J.T. Quite possibly. Heaven must be reckoning according to what happened in Jesus, what the Holy Spirit had in Him, in Mary His mother, and then His wonderful life until He was baptised, and then His wonderful ministry -- three and a half years, and then the three days of His death and burial -- "Three days and three nights in the heart of the earth", and then His resurrection and the remaining forty days here, leaving ten days before the Spirit came so that it must synchronise with the day of Pentecost.
Rem. When the Spirit came down on the Lord Jesus it was as a dove. Here it is different.
J.T. It was the kind of thing that took place
{407}
when He began His ministry. Here we have power. All things can be reached. We are told here the ones that were reached, but it would become wider after Stephen's testimony.
Rem. We are in remnant conditions now, but we have this power. God is no doubt working, but we are in lowly conditions.
J.T. The Lord knows, therefore He says, "Thou hast a little strength", @Revelation 3: 8.
Rem. It says it "filled all the house where they were sitting" as though there is a sphere where what is heavenly is to be paramount.
J.T. Sitting is an attitude of thoughtfulness. The Lord is sitting according to Mark on the right hand of God, time is taken to look into things and make decisions. You wonder at the length of the dispensation, yet the sitting position is held, not forced, and it is for us to learn to sit and look into things, look around and get the right thought.
Ques. Why does it refer to the Spirit as sitting upon them, too?
J.T. He is taking up a place that He is not going to leave. He is remaining with us. There is the possibility of our partaking of the Holy Spirit and not being real believers, but those who are real believers respond to the Spirit. It gives great assurance as to the dispensation itself.
Ques. Have we to learn that certain things in time synchronise with the plan of heaven? So the day of Pentecost would be a certain thing in time. The suddenness of the noise coming out of heaven would suggest that everything was prepared and the Holy Spirit sat upon them.
J.T. There is infinite accuracy in the things of God. It is very wonderful -- more so than what happened when creation took place. Everything must begin with the birth of Jesus. It is a question of what God decreed. "Lo, I come". He never imposed
{408}
upon Him to come, He does it Himself. The Spirit was sent, but never Jesus. Much is spoken of as coming out of heaven. In this chapter the sound from heaven, in chapter 9 light from heaven, in chapter 10 the sheet from heaven.
L.H.R. What is the thought of it being a violent and impetuous blowing?
J.T. It is the thought of power. We are told that the breath of God is applied to the lake of fire, showing the relation of the actions of God. All is of Himself and from love. Everything is because of love, even the lake of fire. It is a necessity on account of love. It is violent but it is all for blessing, hence what follows proves that -- three thousand persons are converted.
G.H.M. Are you presenting the magnitude and importance of the Spirit being here that we might take account of it?
J.T. It is the same Spirit.
Rem. Elihu says, "The breath of the Almighty hath given me life".
J.T. In Isaiah it speaks of "The breath of Jehovah, like a stream of brimstone", chapter 30: 33.
Ques. Is that the same breath in a different character?
J.T. Yes, it gives light.
{409}
SPIRITUALITY SEEN IN JACOB
@1 Corinthians 1: 4 - 9; @1 Corinthians 2: 7 - 16; @Genesis 30: 25; @Genesis 33:4 - 7
The links between these scriptures are in Jacob (to say nothing of Joseph or Rachel) and the Corinthian saints, and in turning to them, I have spirituality in mind. Jacob and the Corinthian saints were primarily possessed of spirituality in principle. These verses from Genesis would help to show that. Spirituality was there in principle in Jacob, and it was also in principle among the Corinthian saints when the first letter to Corinth was written. The epistles to that assembly have in mind that the principle of spirituality was there basically. The apostle has no doubt about it, but he resorts to abstract statements, and hence the verses I read in the first chapter are abstract; that is to say, the things mentioned were not in the true sense concretely present in them. For instance, "I thank my God always on your behalf, for the grace of God which is given you by Jesus Christ; that in every thing ye are enriched by him". If we have time, we shall see later that these statements are not concretely true in that assembly; nor are further statements -- "Even as the testimony of Christ was confirmed in you; so that ye come behind in no gift; waiting for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ; who shall also confirm you unto the end, that ye may be blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. God is faithful, by whom ye were called unto the fellowship of His Son Jesus Christ our Lord". These verses from four to eight are abstract.
You may query my use of the word 'abstract', but it is a word to be used, and used freely in dealing with Scripture. To illustrate that, in chapter 5 of this very epistle we are told of the wickedness of a certain
{410}
man there who had to be "put away" -- an expression that is not now used as to discipline among the brethren who have intelligence, but was quite right in that day, it being confirmed later in the chapter, "Remove the wicked person from amongst yourselves". But then the idea of the passover came in, "Christ our passover is sacrificed for us", and "Therefore", the apostle says, "let us keep the feast, not with old leaven, neither with the leaven of malice and wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of *sincerity and truth*". And, "Purge out the old leaven, that ye may be a new lump, according as *ye are* unleavened". That is what I call abstract. It is a nail in a sure place on which things can be hung reliably, so that we may work out other things and leave only what is right. So one would cite other illustrations of this. John's epistle has many of them, and those who read it, and perhaps minister from it, do well to recognise that, and no doubt they do, so as to work out and develop other things in order that they might be refused in our minds and withdrawn from.
Now, in this sense, 1 Corinthians corresponds with Jacob. He was dealing with Laban, a difficult man. The apostle was dealing with certain persons in Corinth who were difficult; he held them in reserve. Conditions were not present to enable him to deal with them, but they should be dealt with; and hence he says, "Having in readiness to avenge all disobedience when your obedience shall have been fulfilled", @2 Corinthians 10:6. That is to say, the apostle would reserve exercising discipline. In fact, he did not come. He intended to come, but left the place, and they were questioning his veracity because he did not come; but he did not come because he loved them. He did not wish to use the rod, but rather had recourse to the exercise of grace; and he sent Timotheus to them, a reliable young man who knew him,
{411}
and knew his ways as they were in Christ. So he said, "I have sent to you Timotheus ... who shall put you in mind of my ways as they are in Christ", @1 Corinthians 4: 17. That is one of the methods he adopted -- wisely, as the sequel showed, awaiting the time when all the brethren at Corinth would learn to judge themselves. There was a great want of self-judgment in that sense, and Paul has to wait to exercise discipline because the exercise of discipline might stumble others. We have always to be careful in the use of discipline. Paul was very careful whether he should use the rod or act in love, and he chose to send Timotheus so that they might see in him the apostle's ways, how he did things, as they were in Christ. It was not simply the bare thought of what Paul did, but the things that he did in Christ were placed in a suitable, reliable position, and could be regarded and spoken of as in that position, and so they were. So Timotheus went to Corinth, and others went, too. Another thing you find in this epistle is the use of childish words. One marvels at times, as one notices the childish words that Paul brings into his language in dealing with those saints; and, in order to transfer the thing without hurting anyone, he says, "When I was a child, I spake as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as a child: but when I became a man, I put away childish things", @1 Corinthians 13: 11. So that we have to discern how things are, looking into our own selves, for the apostle here, as we all ought to be, was very careful as to the use of language lest he should provoke unnecessarily resentful feelings in those saints, and they should be rendered hard and severe, and turned aside. Hence, Paul sent Timotheus, a young brother, but a young brother with great wisdom, of whom Paul said, "I have no man like-minded", @Philippians 2:20. How the Lord would love to classify certain young brothers and sisters: He would love to do it, and those of us here in this
{412}
company who are older would love to do it, too, so as to encourage young persons to do things, and to do them *well*, because it is not only what we do, but what is done well, that is important. As it was said of the daughters of Zelophehad, "The daughters of Zelophehad speak right", @Numbers 27:7. They not only spake, but spake right; so in the case of the man whose tongue was loosed, it says, "he spoke right", @Mark 7: 35. He had not been able to do so.
In order to serve, we must know how to do things well, and the Lord would teach us to do it. So Paul said of Timotheus, "I have no man like-minded".
Paul spoke of certain ones in that way as though they were his delegates, committed to him by the Lord to be used in the service according to his wisdom, and he used such as Titus and Timotheus according to his wisdom. So children and young people have to be carefully handled in this sense. Hence, Paul says, "I have no one like-minded who will care with genuine feeling how ye get on". The Lord is looking down on each of us, to see how we get on. We should be advanced more than we were last year, and so forth. It is a question of how *we get on*, and this matter of spirituality is reachable and within the range of all of us. We may have to start young, and the way may be long and tiresome, and we may be turned aside by the weariness of it, but we have to have patience, for it says, "He that endureth to the end ...". @Matthew 10: 22. If things are to be reached, we have got to reach the end of them, and God has apportioned the end of them; He has measured them we do not measure, He does, and "he that endureth to the end shall be saved". That is to say, the end is a saving matter, and young people need to think of it. The way may be long. It was in Jacob's time; he had a wearisome journey. He had to look after the cattle of his father-in-law -- an unreasonable father-in-law. In-laws are apt to be, and we have to be
{413}
careful, because they are usually older, and we need patience with them.
So Joseph was born. He had been waited for Rachel waited for him, and God remembered her in waiting. That is most beautiful! In the waiting time He remembers us. God remembered Rachel, and surely enough Joseph came  -- a child of promise. It is very important for households to have in mind that God at times gives children of promise: children who will be marked in the testimony. How important it is to bring them up in view of that! "And God remembered Rachel". He remembered Rebecca, her predecessor, in like circumstances. In this case, Joseph came -- the eleventh son of Jacob. It may be said, Well, he had enough. But not for God! We must not regulate our families according to our own thoughts. It is a question of God, dear brethren. We have to do with God in all these matters. Whether it be wives, or husbands, or children, God has His rights, and woe be to him who disregards the rights of God. God needed twelve sons in the family of Jacob, and Rachel had that assurance, for she said prophetically, "The Lord shall add to me another son". God said He would add it to Himself, for the other was to be the occasion of her death. A solemn thing! Yet it was the accomplishment of the purpose of God. What can be greater than the accomplishment of divine purposes, even if one suffers for it, and loses one's life for it! The purpose of God is valuable beyond words. She can say, "The Lord shall add to me another son". Another son meant in effect that God would complete His twelve -- the great number twelve in the family of Jacob -- and it was to go down the ages right into eternity.
So Rachel dies. Benjamin was the son of his mother's sorrow. God would not forget that, either. He was the son of his mother's sorrow, but he was the son of his father's right hand. So we can all leave it
{414}
that what God does is right. The greatest thing to learn is the rightness of what God does.
So, as I said, He added to Rachel and Jacob another son -- the twelfth. Now Jacob was not unaffected. He felt the loss of Rachel. He loved her. We all know the story of Rachel's betrothal to Jacob, and now it is the day of her sorrow, but she comes down the ages. Her sorrow was not for nothing; "Rachel weeping for her children", @Matthew 2: 18.
These are in the records of heaven, so we should learn to look afar off, dear brethren. One feels it for one's self, how short-sighted we are. We have to learn to look afar off; if we do not, we may forget we are purged from our former sins. We are to look afar off and see what can happen in the purposes and ways of God, and be in line with them. Jacob was in the line of the ways of God, as Isaac and Rebecca had been, and he says to Laban, "Send me away, that I may go unto mine own place, and to my country".
He is to return to his land and to his father: a most worthy thought, and born of the idea of spirituality; a good root, a spiritual root, that he should now think of returning to his land and to his father's house -- to Isaac.
What I want to say briefly is, that he delayed in the thing. He would do better; he would make a bargain with his father-in-law, a hard man, and in these bargains we are sure to meet hardness. We are hard ourselves. The apostle warns the Corinthians about going to law with one another. We are enjoined against it, because hardness will meet hardness. So it was that Jacob met hardness in Laban. They made a bargain, and at the end Jacob had the best of the bargain. He decided he would have the speckled cattle -- he would take those for his wages. When we come to wages, we are on dangerous ground. Since the recent war began, there have been great opportunities for making money, but all tending to
{415}
hardness and loss of spirituality, loss of growth spiritually. And Jacob was not free of this. He made a bargain with Laban, and Laban made a bargain with him. It was seemingly fairly gracious, but it wasted considerable time, and time is one of the most precious things there are in the ways of God, because there is so much to be done. So we are told, "Redeeming the time, because the days are evil", @Ephesians 5: 16. We find it hard to get to meetings, and we miss meetings because of our bargaining, perhaps, seeking higher wages, or extra wages because of late working, and we lose. Yet Jacob did not lose from that point of view; his cattle increased; but still, he was a wage-earner, a poor calling for the root of promise, but that is what he was. God is pleased in His governmental ways to allow things to go that way, whereas, if we are simple and take the shortest course to heaven, to the land of promise, so to speak, we escape much. We may lose extra money; lose a larger bank account, but heaven -- what can be compared with that? It is a question of God's purposes of love and our part in those purposes. Dear brethren, we are at the parting of the ways. It is a question just now whether we go on to the purpose of God, and the apostle had in mind that the Corinthians should go on; so, as I said, he spoke in the abstract, and gave them all the credit he could; but it was from the divine side, the objective side. Objective truth is right in its place, but it is not subjective truth. We may not have travelled the way for it, but when we do we have to go the way Jacob did -- he came to Canaan, and ultimately to Isaac.
So I referred to these passages in Genesis because he told Laban he wanted to go to his place and to his land. This bargain was made, and the time was spent, and Isaac was put off, and Canaan was put off. He must have those wages, but the root of the thing was in him. I am only speaking now very practically,
{416}
dear brethren, so that we may avoid these things. If we are in danger of them, turn away from them. So Jacob wasted the time. However many cattle he gained, he wasted the time. He was a long time in getting to his father. Could it be said that he loved his father? It is difficult to say. Why did he wait? If one says, I would like to go to be with the Lord, then why wait? There is a way. The way to the end of the purpose of God is open to us, and the thing is to take it.
So Jacob did take it. He had the elements of spirituality in his heart all the time, and that was centred in Joseph, not in Isaac now; it had been, but now it is a question of Joseph. We must not attempt to regulate our families in this sense of doing our wills in them. Let God do it. Jacob evidently fixed his heart on Joseph, for we are told, "Now Israel loved Joseph more than all his children",
(@Genesis 37: 3), a very precious fact. The succeeding history is full of this fact and all that enters into it. Spirituality enters into the relations of Jacob and Joseph.
I am seeking to urge on the brethren this thought of spirituality. The fact that you are here today would be a strong indication that the root of it is in you. The root of it is in christendom, or God would not go on with it. He desires us to go on: not to deal with more wages and increase our cattle, but go straight forward in the right way; as the word is, "And thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying, This is the way, walk ye in it", @Isaiah 30: 21. We have to learn where the way is and walk in it.
So Jacob did start. I only read the verses in chapter 33 to bring out that Joseph was still in his mind, and he was in mind right to the end of the chapter. The last conversation of Jacob and Joseph is beautiful. It brings out the greatness and glory of Jacob; even in the presence of Joseph, Jacob
{417}
was greater. God is intent on making us greater than we are, because we are great essentially and great potentially, if we are christians, and He will go through with that with every one of us, as He did with Jacob. Jacob's brightest days were his closing days. I long for that, having that in mind, not for myself only, because that would, perhaps, be selfish, but for the brethren; it is a question of the brethren. So Jacob puts Ephraim above Manasseh.
I was speaking a moment ago of the correspondence between the histories of the Corinthians and Jacob, and it is very striking, because the first epistle ends gloriously: "Behold, I shew you a mystery; We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye", @1 Corinthians 15: 51, 52. What an end that is! But there is more. The second epistle is one that works the subjective thing out. That is what I am aiming at now. The idea of the second letter is to be worked out in the brethren.
"He that is spiritual judgeth all things". What a man that is! Surely Jacob was on that line; he judged all things at the end. He judged the twelve tribes -- "Listen to Israel your father", he says (@Genesis 49: 2); and he gives an account prophetically of every one of them. "Listen to Israel your father" a beautiful finish. It came out in Jacob, and it came out in Joseph, too, so that they were "lovely and pleasant in their lives, and in their death they were not divided", so to speak. Joseph said in effect at his death, I want all to come with me. I do not want to go to heaven by myself. That is the principle. Nor does any one of us rightly wish to go to heaven alone: "God ... has raised us up together, and has made us sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus". That is the divine thought; that we might be there together, and that is how Joseph went. Jacob, too, went on that principle, carrying the tribes with him, telling them about their future. He is
{418}
living in futures now, as I might say. That is a term often used. When he was in Padan-aram he was living in the futures of cattle. I have seen people who keep a diary, a history of their cattle, so as to work out the relative value of each of the cows, whatever they might be. Well, that is a poor future.
Joseph dealt in futures, that is to say, he would have all the tribes go together. That is what is meant spiritually, and it is that that Paul had in mind when he said, "... raised us up together, and has made us sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus"not alone. It is a poor thing for anyone to think of going to heaven by himself. You say, It is worth going to heaven. Of course: but it is not God's mind you have before you, but your own mind. Joseph had the mind of God, and so did Jacob; hence he put Ephraim before Manasseh. He would settle the position; he would establish the mind of God in the two tribes; and the twelve tribes are going through according to Revelation -- going through into eternity. In the mind of God the twelve tribes never fail.
I would say that you would not be groaning about wishing to depart and be with the Lord unless you are only thinking of your present circumstances. It is a poor thing, and I do not think heaven cares for it, or thinks much of it. It is a poor sort of thing when we are sorrowful or troubled or short of business -- or whatever else it may be that disturbs us here -- to begin to talk of going to be with the Lord. I would rather say I would wait for the brethren. Of course, Paul said that he desired to depart and be with Christ, which is far better, but then he did not judge that way, but waited for the Philippians. That is love. The purpose of God never fails, and we are in it. As was said to Daniel, "Blessed is he that waiteth, and cometh to the thousand three hundred and five and thirty days. But go thou thy way till
{419}
the end be: for thou shalt rest, and stand in thy lot at the end of the days", (@Daniel 12: 12, 13) -- wait for that -- the utmost limit of time that God has appointed, because the best will come in then. "I will raise him up at the last day".
There is not much more to say, but the passage in @1 Corinthians 2:7 - 16 corresponds with what happened in @Genesis 33; that is to say, when Jacob saw his brother. He had been afraid of him, and had had reason to be, but his brother was more conciliated than he thought he was. God does things for us as we take the right way, and Jacob now is in the right way. He is going to Canaan, to Isaac, and things are clearing up, as it were. He has settled matters with his brother, and now, what about Joseph? I read these verses because of Joseph's place in them. There were the two maidservants and their children, and Leah and her children. These were to go on one after another, and then, finally, Rachel and Joseph. Notice that I am putting Rachel first, because that is how it stands in the early part of the passage -- "Rachel and Joseph"; but the time comes for the review (and the review will come sooner or later) and it meant that the maidservants were first; Jacob intended that, and he intended Leah and her children to be second; and then the striking thing is that it is not Rachel and Joseph, but "Joseph ... and Rachel". That is to say, the divine idea we are speaking of, the idea of spirituality, triumphs -- only in a little way, but it is on that line. The mind of God must go through, and the mind of God requires spirituality, and sure it is that while Jacob thought of Joseph and would have done all he could for his beloved child, it is apparent that it is God who put Joseph first "Joseph ... and Rachel". Joseph is first and then Rachel. The idea of spirituality must go through. I, therefore, urge on the brethren to keep it before you; however little it may be, keep it before you,
{420}
and see if it is growing. So in both epistles you see the idea of spirituality constantly growing. It is included in the passage I read, "The spiritual discerns all things". You may wonder whether it is growing, but you should take it out, so to speak, and look at it, and see that it is growing. God intends it should you are not going to heaven without it. It is intended it should be there, and so it is. It is there in the presence of Esau; Joseph is before Rachel. The idea of spirituality must stand, and that is the point just now.
How are we going to heaven? The Lord is about to take us. He means us to be spiritual: we are to go there spiritually, and that is within the range of everyone. That is the idea in Joseph, and what I have in mind in this word is that we might be spiritual, young and old, that every one of us might be spiritual; "the spiritual discerns all things, and *he* is discerned of no one", @1 Corinthians 2: 15. How important and how advantageous that is! It implies triumph for spirituality, for if no one discerns the spiritual man, he will be triumphant. That is God's way. So in the letters to the assemblies, we have those that overcome. The end of each gives us an overcomer. There are great rewards for overcomers, and overcoming implies spirituality. May God bless this thought to us, for His name's sake.
{421}
SIMPLICITY
@Luke 22: 14 - 18, 21 - 30; @John 13: 31 - 34
I have read from these two gospels in order to bring out the idea of simplicity. Simplicity marked the Lord's relations with His own as here in flesh and He made it plain that it should mark their relations with each other during His absence. On the mount of transfiguration, as no doubt most here will remember, as the glory scene disappeared He was found alone with them -- the three disciples or apostles whom He had taken up with Him to that glory scene. It is said, "And suddenly having looked around, they no longer saw any one, but Jesus alone *with themselves*", @Mark 9:8. The Lord having returned to His ordinary way -- the lowly Man who could be seen at any time in Jerusalem or Judaea or Galilee, He intended that the simplicity that marked Him should mark them. That is what is in mind now, dear brethren, that this simplicity should be with us. It is a product of the Holy Spirit -- but primarily a product of the Lord Jesus. He is not here, He is gone to heaven, but the Holy Spirit is here -- a divine Person, as the Lord Jesus is a divine Person. Those who are indwelt by the Holy Spirit are also simple.
So I have read from Luke and from John. The other two gospels are more official, the one alluding to the assembly, for the only gospel that speaks formally of the assembly is Matthew. His words as to it are unmistakable, they are words of dignity. Matthew and Mark speak of official dignity in the service of the Lord as here in flesh. So, the assembly being the point with Matthew, he does not fail to treat of her in her dignity; of the wayward or lawless believer (a lawless person and yet undoubtedly
{422}
a believer) the Lord said, "If also he will not listen to the assembly, let him be to thee as one of the nations and a tax-gatherer", that is, a person unfit for fellowship. Mark on the other hand speaks about levitical service and immediately introduces the Son of God. Again it is a question of the dignity attached to the servants. They are to be regarded accordingly.
But Luke is sympathetic. He may have been a gentile, very possibly he was, and it is possible too that if he were a converted gentile he would carry the suitable comeliness and lowliness in his walk and ways which would befit an outsider called into the fellowship of God's Son. Luke is gracious. He addresses his correspondent, if I may so call Theophilus, with suitable grace and respect. Theophilus was evidently a man of distinction and hence required to be addressed accordingly. Luke is the man for that in both cases. He writes to the same person, and although somewhat less deferentially the second time, yet he says "O Theophilus". Luke is gracious and gives us a record of the last passover that is very touching.
So we have in Luke, "And when the hour was come, he placed himself at table, and the twelve apostles with him". The twelve are said to be with the Lord in the gospels as He partook of the last passover, except in John, who does not record that the twelve were with Him. Luke alone records that they were apostles. I mention all this, not because I wish to speak of the Lord's supper; I read about the passover in Luke. I read about the Supper in John, but we are not told what supper it was; we are left to assume that it was a family affair. That is what I am aiming at -- that we may cling to the family, not the natural, but the spiritual family. It is very encouraging that, as far as I know, all the Lord's natural relatives were saved, although at first they were very far from it. It shows how we might be
{423}
encouraged to keep an eye on our children, old and young, so that they might be saved. The Lord would set that example before us. If we have children or grandchildren or great grandchildren -- some of us have -- we should pray that they all may be saved, for God has no less a thought for our children. God would accord everything possible to them so as to encourage them in due time to seek salvation. The salvation of God is sent to the gentiles, and they will receive it. Why not our children? They should be the very first to receive it.
The idea of the passover -- the simplicity of it, and the fact that the twelve were there -- is what I have in mind now. In all these matters that are depicted in the verses read in both gospels the twelve apostles are there. The point was that the last passover, which developed into the Lord's supper, should be thoroughly accounted for, attested to, and that all should understand what was said and meant, especially that it was a family affair. Just for the moment I am confining myself to the passover, because that is how the scripture speaks of it: "when the hour was come, he placed himself at table, and the twelve apostles with him".
I am speaking now of facts relative to these great matters so that we may see how they enter into christianity at the present time. Other things were said to the Corinthians, very many and great things, but in that section the apostle says, "I have espoused you unto one man", showing that the assembly was in the apostle's mind, and that it was a practical thought. It was not simply the sisters of the assembly, but the saints of the assembly, brothers and sisters, old and young, were espoused as a chaste virgin to Christ, all pointing to this great fact of the assembly, and how it was in the apostle's mind when he wrote his letter to the Corinthians.
I go back now to the practical bearing of all this,
{424}
that what was said and done was to be attested in the most accurate way. The twelve in Matthew, Mark and Luke were seen when this last passover was celebrated, out of which the Lord's supper developed. This would remind us to be accurate in each thought as to it. The scriptural thoughts relative to this great matter must be clear so that we may be accurate, not only in what we say of it, but in what we say to the Lord in it.
I have now one or two further thoughts about the Lord's supper. The apostle Paul says, "I received from the Lord, that which I also delivered to you, that the Lord Jesus, in the night in which he was delivered up, took bread, and having given thanks broke it, and said, This is my body, which is for you: this do in remembrance of me", @1 Corinthians 11:23, 24. That and what follows as to the cup are the sum total of the actual facts that were delivered to Paul as to the institution and celebration of the Lord's supper. It is quite plain that it is simple. Its very simplicity is its charm, and we should not add to it. We should be content with the word that Paul gives us. The beautiful word of Paul's, in which he says that he has received from the Lord the things that I have quoted, should suffice in what we say to the Lord in that matter.
I now go back to the idea of simplicity and how the matter stood as the Lord said to the apostles that He would eat the passover with them and directed how it was to be brought about, what was to be done, and sent two of them to attend to it. He told them about the man who would carry the pitcher of water. And so the passover was to be celebrated. He had doubtless celebrated the passover every time it came round during His blessed life here, but this was the last time. I am speaking of it because it involves so much simplicity as to the Lord's life and ways. "If even we have known
{425}
Christ according to flesh, yet now we know him thus no longer", @2 Corinthians 5: 16. But Scripture does speak of Him as to what He did when He was here after the flesh. It is clear, however, that as to what the Lord's supper may imply it is a question of Christ in heaven. He would not celebrate the passover again. He says, "I will not drink at all of the fruit of the vine until the kingdom of God come". That would be another matter altogether. In the meantime the passover is in the minds of the three writers, and it is now for us to refer to 1 Corinthians -- "Our passover, Christ, has been sacrificed".
I am speaking of the simplicity that marked Christ. He places Himself at table and the twelve apostles with Him. There they are in position as associated with their Master. The Lord could see at that moment everything that should run down the ages in regard to this matter. Much controversy has happened and darkness has marked many in the so-called celebration of the Lord's supper; whereas the thing is simple. Then He says, and it often affects me greatly, "with desire I have desired to eat this passover with you before I suffer". These are His own words, and He meant to convey a family scene. That family was to be transferred, it was not to disappear, it was to remain and enter a new order of things. But at that time the Lord Jesus was there and He was expressing His feelings, that He should eat the passover with them before He suffered. The Lord would say, I want this time with you. The whole scene is transferred and could only be so by the Spirit. The Lord went up to heaven and left the eleven here. Mary is there, other women are there, and the brethren of Christ are there. Undoubtedly they are all there. There is evidence that the Lord's own brethren after the flesh were saved and transferred into the new order of things in which we now have part. In Galatians Paul says, I went up to
{426}
see Peter and spent fifteen days with him. A new order of things is in view, but the simplicity has not left it. I mention that to show you how simple christianity is. "Other of the apostles saw I none, save James the Lord's brother", says Paul; @Galatians 1: 19. Evidently James was saved, in fact it almost implies that he was an apostle; anyway, he was there.
How glorious the beginning, when, in all humility and simplicity the eleven and Peter were there! Mary the Lord's mother and other women also, and the brethren of the Lord. The Spirit would speak victoriously of what prevailed after the Lord went up to heaven. The Spirit had not yet come, but all that I am speaking of is mentioned there in @Acts 1. What a scene it was! What light and glory were in that upper room! Mary the mother of the Lord, what she could tell! The ground was secured for the Holy Spirit to come in after the Lord went up, and it is said that He was sent down from heaven. It is never said that the Lord Jesus was sent down from heaven, but it is said that *He* sent down the Holy Spirit from heaven. I am stressing what was there as the Holy Spirit came down from heaven, and chapter 2 unfolds what happened. Persons were there from other parts of the world, as if heaven would begin to count in vast numbers; persons to witness a new order of things and yet maintained in simplicity by the Holy Spirit.
We should have it in mind that we are at the end of the dispensation, but the Lord is insisting that the end should be as the beginning. He is working against any deterioration in what there is, but rather increase. There will be plenty of deterioration of this world -- the miry clay has come and we have to face it and feel it, but the very greatest thoughts are with us, with the saints. The greatest thoughts from heaven have come down here and do not deteriorate, because the Spirit of God is here. We should learn to be dignified
{427}
in our minds, not in any natural way but in the sense that "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him. But God hath revealed them unto us by his Spirit: for the Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God". These are the things we are dealing with today. I am impressed with the simplicity and the dignity of the whole matter, what is to go up, to be transferred to the scene where Christ is and where we are going. I felt it was necessary to bring all this before you, the simplicity of the Lord's relations with His saints at the beginning. The Spirit of God came in and found these relations and is maintaining them and carrying them on to the end, and enhancing them. We are supposed to increase steadily in these matters.
There was strife among the disciples which of them should be the greatest. "And he said to them, The kings of the nations rule over them, and they that exercise authority over them are called benefactors. But *ye* shall not be thus; but let the greater among you be as the younger, and the leader as he that serves". I want everybody to take that in, and my own soul, too. "I am in the midst of you as the one that serves". The Lord of glory was there with His apostles to partake of the passover for the last time. He desired with great desire that it should be so, that He should eat the passover before He suffered. During all that time He was ready to serve any one of them. It is to pass on to us the great matter of what christianity really is. It is Christ, "Christ in you the hope of glory", @Colossians 1: 27. It is a mystery, "Christ in you" meaning Christ among the gentiles, like Joseph in Egypt. He is in us, the hope of glory. Words cannot convey the glory. "For our momentary and light affliction works for us in surpassing measure an eternal weight of glory", @2 Corinthians 4: 17.
{428}
We are weighted so as not to be turned over by some trifle; holding on to what we are, what the Spirit of God has made us, because He is in every one of us. "He dwelleth with you, and shall be in you", @John 14: 17. He remains with us for ever. We must not turn aside, but go along simply in lowliness, serving one another in love. "I am in the midst of you as the one that serves". I do not know that I can say anything greater than what I am speaking of now. The devil is set on discouraging us, but all these things are among us. "Christ in you the hope of glory" -- that is what Paul says to the Colossians, persons who had never seen his face in the flesh. What is said of them is now said of us.
Now in @John 13: 31, Judas has gone out, I suppose meaning that the light drove him out. Light will drive Satan out, so that there is no need for any company of christians to have the devil among them at all; light will drive him out. Judas went out. The Lord said, "What thou doest, do quickly", and he went out and it was night. He has gone out, never to come back. So we are told here, "When therefore he was gone out Jesus says, Now is the Son of man glorified, and God is glorified in him. If God be glorified in him, God also shall glorify him in himself, and shall glorify him immediately. Children", (the simplicity of it!) "yet a little while I am with you. Ye shall seek me; and, as I said to the Jews, Where I go ye cannot come, I say to you also now. A new commandment I give to you, that ye love one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one another". That is the great final matter of what I am saying, and the final matter of John's gospel and of the Bible. It is the question of love. One who has not love is nothing. He is nothing. I simply am nothing if I have it not, whatever else I have. Christianity is Christ, but the Spirit is here and Christ is in heaven. "A
{429}
new commandment I give to you, that ye love one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one another. By this shall all know that ye are disciples of mine, if ye have love amongst yourselves". It is the mutual side of Christianity. Whether there were twelve apostles, or Paul, or Barnabas or others, it is "amongst yourselves". It is to dignify the position wherever we may be dwelling -- "love amongst your selves". "By this shall all know that ye are disciples of mine, if ye have love amongst yourselves".
May God bless the word to us!
{430}
INDIVIDUAL AND COLLECTIVE BLESSING
@Isaiah 51:1, 2; @Acts 10:44; @1 Thessalonians 4: 17; @Ephesians 2: 6
There is such a thing as individual blessing, and I have in mind that Abraham represents this thought. We could hardly find a more distinguished person to represent it. One who is the progenitor of millions, the father of all believers, is here taken to be alone -- as Jehovah says, "I called him alone, and blessed him", @Isaiah 51:2. Many believers are unattached and elect to pursue a lonely, individual path, whereas there are companions for us, but Abraham was called alone. God had him in mind for great distinction and "called him alone, and blessed him". Great glory was in the mind and heart of God when this event occurred.
Stephen, the martyr, begins his address to the Jewish leaders by saying, "The God of glory appeared unto our father Abraham, when he was in Mesopotamia". "The God of glory!" The glory was not shining just then, but it would shine, and is shining now -- "the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ". We are to behold that glory now. It enters into assembly services. "We all", it is said, "... are changed into the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord", @2 Corinthians 3: 18 -- a very simple statement which fits into what I have in mind. None of us is to be alone ultimately, though we may have to be according to the wisdom of God as Abraham was, for he was called alone. God had His own thoughts and waited His time for the display of them, but they were there. They were in His heart. We are told that in the days of Noah God had certain things in His heart. They were not disclosed. God has a right to keep His
{431}
mind to Himself and so the mystery was not disclosed, the mystery "since the world began"; it was kept secret. God has a right to these matters, to keep things secret, and He has a right to take any one of us up as alone, it may be to discipline us, as the brethren are obliged to separate from us. That happened at Corinth. The grace of God superabounded in that case and the man that was selected for judgment was released earlier than it might have been expected. Paul himself, it would appear, was peculiarly affected that the release should come so soon. The Corinthians were not ready for it -- they kept him in ward -- but heaven had already acted in the case. The suggestion at the outset was that his spirit might be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus, not saved here in time, in ordinary circumstances; but it was saved -- the spirit was released and his body, too. Paul had tidings of this with great joy. The release from the sentence of judgment is God's matter. The Lord Jesus has committed to His people the right of remission of sins. The Lord Jesus breathed into the disciples and said, "Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them", @John 20: 23. Not that they will be, but they are! It is immediate. So it was that the man at Corinth was released, and did not have to wait for the day of the Lord Jesus.
The present day is the greatest of all days in the moral sense; it is a day of remission, and remission committed to the Lord's people -- the lovers of Christ, those whom He can rely on, those whom He can trust. There are very few, but they were there at the beginning and the Lord saw to it that they should be trustworthy and so communicated to them His own Spirit. Thus they would act according to heaven. So at Corinth this man, being awakened, had his sins remitted, though not yet by the saints. The assembly was not ready for the great matter, but
{432}
heaven was. The apostle has to encourage the brethren at Corinth to act like heaven, because that is the position. The assembly is to reflect what is in heaven. Corinth was not ready for that. Many of us may not be ready for it; we may have grudges against each other and are not ready for forgiveness, whereas heaven is. The Lord says, "If thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there rememberest ..." (@Matthew 5: 23), as if God would wait until you get to the altar to remind you. It is not suggested that the man's wife or his children reminded him -- "If thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there rememberest that thy brother hath ought against thee; leave there thy gift before the altar, and go thy way; first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift". Leave it at the altar, heaven will take care of it. You will all remember how Abraham scared away the fowls that took his offerings. He took care of his offerings. Offerings to the Lord are to be taken care of -- the altar is the custodian of them. The offering would wait our coming back to do the service of heaven. Seek thy brother's forgiveness first. The whole scene in the sanctuary is to be marked by the spirit of forgiveness; none of us should be there with any unforgiven sins. None of us should be there having matters unsettled with our brother; the sanctuary should be free of all such things. Heaven is free. Joy is the order of the day in heaven. "Joy ... in heaven over one sinner that repenteth, more than over ninety and nine just persons, which need no repentance", @Luke 15: 7.
So there is this idea of individuality and Abraham is selected of God to exhibit it. "I called him alone, and blessed him, and increased him".
Having said so much I should now like to point out that individual matters that need divine attention will be attended to by God. The epistle to the
{433}
Romans unfolds to us the individual needs of the believer and how they are met. They should be met because God would have us attached. God has in His mind that every one of us should be attached. Many are unattached, remaining in an individual state, relation or circumstance, as it would seem in the person's mind, for ever and for ever. But God would have us, those who are professedly believers, to be attached. Those who are unattached suffer accordingly; their countenances are not bright and free and happy if they have no true companionship. The other verses I have read are to bring out the blessedness of attachment according to God.
The epistle to the Romans is to bring out how individual needs are met. A believer (or even an unbeliever) is taken up as unattached in Romans; his position as such is accepted, and it is according to the mind of God that he should remain unattached until his needs are met.
I am under the impression that there are unattached persons here who should be attached -- and perhaps attached persons who possibly may need detachment, but I am now seeking to bring out the thought of attachment. @Acts 10 is peculiarly intended to help us on this line. Cornelius is an excellent example of what I have in mind. It is said of him "There was a certain man in Caesarea called Cornelius ...". This is an introduction by heaven of this remarkable man Cornelius. "A centurion of the band called the Italian band". It is a heavenly introduction. Have you ever had such an introduction? It is questionable whether there ever was one who received such an introduction as Cornelius. Heaven is speaking to him and he is really unattached. He is a centurion, a military man, but he has already a place in heaven, a memorial in heaven. Cornelius had built up a memorial in heaven, and I doubt whether there ever was a man of his kind of which
{434}
this is said earlier. An angel came to him and "when he looked on him, he was afraid, and said, What is it, Lord?" His answer is quite respectful, which is important if we are endeavouring to get light, or to be attached according to God. It was in the mind of heaven that this man was to be attached according to God. I want to show you how it came about.
So the answer was, "Thy prayers and thine alms are come up for a memorial before God". He had a memorial up there. He had not gone up there himself yet (he would go), but he is fitted for heaven already. We speak of those who have gone to be with the Lord as having gone to heaven, which is hardly accurate; it is better to say that they have gone to be with the Lord. Cornelius is undoubtedly marked out to be in heaven. It is a heavenly time, and Cornelius is coming into this. Others had come into it among the Jews, a few among the gentiles, but not any Corneliuses. He is intended to be a leader. But what I am dealing with now is that he is building up a memorial in heaven. Many have memorials on earth now, military ones, but Cornelius had built up a memorial in heaven and yet he had not the Holy Spirit. We could hardly say he had peace, or was justified in the ordinary sense in Romans, but he was building up a memorial in heaven, which indicates what a dispensation we are in. God is working in His own way. Apollos was taken to two persons to be shown the way of God more exactly. Many of us are very inexact about God.
If we are clerks or bank managers we are accurate enough, but when it comes to scriptural things we are very inaccurate. Aquila and Priscilla took Apollos to them and showed him the way of God more exactly, so Cornelius is signalised in this way as having a memorial in heaven before he had the Holy Spirit. There are many questions raised about
{435}
this, but the answers to them all are in the Scriptures. This man was building up a memorial in heaven and in that sense was preparing for attachment.
I go on now to the attachment in verse 44: "While Peter yet spake these words, the Holy Spirit fell on all them which heard the word". Cornelius had a number of persons when Peter came, and he said, "we are all present". Heaven saw the intent of their minds; it was not to speak about this brother or that brother, or this event or that, but to hear Peter -- the evangelist of heaven, the messenger of heaven. It was that Peter should say things by which this man should be saved, and his companions should be saved, that they should all be released from encumbrances and no longer remain unattached, that they had come together. It was a great time; a time that extended far beyond that house of Cornelius it extended out to the gentile world -- we are benefitting from it in this room tonight. Perhaps you have never heard about this before; but what I am saying is the truth. However many questions there may be in minds here, it is for each of us to take it up and see that it is true. Cornelius did not yet have the Holy Spirit; he was not redeemed, but God was building up for him in heaven a memorial. This is Cornelius's memorial and he deserves it. The word as to him is, "Thy prayers and thine alms are come up for a memorial before God" -- not simply to heaven, but "before God". Peter's word was that he should be saved. He should tell words to Cornelius and his company as to how they should be saved; that is, relieved of everything that would encumber them morally.
What I want to show you now is that "while Peter yet spake these words, the Holy Spirit fell on all them which heard the word". That is to say, heaven did not wait for Peter; heaven is greater than Peter, greater than all the apostles. It is a
{436}
question of God. So it is that "while Peter yet spake ..." and he spoke well, I need hardly say. He was now announcing in Cornelius's house, and they were all there together in one place, just as at Pentecost. We should be together in affection, but here in Cornelius's house they were all together actually. They had come to hear the gospel word by which they were to be saved, one of the greatest matters, and in effect it was the opening of the door to the gentiles. It was Peter using the keys of the kingdom. He was to use those keys to let in these people; to let them into the kingdom of heaven -- the kingdom of God. It was a question of being attached.
"While Peter yet spake these words, the Holy Spirit fell on all them which heard the word" -- not simply, 'which heard Peter'. It was a question of hearing and speaking the word of God. Timotheus preached the word, which is in a sense greater than preaching the gospel. The gospel is glad tidings, but the word of God has power in it -- "sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart", @Hebrews 4: 12. The word of God is a peculiar thing, and, while these people were listening to the word that Peter was saying, "the Holy Spirit fell on all them which heard the word".
These are Peter's words, but the word is the word of God. "*While* Peter yet spake ..." -- at that very minute -- it was one act, and it says "fell", which would connect with the statement in Luke's gospel that the prodigal's father fell on the prodigal's neck. It was the gracious intervention of heaven on account of these people in Cornelius's house that they might be sealed and possessed by the Holy Spirit, that He might be in them and they might form the assembly. Hence they were attached.
If there are those here who are unattached in that
{437}
sense I would ask you to hasten to become attached, become attached in God's way! Attachment in that sense is the collective idea. You have been on individual lines too long, you are not getting the good of the brethren. Perhaps you have been obliged to alienate yourself from them. There is a way of recovery so that you should again become attached -- it is by the Holy Spirit, who fell on these people while they were listening to Peter's words.
Now in Ephesians we read, "... even when we were dead in sins, hath quickened us together with Christ, (by grace ye are saved;) and hath raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus". The word 'together' is what is in mind. We are made to sit down together, meaning that no christian should, or does if he is intelligent, think of going to heaven by himself. We are to go together, a much more blessed thought. It is due to God and the brethren that we should think of the brethren in that way, that we are all going up together. "Hath raised us up together"it is an anticipative thought, not actually true yet, but it is true in order to bring out the great facts of the dispensation. We are viewed already as seated in the heavenlies. "Raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus". But in view of the ages to come it is that "he might show the exceeding riches of his grace in his kindness toward us through Christ Jesus". The title is that our place is in heaven; our place is in the assembly here below *de facto*, but our place is in heaven, and it is that when the time comes we should show the exceeding riches of His grace in His kindness toward us through Christ Jesus.
Now finally I want to speak of what is to happen at the coming of the Lord. "Then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up together with them ...". I want to call attention to the word
{438}
'together'. This should preclude any thought of being apart or unattached. Our feelings toward each other should be so intense that we are glad when the opportunity arises to be together. "Then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up together with them ...". One might say, Well, it is a blessed end to go anyway; but the thought is that we are going *together*, being caught up *together* and being with the Lord for ever and for ever. The great event will soon happen. "Then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air and so shall we ever be with the Lord". May God bless His word to us all!
{439}
MAINTENANCE
@Luke 10:35; @2 Samuel 19:31 - 39; @1 kings 17:8 - 16
I read these scriptures because they present to us the idea of *maintenance* in certain characteristic persons, not only in the sense of food, but in the sense of all that is needed in a given position. It is very much before men at the present time, but now we are dealing with what is with the people of God, what is of divine ordering in the kingdom of God.
The idea of maintenance, or, if I may so say, departmental maintenance of persons or things, is common. In David's kingdom it was very extensive and each department had its head. The service of God, food, the army, all these, speaking simply, were departments that had *heads*. In David's time you will remember the idea of twenty-four was inaugurated in the division of time. It is carried down to the New Testament and helps us in the understanding of the present dispensation and the coming one, especially the latter, because in the coming one the numeral twelve is very pronounced, especially in @Revelation 21. The book of the Revelation came in long after the inauguration of christianity, consequent upon certain exigencies that arose and have arisen and are now existent, involving the severest judgments of God. The book is full of this. And as brethren, saints, and followers of the Lord Jesus, we are to become conversant with that era. The Spirit says in the beginning of the book (chapter 1: 1, 2) that it is the "Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave to him, to show to his bondmen what must shortly take place; and he signified it, sending by his angel, to his bondman John, who testified the word of God, and the testimony of Jesus Christ, all things that he saw". So that we have a plain and brief
{440}
statement of the whole matter as to the Apocalypse one of the severest periods in the course of time. It only requires that we should read the book and we are promised a premium, so to speak, to do so. We are blessed if we do it, and if we do not do it we shall lose, we shall not understand the times.
So David, as I said, divided time into twenty-four courses of persons in order to facilitate the government, inclusive of the service of God, the singing, so that there should be no time lost. It is a very important matter that time should be preserved and not wasted. We are to redeem it. And so it is that David used time well, Solomon also. Solomon divided time up, especially for administration of food.
The food question was the prime question in his day as it is in ours, never more so than it is now.
So I come to this matter of maintenance, which involves food and other things also. The first person in mind is the man of @Luke 10, a well-known gospel subject. Luke is full of these subjects, for he is most evangelical. What is particularly needed today is *the word of God*, so that the mercy and goodness of God expressed in the death of Christ should come home to men. God hates the disposition that assumes that His things can be left at will and taken up at will or may not be taken up at all. So the word of God is to be preached, and not only the glad tidings, which involves the idea of joy and gladness. Those who do preach would do well to take note that it is so -- that we should *preach the word*. Not, indeed, that the glad tidings should be neglected or misused, but that the word of God in all its significance should be used. The first mention we have of it in Scripture is in @Genesis 15. It is spoken to Abram. And it runs down to the present time and is now touched on so that we might have in mind that God's word carries with it is own penalties if we neglect it and its own joys as we accept it. "Thy words were
{441}
found, and I did eat them", says Jeremiah, "and thy words were unto me the joy and rejoicing of my heart", @Jeremiah 15: 16. Where there is neglect of it, the penalties will come. God is slow to anger, He is long-suffering and merciful, but still the days of penalty are fixed and they are sure to come.
Now the gospel is in mind in @Luke 10 and I have selected verse 35 because it speaks about the maintenance of the man who has been rescued from the thieves; his wounds have been bound up and oil and wine poured in, and he himself carried to the inn. That was preliminary. The Samaritan, however, remained all night with him, which is a good suggestion as to evangelical service -- remaining with the convert or the man who, as Scripture says, is convicted of all, judged of all, and who falls down and worships God. A man like that is turned into a worshipper. He is to be in mind after meetings -- the ministry meeting, the Bible reading, and all such meetings. The man is in mind. But first he is carried and cared for, however far the distance, which may be considerable, because he is to be taken to the nearest town, so to speak, the nearest hotel and, to extend the thought, perhaps the nearest hospital.
Then the man who journeyed is a Samaritan, one who is not affected by the claims of the Jews specially. There are many against and for the claims of the Jews. Heaven knows them, and what they need, but heaven is not speaking of the terrible pouring of apostate Jews to the east. Let the nations struggle about it, yet heaven knows exactly what the mind of God is as to them and will carry out its behest in time, as in the case of Cain. Whilst he was a vagabond and murderer, yet Jehovah put a mark on him. That is the present moment. It is a prophetic idea, that God has put a mark on His ancient people, and woe betide the nation that disregards it. So that we christians, believers in the Lord Jesus, are not
{442}
indifferent to or neglectful either of this great matter of the Jewish problem. Their time will come, and the land will be theirs. The uttermost north will find out to its loss in due course that it cannot attack them with impunity. God has His eye on them and will take care of them.
This Samaritan who journeyed is not in any sense to be regarded as obligated to the Jewish nation. He is a journeying man, and withal a typical merciful man, a man that noticed what had happened through the thieves. He had all that was needed with him. He had the things with him, he knew what to do and he did it. He had skill. Then he had also the beast, that is to say, the means of power. It was not a vehicle, it was a beast, a creature of God included in the living creatures. They are all viewed as of God, they belong to God, and they become types and symbols of mercy and goodness. The four living creatures as over against the twenty-four elders represent what God is in a creative sense, how good He is! Every morning brings its testimony, as the scripture says, of freshness, "new every morning". And that is really what is meant in the symbolical book to which I have already alluded, the book of Revelation, that these four living creatures are living, they are part of God's creation. They do not refer to man-made things but to God-made things, such as God can use. Even creatures have a certain amount of affection. God has placed it in them. They are next to men; the field animals are our neighbours, so to speak. God says to Job, as to a certain creature, the behemoth, "which I made with thee", @Job 40: 15. They were made on the same day as man, the land animals, the domesticated animals, and we do well to have respect for them. The Scriptures warn us not to be cruel to our beasts; they are under God's eye as His creatures.
So the Samaritan represents the embodiment of
{443}
mercy, in fact rising to a type of the Lord Jesus, no less than that. And the idea of maintenance comes into it, as I have said. "On the morrow", we read, "as he left, taking out two denarii he gave them to the innkeeper, and said to him, Take care of him, and whatsoever thou shalt expend more, I will render to thee on my coming back". That is to say, the Samaritan is coming back. There are better times coming, dear brethren. Not a Utopia as the natural mind would suggest, but what *heaven* would suggest will come in course of time. The symbol now that I am dealing with -- the first one -- is the case of a poor sinner saved by grace, for that is what it is, and how he is on our hands. No one can say in the light of christianity that it is not his affair. The priest and the levite passed by on the other side, but the Samaritan not only rises to a type of Christ but at the same time represents the principle of mercy in christians. We are to be merciful. We are to have love among ourselves and to do good unto all men. And in bringing this man to your notice I would like you to carry away with you the simple thought of the maintenance of a sinner saved by grace. He needs to be maintained. God will do for him above all that we can ask or think. God will care for him abundantly, but at the same time it is given to us to do the same: to extend mercy as needed. And what a time of distress from physical need it is, but above all, dear brethren, from spiritual need. And christians only can meet that. I say that advisedly. Christians only can meet that and it is our obligation to do it. So I leave it with you. It is a sinner saved by grace, his wounds bound up, and himself taken to the inn, the nearest hotel, the most suitable. And then we are told that the man whose love, mercy and grace are shown, stayed there all night with the man. That is the test. It is all very well to deal out a little money and perhaps
{444}
some food, but to stay the whole night at an hotel with the man touches the heart. It is the mercy of God that is being shown by the man who does it.
I pass on to the next instance -- Barzillai. David says to him in @2 Samuel 19: 33, "Pass thou over with me, and I will *maintain* thee with me in Jerusalem". That is the word -- a very full, comprehensive word, and well understood in all departments of life -- the idea of maintenance. This case is an old brother. We are very thankful for them and hope they will continue to attend the meetings and take in the ministry, whatever it be. They are needed. They have experience which young people have not. David says, "Pass thou over with me, and I will maintain thee with me in Jerusalem". The Lord has been pleased to take many of the older ones, brothers and sisters, in one's own time and more particularly in recent times, and there are more who will go to be with Him soon if He does not come before. The Lord will take them. He has a right to do that. He has rights over us, too, as to our aged ones, that we should not neglect them, because we are apt to forget that they did not neglect us when we were young and they were able to help us. They carried out God's will in their way, and now it is the turn of us who are young to take care of them. We are told in the first epistle to Timothy that widows are not to be put on the list unless they are sixty or older, that is to say, they are not to be a charge on the assembly. But that does not mean that someone must not care for them, and the alternative is that the descendants must take on the responsibility. God is showing to us in such a requirement that He has great regard for the assembly, far greater than we have been accustomed to think. It is His vessel, His immediate means of operation through all time. There is no vessel outside the assembly which is taken account of in this way, and it is to be regarded
{445}
according to the dignity of it, so that certain charges are not to be levied upon it.
Barzillai was a very aged man, we are told. But that is not all; a very great man, the word 'great' meaning 'rich'. He was a very great man, which means that he was a rich man, so rich that he could maintain the king of Israel when he was in rejection; so all the more did he deserve to be taken care of by the king. And the king was not behind in his desire to take care of Barzillai. But then Barzillai was not in need, and not only that, he said he was too old to go to Jerusalem. That is what I want you to take notice of, lest anyone should think himself or herself too old to have part in the wonderful operations of the Spirit of God, to elect himself out of this and to go back to his farm, his business, his house -- a well-built one, no doubt, well furnished and embellished. Barzillai was going back to it, and he was going back to it to *die*. He knew he was going back to it to die.
"I am this day eighty years old", he says. Not very old even now, for some have lived to a hundred, but not many. I know one old brother who is a hundred and five, and he is not too old to be attending the meetings, he is the best attendant I know at the meetings. He is not too old to go to Jerusalem, and there are many others like him.
I am speaking now of going to Jerusalem, not simply attending the meetings on the Lord's day to carry through a show of religion, but to attend *all* of them and to join in them happily, too. Heaven is in that and glorying that old people are there. That is where Barzillai failed. He says to David, "*How long have I to live*, that I should go up with the king unto Jerusalem?" Well, he did not answer that question, and David did not either. How could he? Moses lived to be a hundred and twenty; Aaron lived to be a hundred and twenty-three; Joshua to be a hundred and ten; and how long others lived I
{446}
am not prepared to say, but anyway many lived longer than eighty years. And yet this old man, who is typically a christian, a worthy man -- the king kissed him, he had great affection for him and honoured him, for he had served the king well -- says, 'I prefer to go home to die than to come to Jerusalem with you'. He did not say that in so many words, but. David's proposal was, "Pass thou over with me, and I will maintain thee with me in Jerusalem". How is it going to be with our old brothers and sisters? A few days, a few years -- and die? There are some places in this country where people go down to die, whereas the idea in David's mind was that Barzillai should go over with him and be maintained with him in Jerusalem. I may transfer that thought to the Lord's wishing us, however old we may be, to be at the meetings in due time, especially when speaking is going on that is kingly, that belongs to David. Great things are going to happen. The Lord says to Nathanael, "Thou shalt see greater things than these", @John 1: 50. And I would say to any old brother or sister that you will see greater things than these. Even the meetings are going to be greater. I am not saying that they are going to be larger or that there is to be a great revival, nor am I denying it. I am saying simply that it is a time of great things and greater things and we cannot afford to miss it.
So I would urge all the old people to attend the meetings. One old sister of whom we read in @Luke 2 lived, as far as I can make out, to be a hundred and six -- Anna. She was a prophetess, contemporary with Simeon. Simeon prophesied about the Lord Jesus that He should be for the fall and rising again of many in Israel, and he was ready to go when Jehovah wanted him. He says, "Lord, now thou lettest thy bondman go, according to thy word, in peace". But Barzillai did not say that. He said, "How long
{447}
have I to live, that I should go up with the king unto Jerusalem? I am this day fourscore years old and can I discern between good and evil? can thy servant taste what I eat or what I drink? can I hear any more the voice of singing men and singing women? wherefore then should thy servant be yet a burden unto my lord the king?" He is asking questions, but in his mind they were to be answered in the negative, that is to say, that he should not go to Jerusalem, whereas David is saying he should and he would maintain him there. You say you cannot hear and cannot enjoy the singing. But why not? The Lord has graciously furnished the means for the intelligent service of song, and here is a brother who is saying that he cannot enjoy it! You will understand I am paraphrasing the passages only to bring the facts before us. Barzillai is saying he cannot enjoy the voice of singing men and singing women. But why should he not? As far as I know, the old brothers and sisters are enjoying the singing "Singing and making melody in your heart to the Lord", @Ephesians 5: 19. It is a way of being maintained for God and for Jerusalem, to be able to sing the precious songs that God has furnished us by His Spirit. I need not say more, but you can see what I mean, that Barzillai elected himself out of the greatest things. The coming of the Lord is imminent, it is about to happen at any time, and who is there -- is there a brother or sister who will elect himself or herself out of the great things that are about to happen? On the contrary you will say, 'I want to be in these things, I love the Lord's appearing'. That is the thing.
I finish with @1 Kings 17 just to bring out again this matter of maintenance. It is a question of the testimony here, because it is a question of the prophet and the prophet usually stands for the testimony. Elijah was at that time the mainspring of the service
{448}
of God in the testimony. He had to flee from Jezebel, as we read in chapter 19, but the Lord restored him -- a word that I would pass on to all the old brothers and sisters. If they have been tripped up or something has happened which has caused discipline, well, it happened to Elijah, and yet Elijah was caught up to heaven without dying! What a thought that is -- the possibility of going to heaven without dying! It is within the range of every brother and sister today. It should stir us up and invigorate us. And in the meantime, if something has happened, we may be restored, cleansed from it, made fit and kept from falling: as Jude says in his epistle, "Now unto him that is able to keep you from falling, and to present you faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy ...". (verse 24). It is a wonderful thing to have in mind, and surely it should be an incentive to be maintained here and be used to maintain others, too.
Elijah had been fed -- maintained -- by the ravens, and he drank of the brook. But the brook dried up, which may happen. Then the word of Jehovah comes to him, saying, "Arise, go to Zarephath, which is by Zidon, and abide there: behold, I have commanded a widow woman there to maintain thee". Not simply to maintain the prophet but to maintain him *there*, where she lives. That is, it is a local position, and Elijah is to be maintained in it. And we may therefore think of local positions with peculiar satisfaction, for it is a question of being maintained by God, and if we have a commission from God, which Elijah had, then how great the matter is, to carry on in the local position, wherever it may be, and do something for the testimony. The widow woman was to maintain Elijah there in that place, Zarephath. She had great questioning about it, because he met her at the entrance of the city and we are told what she was doing; she was
{449}
gathering two sticks to prepare whatever food she had that she and her son might eat it -- and both die! Now this is serious. It is very serious to die rather than to live and maintain the testimony of God. I urge every brother and sister that this is the point -- the maintenance of the testimony of God, in so far as you can do anything for it. The testimony of God is a very wide thought and each one of us can do something in it to maintain the position.
I would close with that, so that we may carry it away with freshness and know that wherever we are the testimony must go on. Whatever it may cost me, let it go on. Let the circulatory principle be with us, whatever we have got, even if it be means or food. There is a remarkable testimony in regard of the circulation of food and we may well thank God for it. It is of God. God does the thing in an immense way, and He puts it upon us to circulate whatever we have amongst the brethren. The story of Elijah and the widow woman is well known, but perhaps not well enough. It is not simply Elijah, but *the testimony of God*, that must be maintained; not just carried on, but *maintained*, and each one of us can do something to maintain it.
{450}
READING ON @REVELATION 16
J.T. In @Revelation 15: 1 John says, "I saw another sign in the heaven, great and wonderful: seven angels having seven plagues, the last; for in them the fury of God is completed", that is preliminary to chapter 16. These seven plagues are said to be "the last", as if they would finish the judgments of the earth. After this, in chapter 17, we have the judgment of Babylon, the great whore, which is completed in chapter 18. Then chapter 19 is the Lamb's wife and the chapter proceeds to tell us about the Lord coming out of heaven riding on a white horse. We have the completion of the judgments of God pretty much in these chapters. In chapter 15 we see those who had gained the victory over the beast and its image standing on the sea of glass "having harps of God". Now, however, it is a question of the direct judgment of God, so that the judgment is executed on those who have the mark of the beast. The history of the beast is given to us in chapter 13, but here it is on men who had the mark of the beast that the judgment is poured out.
Ques. What is the import of the fact that the temple from which the voice speaks is filled with smoke from the glory of God and His power, according to chapter 15: 8?
J.T. In that chapter the seven angels who had the seven plagues came out of the temple clothed in pure bright linen and girded about the breasts with golden girdles. Then we are told, "And one of the four living creatures gave to the seven angels seven golden bowls, full of the fury of God, who lives to the ages of ages. And the temple was filled with smoke from the glory of God and from his power: and no one could enter into the temple until the seven
{451}
plagues of the seven angels were completed". So the service of God on the earth would be stayed until these bowls of fury were poured out. We as christians now belonging to the assembly have entrance into the temple of God -- we are it indeed -- "Do ye not know that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you?" (@1 Corinthians 3: 16); so at the present time we are to understand and have part in the service of God in His temple. But here there is no service till the fury is poured out. It is not the present period that is in mind, but the future. In the meantime the service of God proceeds, not in the sense of an earthly service, but a heavenly service. The assembly is the temple of God now; she grows to a holy temple in the Lord, that is in view of the millennium. In chapter 15 it is stated as to the temple in the heaven that "the temple was filled with smoke from the glory of God and from his power: and no one could enter into the temple until the seven plagues of the seven angels were completed". The temple service in mind there in verse 8 is still future. The seven angels are seen pouring out their bowls, the fury of God, on the earth. It is really a future matter, because this book contemplates the future; after chapter 4, it is a question of "the things that are about to be after these".
T.J.M. Is the instruction for us today that, if the service of God is to proceed, that which calls for judgment, as in this chapter, is to come under judgment in our souls now?
J.T. That would be the idea. We learn things anticipatively; God is working things out in the assembly in the most superior sense. The angels now are looking on at what God is doing in the assembly; the most supreme services are carried on there. The assembly's service is heavenly, though it may be literally on earth at the moment; whereas the future earthly service, as in chapter 15, is stayed until the
{452}
fury of God is poured out and the earth is cleansed. It is a question here of those who come under the mark of the beast and worship its image.
Ques. What would be the significance of the evil and grievous sore that characterises the judgment?
J.T. It would probably be some moral matter, something that would affect men in a moral sense. "The second poured out his bowl on the sea; and it became blood, as of a dead man; and every living soul died in the sea". This idea of the blood of a dead man is a gruesome thing literally, but it refers to apostasy in which there is no recovery. Christendom is doomed for non-recovery; there are no more relations with God when these things happen.
E.S.H. In spite of judgments they will blaspheme God.
J.T. Quite so; it shows how terrible the things are that are depicted here.
Ques. Does the beast represent power?
J.T. Yes, imperial power. We have to keep before us that it is the beast; it is a system properly, an imperial system but wholly under the control of the devil.
Ques. Would there be some analogy between this and the sores in the plague of boils in Exodus?
J.T. Those things may be alluded to, but this matter of the blood in verse 3 is to be noted. This blood as of a dead man is an awful thing literally, but we have to inquire as to what it is morally and how men are affected by it, that is, it is moral death, men thoroughly influenced by wickedness issuing from the beast. The words "as of a dead man" denote a terrible thing; there is no possibility of hope when this happens, the whole thing has become apostate. We have to inquire as to the import of this; pathologically it is perhaps impossible that anything could be made out of the blood of a dead man, but it is to show how terrible things are to be
{453}
when these things happen. There is no possibility of reviving the man, there is no thought of life, it is just moral death; and Europe is in mind, I believe, in all these things. It is for us to seek to understand what is meant by the blood of a dead man. There is no idea of gospel in it. The everlasting gospel is spoken of, but that is for the east, but here it is the western world where the great light of christianity has been.
E.S.H. Satan brought death to bear on the Lord and we have all the results in grace of His precious blood. I suppose these have refused the gospel and now Satan with all his power comes in in apostasy and we have the blood of a dead man.
J.T. Instead of the blood of Christ in which there is redemption, this is the blood of another man, not of Christ; it is the blood of a man dead morally, people made dead in that sense as having rejected the testimony of the gospel.
Ques. Jude, in speaking of the terrible state of things that will come in, speaks of those who are twice dead; would that have any bearing?
J.T. It would; it undoubtedly means apostasy.
Ques. Does what follows emphasise it, that "every living soul" is referred to, confirming what you said as to the hopelessness of the position?
J.T. The sea would be, I suppose, just humanity in these circumstances; it becomes blood "and every living soul died in the sea".
Ques. Does @Hebrews 12 stand out in sharp contrast, as to what we have come to?
J.T. Quite so -- "speaking better things ...". This speaks simply of judgment, there is no hope at all.
E.S.H. It is striking how even ministers of religion today have been and are speaking against the blood of Christ and its cleansing virtue.
J.T. "And the third poured out his bowl on the rivers, and on the fountains of waters; and they
{454}
became blood. And I heard the angel of the waters saying, Thou art righteous, who art and wart, the holy one, that thou halt judged so; for they have poured out the blood of saints and prophets, and thou hast given them blood to drink; they are worthy". So now we are dealing with blood, the blood of saints and prophets and these persecutors are given blood to drink. It is still the idea of the darkness of apostasy, yet this is said to be on the rivers and on the fountains of water; that is to say, the sources of refreshment and light ordinarily are now dealt with in this way. So we have in verses 5 and 6 the announcement of God's righteousness in dealing thus, "they have poured out the blood of saints and prophets"; this is a different blood; the blood of righteous men.
Rem. The harlot, who has her seat on the great waters, is spoken of as being drunk with the blood of the saints.
Ques. Taking a broad view of the chapter, it seems as if the elements are referred to, the earth, the sea, the sun and the air; would it be in contrast to the vast resources God has in the earth which at the moment He employs in the creation for the good of the assembly?
J.T. Well, we have to examine each case. We have now the waters in verse 4, the rivers and the fountains of water became blood. These are good in themselves but judgment is poured out, and they become blood; and then we have the record of the angel of the waters saying, "Thou art righteous". So He is turning what would be in itself profitable and useful to man to this kind of judgment, and it is called blood. Then we have the fourth angel who poured out his bowl on the sun, "and it was given to it to burn men with fire. And the men were burnt with great heat, and blasphemed the name of God, who had authority over these plagues, and did not
{455}
repent to give him glory". So that the sun, which, according to @Genesis 1, was made to rule the day and which was linked up with the lesser light to rule the night, itself becomes a terrible element of suffering for man. "It was given to it to burn men with fire". That must be also something in a moral sense which carries heat and suffering to men; not that they are burnt up, but what ought to be a mercy from God is turned into judgment. It is a question of men; what ought to be in favour of men is now against them in the most terrible way, showing how government may change over from being beneficial to men, as it was intended to be, and become persecuting.
Ques. Is this an answer to the feelings of Christ as made known in the Psalms? God is faithful to the death of His Son; it calls for judgment. I believe it has been said that the judgment of God is a necessity on account of the death of Christ.
J.T. The extreme judgment of God, of course, is the lake of fire, but these are governmental things we are dealing with in this chapter. The lake of fire is limited, but it is fire; but this is what was intended to be beneficial to men has now become the cause of their greatest suffering. Government, which should be for men, may turn into a very severe condition of things. So we have to watch where we are as to those who are elected in government. "The powers that be are ordained of God", but these very men may become the burning heat that we cannot stand.
Rem. They are made, in verse 9, to recognise that it is God who is executing the judgment.
J.T. Just so. The men are not at all affected in the sense of repentance.
Rem. They "blasphemed the name of God, who had authority over these plagues".
J.T. Yes. You can see what is ahead. We cannot just say when the assembly will be taken away and
{456}
the Spirit of God, too, but we see here what will happen in this nation where we are. It is most solemn to think of.
Rem. It speaks in verse 10 of the throne of the beast. That would be that organised government will be overthrown, but the beast will be left to be dealt with by the Lord Himself.
J.T. Just so; he is dealt with at the end of the book, the beast and the false prophet. So it speaks of the throne of the beast which literally in the early days of christianity would be Rome. In the address to Pergamos we read of Antipas being put to death there. But now God is taking the matter up, and they "blasphemed the God of the heaven for their distresses and their sores, and did not repent of their works". There is no evidence of repentance; and it is a very solemn thing if the government of the day is not recognising God. What can we expect?
Ques. Does this chapter deal more with the civil world and the next chapter with the ecclesiastical?
J.T. Yes. But here, instead of God being presented as in the gospel, as so loving the world, He is seen as a God of judgment, and there is no alleviation of it. "The sixth poured out his bowl on the great river Euphrates". It is not the west exactly, but rather the separation of the east from the west.
"And its water was dried up". It is a large river, of course, but it is a question here of something happening so that "the way of the kings from the rising of the sun might be prepared", as if God is about to call in the eastern nations, to use them as a means of judgment on the western nations.
Rem. Judgment on those who refuse the glad tidings.
J.T. Just so; that is at the back of all these things, the refusal of the gospel, the refusal of what God is in Christ. The time has come for judgment, the governmental action of God against the western
{457}
nations, even using the eastern nations, to whom the everlasting gospel is to be preached, to cause suffering on the western nations. So it says "that the way of the kings from the rising of the sun might be prepared". Then we have a terrible thought -- "I saw out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet, three unclean spirits, as frogs; for they are the spirits of demons, doing signs; which go out to the kings of the whole habitable world to gather them together to the war of that great day of God the Almighty". Then there is a parenthesis, "(Behold, I come as a thief. Blessed is he that watches and keeps his garments, that he may not walk naked, and that they may not see his shame.)" Then the parenthesis ends, and it goes on to say, "And he gathered them together to the place called in Hebrew, Armagedon". That is to say, that some tremendous number of armies or persons in military array are to attack them. Armagedon is in mind.
Ques. Would this be the same as chapter 9: 13 - 16?
J.T. That is something of the same kind, but having a different matter in mind. It is a question of woes. The Euphrates is in mind, but the voice is from the golden altar, the place of prayer. "Loose the four angels which are bound at the great river Euphrates". Now this is something to understand -- the angels who are bound; we have to look into history for that. For undoubtedly the influence of the Euphrates would refer to the Turkish empire for many centuries, but now it is not that the water of the river is dried up, as in our chapter; it says, "I heard a voice ... saying ... Loose the four angels which are bound at the great river Euphrates". We shall have to look into history for that, as to what influence had been holding back the barrier between the east and the west; and historically it would be the Turkish empire.
{458}
Ques. Would the drying of the river suggest it is no longer a boundary?
J.T. Yes, the barrier would be removed for the Japanese or the Indians or whoever God may use. The west is still in mind here, for these are western powers that are alluded to, showing that God is using the east to damage the west. The waters of the Euphrates being dried up, the way is clear for them. God is telling us what is there in the east and what He will do in the future; but we are in the west and God has the west in mind for judgment.
Ques. What is the bearing of all this on ourselves now? Is it not only a warning, but to exercise and stimulate us to be more urgent in gospel activity for men?
J.T. It is a question of having a right judgment of things, and then of being active in the gospel, for we are living in the gospel day and these things are imminent.
Ques. May I ask what altar is referred to in chapter 16: 7?
J.T. It is not the golden altar, but the idea of suffering, I think, rather than of prayer.
Rem. It would have a bearing on what you have said in regard to judging things.
J.T. Quite so. We are in the presence of all these things -- how are we feeling about it? Are we solemnised about it and turning to God, not only for our brethren but for men? The question is whether there is anything in Russia, for instance, that is in any way answering to God's testimony.
Ques. Is this to affect us that we might be found morally like those who have the victory over the beast in the previous chapter?
J.T. Quite so; what is said there is very beautiful -- "I saw as a glass sea, mingled with fire, and those that had gained the victory over the beast, and over its image, and over the number of its name,
{459}
standing upon the glass sea, having harps of God. And they sing the song of Moses bondman of God, and the song of the Lamb", and so forth. That is the thing to have in our minds.
Ques. What is meant by "Blessed is he that watches", in verse 15?
J.T. It is a voice, I think, to ourselves tonight -- to be very simple and practical, for the Lord is saying to us, "Behold, I come as a thief" -- 'I may come any moment', and then, "Blessed is he that watches and keeps his garments, that he may not walk naked, and that they may not see his shame". That is a voice to every one of us and to every christian, too, who is willing to hear it.
Rem. It reminds one of the Lord's word as to watching in @Mark 13, "Watch therefore, for ye do not know when the master of the house comes evening, or midnight, or cock-crow, or morning; lest coming suddenly he find you sleeping. But what I say to you, I say to all, Watch".
J.T. I have often thought of that. It is the chapter that speaks of all being in the hands of God.
Ques. Would you say God is watching the present developments on the earth?
J.T. He certainly is. He is watching what happens amongst the governments and amongst the people, and then what is going on amongst His own people.
Ques. What is the force of keeping his garments? In the last chapter it speaks of those who wash their robes.
J.T. We are supposed to have garments; to be clothed as priests unto God, and we want to be in that attitude. "The priest's lips should keep knowledge, and at his mouth they seek the law", @Malachi 2: 7. Then as to our garments, do we keep them clean or are they defiled by the circumstances we are in?
{460}
Your garments are washed as a believer, but you want to keep them.
Ques. Would this have peculiar application to Sardis where the Lord says the same thing, "I will come upon thee as a thief", @Revelation 3: 3?
J.T. Yes, and you have an allusion there to garments. "Thou hast a few names in Sardis which have not defiled their garments, and they shall walk with me in white, because they are worthy", @Revelation 3: 4.
One is comforted that those who are walking in the truth are of this class, and there are a good many, thank God; they keep their garments.
Rem. The condition of things around us today is such as will, if we are not careful, engulf us, and this comes in to show us what the end will be so that we should keep clear of it.
J.T. Yes, and thank God there are many brethren who are keeping clear and carrying on the service of God, and God is with His people. The thing is to keep our garments that they may not see our shame, that is to say, we are not to be exposed by any carelessness and are to keep our garments clean so that we can go on with the service of God.
Ques. Would it carry the thought of binding on our garments so that nothing is loose? I am thinking of the young man in @Mark 14.
J.T. Quite so, but there is a balance to the man that fled in the man in the last chapter, who is clothed in white and who is at the right side.
Ques. Would Jude's exhortation fit in there -- the thought of hating the garment spotted by the flesh?
J.T. Yes. The brethren will all notice that throughout this chapter we have before us there is so much stress laid on men. People glory in being men and having power, and so on; men are in mind in all this, and God's judgment is overtaking them, so it is a question of how all this is to be met. Man is giving up christianity and taking on something
{461}
else, he does not know what, and governments are not helping him.
Ques. What do you mean by 'a question of how all this is to be met'?
J.T. Whether we are judging things rightly: it is a question of how we are meeting all these things.
"Blessed is he ...". The west has great advantages; it is the part of the earth that was occupied by Japheth, that is the area which God has taken up to give the gospel to and to take the assembly out of; but it is going into apostasy fast, not only America, but this country too and most of the European countries.
Rem. When Paul came to these parts there was the spirit of Python there.
J.T. Yes. We have had to do with the east and certain persons from there, and how much they tell us about the power of demons and so on, but God is going to use the east in a punitive way for the west. But He has in reserve the everlasting gospel for the east; that is a great cheer to think of, but the west is about to be given up by God.
Ques. Who will be the nations who will walk in the light of the city?
J.T. I would say the eastern, the nations that are blessed, beginning with the Jews, those that are saved through the everlasting gospel.
Ques. Is it not remarkable that the first movement as to the birth of Christ came from the east?
J.T. Yes.
{462}
JOTTINGS OF READINGS ON S.S. NESTOR NO. 1
@2 Corinthians 3
J.T. Second letters usually convey the full thought in the writer's mind as amplifying and bringing in what is additional to the first. The great thought of glory marks this one.
P.L. Like the second giving of the law in Deuteronomy.
J.T. Yes, Moses is freer there than in Exodus. Glory is a question of what God is in Himself, coming in feelingly and at times showing Himself -- finding it convenient to show Himself -- by His glory He raised Christ the first day of the week. We get this more here than in the first epistle, in that we get the suffering side more, making way for the glory here, in this second epistle. We are now being helped to enter into the full thought of the Supper, the Lord's feelings entering into it peculiarly and glory connected with it. We are not at the fag-end of things, but at the opening up of the greatest thoughts. We get the Lord pent up in @Luke 22 waiting for the hour, but in chapter 24 He is free. Paul represents this but finds himself free in the presence of his companions as we eight on this ship. We would think of our brethren in Ireland and England entering feelingly into the Supper and thoughts of glory. The passover must come first. "With desire I have desired to eat this passover with you before I suffer", the Lord's supper opening up the dispensation and God's mind week by week. We are connected with a system of glory and it is opening up from glory to glory. "This passover" gathers up all that was in the Lord's mind from the beginning, then the new thing, the mount
{463}
of Olives in due time opened up in the twelve, but the Lord having Paul in mind -- His own man -- bringing out the Supper with a view to going from glory to glory.
P.L. "They go from strength to strength" -- not a fag-end, the spiritual side is glory.
W.S.S. "Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty", the apostle would say this in the enjoyment of the liberty himself.
J.T. We are here in the midst of things between East Ireland and West England where the brethren are having the Lord's supper, like John in the Spirit on the Lord's day. Circumstantially pent up, liberated in spirit. So Sydney and the whole continent of Australia was pent up but now relieved from domination, having got free as in @2 Corinthians 3, involving the second going up of Moses which relates to what is spiritual. We must also take account of the human side which involves feelings as in the Lord Himself, what He is capable of being affected by -- this marking the ministry. Paul himself also represents this.
P.L. "Jesus wept".
J.T. Also seen in John on Patmos. "I John, your brother and fellow-partaker", etc.
W.S.S. "How am I straitened!"
J.T. The Lord was straitened but was going on high and the Spirit was coming to fill out all He had brought in. Moses begged Jehovah to show him His glory. Jehovah said a great deal about Moses. Not just the letter which kills but the spirit. The Spirit gives the subjective fulness of things. The Lord's feelings are seen in @Acts 9. "Why persecutest thou me?" In @Acts 26 the human side is Seen -- "It is hard for thee", etc.
A.M. Might feelings as to Stephen affect Saul before conversion?
{464}
J.T. The Lord names what was going on in Saul's soul: "It is hard for thee to kick against the pricks". The human side is prominent in all this and should mark the ministry. There is power in feelings. Priestly power is needed at the end. How affecting, the three thousand converted in one day when they say, "Men and brethren, what shall we do?"
H.W. Reference to tribulation and patience in Jesus.
J.T. Read @Revelation 1: 9. See J.N.D.¬s note.
A.M. In @Revelation 1: 13 the Lord is girt.
J.T. But He is ungirt in Philadelphia. Hence He had the key of David to open, He is fully free there and this leads on to @Revelation 22.
P.L. Reference to Judah's prevailing in 1 Chronicles. Much said there about David, like Paul in 2 Corinthians.
J.T. What the Lord gave to John is like what the Father gave to the Son, the book of Revelation being the unfolding of what was in the Father's mind. See @Mark 13.
P.L. Reference to the mount of Olives and the enquiring there, the four brothers coming to Him.
J.T. It is an environment for development of the truth, levites needed, priestly power needed in abundance.
W.S.S. *Three* brothers were *selected* by the Lord at different times but in @Mark 13 four brothers come to the Lord enquiring, like ourselves today.
J.T. They were evidently young men. Young men are in view and are needed today. Forty years ago they were discouraged and given no place in the ministry.
P.L. Four suggests the universal side, like ourselves, having in view Africa, Australia, New Zealand and America.
J.T. The golden thread of feeling runs through the Revelation, e.g., silence in heaven (chapter 8),
{465}
involving sympathy with God and men. The elders in chapter 4, marked by feelings, say nothing till the living creatures fall down; these would represent the young brothers. In former days it was always the old brothers first. David said, I have been young and now am old. He made room for the young men at the end by lowering the age of the levites.
A.M. "God ... overlooked the times of ignorance".
Rem. Hence Paul raising Eutychus; David once young, then old, and Zechariah a young prophet, the angel is to run and speak to this young man.
J.T. Isaiah must have begun his service very young, for it covered so many reigns. Young men with feeling and priestly power are needed at the end. *Lord's day, August 24th, 1947*.
NO. 2
@2 Corinthians 4
J.T. The second epistle is to be noted as leading on to the service of God, glory entering into that, especially the Lord's supper, glory being reached from that point. We also have the thought of the believer's body as having part in this. We need to follow this up, going on to the body or "house from heaven". The believer there is contemplated in his raised condition; chapter 5 indicates the end reached; going on to the end of the chapter involving the service of God in new creation. (Verses 16 and 17 read.)
W.S.S. So that chapter 4 would give us the body secured here, then chapter 5 in resurrection and then new creation.
P.L. "Passing through the valley of Baca, they make it a wellspring ... each one will appear before God in Zion".
{466}
J.T. Humiliation attaches to our bodies, yet treasure is in them and glory is to be kept in mind. (Verses 8 to 11 read.) What is mortal is capable of carrying these great thoughts, it links on with what is universal and all is linked up with the "face of Jesus Christ". This has a practical bearing on us as here now.
P.L. Paul, passing through the upper districts to Ephesus, would be on this level. What preceded that at Corinth, including Apollos, would relate to the first epistle to the Corinthians.
J.T. We have the link of the truth working out through the medium of the servants, "the life ... of Jesus" working in our mortal bodies here. Paul here is the medium in which the glory is worked out.
P.L. "I became in the Spirit on the Lord's day". Shut off from our brethren as we are, we have this link on the Lord's day and the Spirit.
J.T. There is clearly a link between the Lord's day and the Spirit.
W.S.S. The "life ... of Jesus" -- would this be a reflection of the glory belonging to Him?
J.T. The body here implies that the highest elevation may be reached in it even though mortal; but the power of abstraction is needed and the admission of humiliation. The "dying of Jesus" links up with the mount of transfiguration. In the Lord's case the highest point ends in the transfiguration. He relinquishes the glory there to return, going down to die, to secure everything. All this is to be in our souls. Although having reached the highest point in the transfiguration, corresponding with @2 Corinthians 3: 18, the Lord returns to normal conditions. The apostle reaching the highest at the end -- the third heaven -- would indicate to us what can be reached in one person. Paul also is able to leave current things with all their humiliation to be
{467}
engaged with the highest things as seen in chapter 5: 16, 17 ("know no one according to flesh" ).
H.W. Would sonship be involved in this, although not mentioned in terms?
J.T. Yes. We know no one after the flesh. Christ in glory and all that stands connected with the first day of the week is open to us in the power of the Spirit.
P.L. Of Levi it is said "He acknowledged not his brethren", etc. Would that be knowing no one according to flesh?
J.T. He is available in abnormal conditions. We, too, are able to get out of flesh and blood conditions by the power of the Spirit. There is no limit as in the Spirit. We have here even departure to be with Christ touched upon in verses 1 - 4, yet leading up to the acme of God's thoughts in new creation. If it is in Paul, it is to be in others by making room for the Spirit. This eternal weight of glory we can all touch in measure as we turn away from all around. The power of abstraction is needed. This leads on to the service of God involving the Lord's supper, but we here (on the ship) are cut off from this. Paul and Silas in the prison were praising God with singing.
W.S.S. We are not to be discouraged by weakness or even to be overmuch occupied with things of humiliation.
J.T. Just so. Read verses 16 to 18. In the power of abstraction we are able to link on with all our brethren; life is to be working in them.
A.M. Is it a matter of the confidence that faith gives?
J.T. Read chapter 4: 13 - 16. The truth is seen working out in Christ, then in one man, Paul himself, and if in one man, then extending out to infinitude, the whole work of God being in view.
W.S.S. Read note to 'many' in chapter 4: 15.
{468}
J.T. This all makes our time here and the opportunities in it full of moment as seen in John in Patmos in the Spirit on the Lord's day. Yet he says, "I John, your brother". He is a brother to the saints. It is all intended to impress us with what the Lord can work out in one man.
W.S.S. Showing the power of abstraction?
J.T. Yes, we must make full allowance for John, what he was, the material God had to work on in one man. The possibilities open up the more you think of it. The apostle is thinking of their being brought into it.
A.M. Is the heave-offering of @Exodus 35: 5 the result of the glory coming down in Moses?
J.T. In @Exodus 34 we have what was worked out in Moses, then Jehovah passes by. It is seen worked out in Moses himself, what God is working out in one man. Then Moses comes down from the mount with the tables of stone, and the people are brought into it. His face shone and he calls the people to him. Read verses 29 - 32. It is all seen working out in one man, the primary reference being to the Lord Himself, and so in Paul, and as he returns to what is normal it can be worked out in God's service. So we have "Jesus alone with themselves" and "they descended". So we are brought in to contribute to the service of God. An eternal weight of glory is connected with this.
P.L. Mr. Rofe's hymn, No. 187, verse 3. (`456:1 in 1973 Revision -- Editor)
A.M. Would Moses¬ @Psalm 90 be in view here? "Let thy work appear unto thy servants, and thy majesty unto their sons".
J.T. The material required for all this was found in Moses primarily and then also in the people.
H.W. David gave largely towards the house of God and said to the people, "And who is willing to offer to Jehovah this day?" @1 Chronicles 29: 5.
{469}
J.T. The military David is to be distinguished from the personal David, the former (@1 Chronicles 22: 14) contributes one hundred thousand talents of gold; the latter (@1 Chronicles 29:4) three thousand talents only, but of the very best kind of gold, such material involving the kind of man needed, for it is here he refers to God as Head.
P.L. These thoughts are being worked out Colossianwise and Ephesianwise, all the saints being brought into the current.
J.T. J.N.D. was told by his father to improve the world by one man. He had to get free from the Church of Ireland and the Church of England and give scope to the Spirit.
A.M. Is the allusion in chapter 4: 7 to Gideon important?
J.T. Yes, things have to be worked out in himself first, then he can say, "Look on me and do likewise ... as I do, so shall ye do".
P.L. In Ezra and Nehemiah we have things working out in one man, involving the choirs and the feast of tabernacles.
J.T. Our minds are taxed by God's use of one man.
P.L. So we have Paul saying, "My intelligence in the mystery".
J.T. It is a question as to how usable one is, specially if young, whether as to material or skill. Paul speaks of his intelligence in the mystery, but in order that others may be brought into it.
P.L. For instance in John's overcomers.
J.T. Moses did not want to take on the service, so that God was wroth with him, but He would have him to go through with it. This is a young men's time, are they ready with the material and the skill to carry through God's thoughts? J.N.D.¬s writings set aside much rubbish and many have been helped.
A.M. Would "I John" in @Revelation 1: 9 refer to the material and in @Revelation 22: 8 to the skill?
{470}
J.T. Yes, "I John" is alongside of "I Jesus", which leads to the Spirit and the bride saying "Come". Sisters are not left out of this. Sisters are constantly brought in in all these cases. Miriam in relation to Moses, and the various women in John's gospel, the Lord having the feminine idea in mind set out in Mary Magdalene. God began with the man and the woman and ends with the Spirit and the bride.
W.S.S. Would the reference in @Exodus 35:25, "And every woman that was wise-hearted spun with her hands, and brought what she had spun" fit in here?
P.L. Would not 'spinning' involve the Colossian "joints and bands"?
W.S.S. Does it not lead up to the bride being seen "prepared as a bride adorned for her husband"?
J.T. Yes, and that leads to the Spirit and the Bride saying "Come". God will reach His thought. (@John 1: 1, 2 and @Colossians 1 referred to.)
P.L. Your opening remark at St. Pancras as to the Spirit and the bride would indicate the greatness of the thoughts in mind, involving the nearness of the assembly to Deity. But you were diverted from developing it.
J.T. To get the full thought of the nearness all the saints are required.
P.L. The heavenly city in @Revelation 21 shows the divine end reached in all.
J.T. The idea of the remnant does not bring us to the full thought of God. His thoughts may be carried through in a remnant, but it will not be a remnant at the finish.
P.L. A remnant is used in testimony.
J.T. Yes, to bring out devotedness. How is the full thing to be brought to pass? that is the point. How much God can do in a moment of time! God can complete His work in His people very quickly.
{471}
God works for Himself and He may have to do a great deal in a short time.
P.L. "Can a land be made to bring forth in one day? shall a nation be born at once?" @Isaiah 66: 8.
J.T. It is a great thing to be maintained in the joy of all that God is shortly going to bring in for Himself.
*Lord's day, August 24th, 1947*.
NO. 3
@2 Corinthians 5
J.T. It is in mind to enlarge on Paul's own personality and ability in the truth, representing it personally both in material and skill, for he is a skilled labourer. Read verses 20 and 21. We have the interweaving of Paul's own personality with the truth. Paul represented in himself material to be used, but also the skilled man, e.g., the two skilled workers in Moses¬ time, Bezaleel and Aholiab. @Matthew 16 shows Peter not only as representative material for the assembly, but also as the skilled minister to be used. Read @Matthew 16: 18, 19.
W.S.S. "Now he that has wrought us for this very thing is God".
J.T. This would refer to Paul personally and would scarcely go beyond him. It would link on with "We are ambassadors therefore for Christ". Again read verse 20 as portraying Paul, a man of skill.
P.L. Referred to Hiram, a "lover of David", who sent to Solomon both the materials and the man of skill to deal with them.
J.T. We see here a remarkable combination of things. The material is seen representatively not only in David but in Moses and Paul, and then we have to consider the skill that is needed. They are all skilled servants.
{472}
W.S.S. Does skill imply acting like God?
J.T. We begin with Him and end with Him.
H.W. To whom would the "we" of verse 20 refer?
J.T. It would be the "we" of dignity and refers to Paul personally though it might include others such as Timothy but Paul himself predominantly. In chapter 6 we have a continuation of the thought of the workman. (Reference to chapter 5: 1 and the believer's body.)
A.M. Is he calling attention to what is inward?
J.T. Quite so.
P.L. The same inhabitant is transferred from the realm of testimony to that of purpose.
J.T. Just so. Read verse 3. This is a solemn matter involving unreality, bad people, having in mind the necessity of dealing with them "found naked", the suggestion being that such would be without a body in which to shine for God. How are the two ideas to coalesce? How to identify the "house from heaven" developed from heaven with what God is forming in us now, or reconcile it with what we are literally, involves the whole scheme of Pauline doctrine. How mysterious it is that God can identify the house from heaven with what dwells in that which is liable to destruction! How marvellously the truth is worked out in our bodies! John says when we shall see Him we shall be like Him. Read verses 6 - 8. Our souls are to be nourished with these great thoughts. Wonderful things open up to our minds in Paul's doctrine in relation to our bodies. I hope I am not mixing things up. We walk by faith, not by sight. In the faith system these things are reconcilable, and we can abstract ourselves. The identity of each of us is seen even in a disembodied condition.
P.L. "Whether in the body I know not, or out of the body I know not", @2 Corinthians 12: 2.
{473}
J.T. The power of abstraction was well known to Paul and indeed to Peter too, and to all the apostles.
H.W. "For whether we are beside ourselves, it is to God; or are sober, it is for you" (verse 13).
J.T. This would involve ecstasy of which Peter also speaks. What wonderful experiences Paul had as in @2 Corinthians 12, the thorn for the flesh being needed to keep him down!
P.L. Reference to the judgment-seat (verse 10), and the penetration of God's eye.
J.T. We have to retire into what God is. Paul could not say whether he was in the body or out of it. When judgment comes the whole matter will have to be gone into. God alone has the understanding as we are dealing with mysterious things. You wonder if we go through very much to fit us for these things. Our minds are to have part in these things in the sense of material and also skill, judgment is to be thought of. Paul speaks of eternal judgment. What is that? We are to accustom our minds to the thought of eternal judgment, and then to be able to turn away from that to contemplate the great things God brings us into.
P.L. Paul would have passed before the judgment-seat in his spirit already.
J.T. Read verses 5 to 8. The idea of judgment would come in here as well as in verses 9 and 10. Then in verse 11 we have the idea of the "terror of the Lord", what God is against sin.
W.S.S. We shrink from it; it is a terrible contemplation.
J T. The gospel, while glad tidings, nevertheless carries the thought of terror with it in view of the great things God has in mind.
P.L. Referred to Abraham and the "horror of great darkness", @Genesis 15.
J.T. The first reference to the word of Jehovah is in that chapter, coming to Abraham as a vision.
{474}
What Paul went through in the three days of darkness would be similar. Material to go through these things needs this process.
P.L. In view of refinement?
J.T. "Our God is a consuming fire". God would bring us through.
H.W. Reference to @Galatians 6: 16, "As many as shall walk by this rule" (the rule of new creation) "peace upon them and mercy, and upon the Israel of God".
J.T. That is the abstract idea. In contrast with this Abraham has to go through the thing personally, then Jehovah makes a covenant with him.
W.S.S. Abraham says, "how shall I know?" (@Genesis 15: 8). Here in @2 Corinthians 5: 1, Paul says, "we know".
J.T. God gives him things and with it the terror. Read @Genesis 15:3 - 6. Notice the reference to righteousness in verse 6, it enters into @2 Corinthians 5.
Then read @Genesis 15: 7 - 18. After these experiences Abraham is now ready for the covenant. It is wonderful that one should go through this horror of great darkness. Tidings from Sydney tell us of one of our brethren having gone through a horror of great darkness. Then the smoking furnace and the flame of fire -- all referring to the death of Christ, as the means by which God brings these things to pass.
W.S.S. Is this needed in some measure for every one of us so that material may be secured for God's end?
J.T. There is the horror of great darkness on the one hand but on the other we have the things mentioned in verse 17 involving the power of God, and substance and light. There must be substance behind the smoke, as referring to the incarnation. The thought of material is worked out fully in the Lord alone. Only in Him could you get substance to go through.
{475}
P.L. "That holy thing".
J.T. Such a section as @Genesis 15 clearly implies the Lord going through things. How are we to understand the four hundred years except to see that Abraham had part in it all?
A.M. Would the 'burning bush' in @Exodus 3 link with @Genesis 15?
J.T. The link with Moses is clear and would lead on to the ark and the shittim wood involving endurance.
P.L. Hence the continuation of the testimony in the last days seen in 2 Timothy bound up with suffering.
J.T. All men God used *had* to suffer.
P.L. Does all this involve the difference between the objective school which would develop the Philistine element and the need for the subjective line?
J.T. There must be an Isaac, not only an Abraham; he is not to be the son of the domestic. Then we also have the reference to the stars, involving the greatness of what was in God's mind.
*Lord's day evening, August 24th, 1947*.
NO. 4
@2 Corinthians 6
J.T. The highest level was in chapter 5, "The love of Christ constraineth us", leading up to new creation. We return here, in chapter 6, to the idea of workmen, "as fellow-workmen, we also beseech". @1 Corinthians 3: 9, was referred to as explaining the thought of workmen, the idea of the reception of the truth has a great place in these two epistles. We have not only the light coming to us, but we are committing ourselves to it. The apostle says, "that ye receive not the grace of God in vain". He quotes scriptures and cites incidents where the truth is
{476}
verified in the servants. These thirty-seven items in verses 4 - 10 show how real his profession as a minister was. It was made good in him and he beseeches that it might be made good in them. @Isaiah 49: 8 was read, as suggesting a suitable scripture, primarily applicable to Christ but used to verify Paul's position as a minister.
In the gospels the Lord spares words. When we come to epistles we find much enlargement in detail, so Paul speaks of thirty-seven things that mark him, having latitude to do this. What could the Corinthians refer to as marking them? Was there any enlargement there? They were shutting him in by their worldliness; he appeals to them, "be ye also enlarged". Worldliness binds us up and the ministers, too, who seek to serve us. The Spirit of God is concerned with the state of the brethren. The apostle enlarged as a vessel reflecting what the Lord was. As the note to verse 12 shows, he had been driven in by their evil but now opened out.
A comparison was made between the Old and New Testament ministry; what latitude there is in the latter. The Lord goes through the cornfields and the disciples pluck and eat the ears of corn and the Lord approved it. There are no limitations on the divine side of the ministry.
The Spirit of God in Mark's gospel proceeds to the thought of the Son of God at once, this having a levitical bearing going on to Paul. There is no part of the Holy Scriptures to be compared with Paul's ministry giving us the idea of what christianity really is. The thirty-seven items referred to give all the latitude that love could seek. There is no lack on the side of the Holy Spirit.
Reference was made to @Psalm 66, "Thou hast brought us out into abundance". The second epistle is remarkable because it is the second epistle. The apostle is showing that he has much in reserve but
{477}
he was restrained; there is no lack in him. *They* "grieved" (or 'limited') "the Holy One of Israel",
@Psalm 78: 41. It is a matter not merely of the small size of the vessel but of the worldliness which affected them. Paul was not worldly, nor the apostles, clearly the Corinthians were and they needed to be enlarged.
Verse 14 shows how things had to be tested such as unequal yokes, these were the things hindering and the word is, "Come out ... I will receive you". The apostle uses tender language as they were really young christians coming out of heathendom and he is careful to give no advantage to the devil to turn them aside. The moral condition of the brethren is usually in mind in the exhortations of Scripture. In the Lord's supper when brethren come together, the Lord is not there, but the objective things are there. Are the saints sufficiently susceptible to the elements which are there so that the Lord can help them? We have the principle of coming together; the thoughts of love are all before us objectively. Now the question is whether ministry can effect anything, or the Lord Himself in coming to visit us. Reference was made to @Luke 24 and the severity of the Lord, "O fools", etc. This bears upon the objective things, but something more has to be added. It is a question of the state of the saints, the attitude of the brethren themselves, and what may be effected through ministry, what God has in the gifts.
Reference was made to the appeal of the apostle in chapter 6: 1, and with what tenderness and care he would serve them lest the enemy should get an advantage through undue severity. He sends Timothy to them and refers to what he is in himself; great skill is seen in sending Timothy lest he might turn any away. We are apt to be severe if we have ability. Reference was made to Asher having his foot dipped in oil. God has set us on the first day of the
{478}
week in circumstances which themselves should soften us. We appropriate the brethren -- "all things are yours", the saints are yours. "Yet shew I unto you a more excellent way". We have added advantage in the gifts, the ability some have to bring the truth before the saints. Read verses 11 - 13. It is all a question of gift, the liberty Paul has to appeal to the saints, not using authority nor the servant standing on his dignity.
In the section commencing with verse 14 there are many things spoken of, we have diverse yokes, mixed marriages and a great many things in connection with associations. How much there is that might hinder a christian! This would bear on what we have in @Mark 4: 30, as to what the kingdom of God is to be *likened* to, which involves what has occurred in the public profession through the allowance of these things. Reference was made to @Leviticus 19: 19, and @Deuteronomy 22: 10, as to sowing with mixed seeds. One might be a christian and yet any of these things might attach to him. The abstract thought is brought in in the midst of these mixed conditions by the words "*ye* are the living God's temple". There is affection in the apostle's appeal and good ground for healing in the saints. God is willing to take up the attitude of a Father on the conditions specified. In Galatians we are sons; here it is a question of what God is prepared to be to us in certain conditions, that is "sons and daughters". In the gospel the Lord says "Daughter", which would be more than what we have in this chapter. It is purely conditional here. It is to a separate Abram that Jehovah says, "I am thy shield, thy exceeding great reward".
All this is leading up to a "man in Christ" in chapter 12.
*Lord's day morning, August 31st, 1947*.
{479}
NO. 5
@2 Corinthians 7
J.T. This chapter bears out fully what has been before us, that is, the grace which belongs to the ministry working out in tenderness to hose ministered to lest the work of God be damaged. This chapter seems to finalise the matter of discipline raised in the first epistle; they were genuinely affected by the ministry so that they were in accord with Paul's judgment of the person under discipline. Read verses 7 to 11. "What ardent desire, but what zeal ... in every way ye have proved yourselves to be pure in the matter". This indicates that the end had been reached, but not only in the man dealt with in chapter 5 of the first epistle (they were slow to do it). It is an example for those of us who are engaged in the service of the Lord. The minister has to be watchful not to be accountable for any damage. The apostle's feelings enter into this and it is over against clericalism ruling over God's heritage. This lifts the saints up to the level of the ministers. "Receive us" would be equivalent to receiving the ministry. It is wonderful how low the great apostle goes in asking them to receive him. The question was raised as to letters of commendation (@2 Corinthians 3: 1), being needed by the apostle. Paul did not claim his rights but was concerned that they should be on the ground of mutual feelings. This is clearly seen in @1 Corinthians 9 where these feelings are to work out in bringing all on to the same level. They also work out, as is seen in this chapter, in the apostle's joy in the results of his service. "Weeping may endure for a night, but joy cometh in the morning", @Psalm 30: 5.
"His compassions fail not", @Lamentations 3:22. In @Numbers 25 Phinehas deals with the evil, and then in chapter 26 the people can be numbered, being thus lifted up to assembly status. After that Joshua
{480}
comes into view, a man "in whom is the Spirit". Right assembly feelings begin to display themselves now. Paul held himself back, putting others forward; these are subordinates, go-betweens in the ministry and become in entire keeping with Paul. It was all a question of saving the Corinthians. The apostle's skill is seen in sending young men, instead of the older ones, which is an example for us in matters of discipline. We might think old men are needed but young men are equal to the service; it is remarkable that they are. We see this principle in Abigail's young men (@1 Samuel 25: 14), which is an assembly chapter -- Abigail's chapter. Her young men were entirely equal to the moment, it was a young men's opportunity. This is all very suggestive as to the place young men may have in service. The older ones are dropping out and the Lord is saying, 'Can you be trusted?' Timothy and Titus were to be trusted in relation to Corinth, yet there was a special word for Timothy not to neglect the gift in him. They all come in to the glory of the results. Paul says, "such a one as Paul the aged", yet he makes much of the younger men, saying to Timothy "the things that thou hast heard of me ... commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also", @2 Timothy 2: 2. David's men would be young, a motley number at first but under his influence what results are seen in them! In @Exodus 24 when the twelve pillars were built Moses sent youths to offer burnt-offerings, etc., youthful material is emphasised; they filled up the gap in priesthood when no formal priest was yet appointed. This depth of feeling and joy would serve to consolidate the Corinthians. They were given to understand that he was thoroughly with them in the whole matter of this judgment, the man was to be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus; although he was not yet forgiven, he was deserving of forgiveness and so was saved.
{481}
The minister is as ready as possible to be with those ministered to, the mutual state is there, nothing is more important, we need to merge together in all disciplinary matters. The apostle was with them in spirit in their disciplinary action, with them feelingly, "Ye and my spirit being gathered together", @1 Corinthians 5: 4. Common church griefs promote unity. It is a great victory when this comes about, matters being solved to the satisfaction of all. The apostle gives as much credit as possible to those he ministered to, his skill is seen in this. Verse 8 read. He arrives at it tenderly so that no reasonable person could question it. All the feelings of a pastor are seen marking the apostle. It seems as if a finish was reached to this matter of discipline. The apostle had been pent up but now he rejoices. Reference was made to verse 6, as indicating what he felt in a priestly way, leading to the encouragement of the apostle by the coming of Titus; we see here the fusion of the apostle's spirit with that of the whole company. It would be difficult to find a greater evidence of the true priestly spirit in the minister. Reference was made to David at the mount of Olives and those who went with him, others coming into the same matter, two young men and a sister. There should be more jubilance over recovery as in @Luke 15; @John 20 also would be outstanding in all this. Brethren are being brought to this, restoration being always in view. Reference was made to such joy being experienced in London in the restoration of a brother now valued among us.
There is nothing more consolidating than the feeling of joy we experience in these cases. @Galatians 6: 1 implies that he is to be restored to where he was before, functioning as he had been. Reference was made to the restored leper being seen in priestly dignity as anointed with oil. The details of his recovery are so striking as set out in @Leviticus 14. Verses 13 - 15 of the chapter were read, showing the
{482}
matter being settled and Paul satisfied. Titus is seen as a safe man -- a good churchman; Paul and Titus fill out the bill well. Allusion was also made to messengers of the assemblies, Christ's glory, they are reliable go-betweens. It was said that our assembly measure is seen by our reception of Paul, a great general result being in view of the coming of the Lord, for we are to go up acceptably; this is the result of the gifts and the ministry in the saints: "Until we all arrive at the unity of the faith ... the full-grown man"; we are thus ready for translation, the Lord having this in mind through the ministry; the assembly is the great point, whether it is translatable acceptably to God and to Christ. This implies the work of the ministers. The Spirit and the bride saying Come, means that she is ready; what a great result is going to come about! God will do much quickly, all is ready when translation takes place. Heaven and earth must come into accord, that is what God has done objectively and what the Spirit is doing through the gifts.
Chapter 5: 15 - 17 was read, leading on to new creation, all things are of God and so we get beyond the realm of gift. The body becomes self-supporting; the great result will be glory to God in the assembly in Christ Jesus.
Verse 16 was read, with the remark that there must be something abstractly there which was perfect. The 'gist and marrow' was there even if in two or three, there must be something there that was perfect against which the gates of hades shall not prevail. Heaven and earth must be brought into agreement, God can do much in the twinkling of an eye.
Reference was made to @1 Corinthians 1: 30, linking it with "in Christ" and "new creation" and "all things are of God".
Although everything had not been fully cleared up, chapter 7 shows that ground had been reached on
{483}
which the apostle could go on with the brethren. "Ye have proved yourselves to be pure in the matter". Reference was made to "*the* letter" (verse 8). How enshrined the first epistle is in the hearts and minds of all true churchmen.
*Lord's day evening, August 31st, 1947*.
NO. 6
@2 Corinthians 8
It had been thought by some in the past that the box was out of keeping with the Lord's supper and it had, in some cases, been placed under the table and passed around at the end of the meeting. Ministry from the time of the revival makes much of the collection. Two chapters are devoted to it in this epistle; there is also reference to collections for the saints in chapter 16 of the first epistle. It is helpful to consider the thought of the collection for it is evidently treasured above, not because of the monetary value involved but on account of what is in the hearts of the brethren towards each other. Both Paul and John make much of giving to meet need. Reference was made to the widow who gave two mites, it was clearly not a matter of money in her case but of what was in her heart, what actuated the giver. The widow is suggestive of the assembly. The thought of sacrifice is connected with giving as in Hebrews, "with such sacrifices God is well pleased", also "God loveth a cheerful giver". God Himself is the great Giver and the apostle says, "Thanks be to God for his unspeakable free gift". In writing to the Philippians Paul says, "If also I am poured out as a libation on the sacrifice and ministration of your faith, I rejoice", @Philippians 2: 17.
A brother has recently written asking if the collection was not below the level of the Lord's supper,
{484}
showing how the minds of the brethren may be affected as to this matter. F.E.R. spoke of the bread and the cup and the box as being connected with the administration side of the testimony. He said 'if the box is to be put under the table, why not the other two?' The quotations used by the apostle in these two chapters are remarkable. "He who gathered much had no excess", etc.; "He has scattered abroad, he has given to the poor"; many Old Testament scriptures are brought to bear on the subject. Verse 15 no doubt alludes to the manna, the Psalms are also quoted. In France some time ago the box was nailed to the door where anyone could have access to it. J.N.D. recognised it. We need to be able to appraise values, and were the truth of the assembly better understood, we should have no difficulty about many such matters. Abigail knew how to give both as to material and quantities, what she brought was referred to (verses in @1 Samuel 25 were read); she estimated what was needed and spoke with great intelligence to David, showing her appraisement of values; David said, "Blessed be Jehovah, ... blessed be thy discernment, and blessed be thou", showing his appraisement of values; all this comes before us at the Lord's supper.
The reference in verse 5 to the Macedonians giving themselves "first to the Lord, and to us" was mentioned as being the necessary basis of all giving, and as illustrated in the widow.
At one time we used to cover the emblems after they were partaken of. This is not right because the public position continues to the last moment of the service. We come together to break bread; we could not have the breaking of bread without some idea of giving, for the matter of righteousness enters into it, the "guest-chamber" has to be supplied; we have to pay our rent and other expenses. Spontaneity (verse 3) was referred to as showing our right to bring
{485}
forward the graces of the saints to encourage others, thus the grace of the Macedonians would encourage the Corinthians.
Coming to David in Chronicles we have what he gave as King and Defender of the truth, one hundred thousand talents; then out of his own property three thousand talents of the gold of Ophir, loss in volume but greater in value. What lies behind the giving is so important, as in verse 4 the grace and favour shown represents what was in the hearts of the saints -- the hearts of the Corinthians towards those in Judaea. This would be calculated to stimulate 'body' feelings among the saints. The apostle's ministry was referred to in this connection, he having a moral right and qualification to so minister with a view to imparting a far and wide spread of 'body' feelings amongst the saints. Persons are brought into it as handling these things; verses 16 - 24 read, speaking of various persons engaged in this gracious service. I am just thinking of how these persons are appraised in a distinctive way; a witness of "our readiness". What remarkable language yet all in relation to these material things! The apostle had been boasting of the Corinthians and now he exhorts them to show the proof of their love and his boasting. Providing "things honest" would refer to the manner in which all expenses connected with the room, etc., would be met.
Reference was made to the spiritual qualifications of those who were acting as "deputed messengers of assemblies" and the confidence the brethren had in them. We ought to be able to judge between the different character of meetings, e.g., week-end meetings and larger meetings involving the testimony. These larger meetings are of a higher character and are for the beating out of the truth; those present are there by invitation, based on what they are in the testimony. The distinguishing feature lies in the spirituality
{486}
of the brothers invited; their presence there lifts the meeting to a higher level.
Enquiry was made as to the difference in character in the ministry in local fellowship meetings, involving building up young people in fundamentals, whereas the ministry in conferences would be in the nature of Paul's movements in the "upper districts", @Acts 19.
The Lord is showing that what the brethren are doing is right. @Nehemiah 8: 13 was read as showing the character of the gathering on the "second day", when the chief fathers, etc., were present. @1 Samuel 9:22 was referred to when thirty persons were invited by Samuel. We have the Lord's own example in choosing the persons who should be present at the Supper. He directed two of the disciples to go into the city and enquire, "Where is the guest-chamber?" saying "a man will meet you, carrying an earthen pitcher of water". They were to go in where he went. "*He* will chew you a large upper room furnished".
Then we have the Lord's great ease as to the persons present and the place itself so that it says "He placed himself at table". The passover was a very distinguished matter, being the first of the seven feasts in @Leviticus 23.
Further as to Nehemiah, it is helpful to see the difference between the first and second day. In the first all the people were there but on the second day the chief fathers, etc., were gathered to Ezra to "gain wisdom as to the words of the law". You would expect some distinctive ministry not only because of the persons but on account of Ezra's peculiar ability. Nehemiah is not mentioned on the second day because his office gave him no special place religiously. The enquiry on the second day leads to the consummation of God's thoughts as indicated in the feast of tabernacles. Ezra is distinguished, he no doubt made a collection of the books of Scripture. The beginning of Ezra coincides with the end of Chronicles, linking
{487}
up the revival of Ezra's time with what had gone before. Luke in a similar way links up what was coming in with the Old Testament, in the reference to Zechariah fulfilling his priestly service. He writes with method and leads us on to the end of the Acts where the Jews turn away and Paul says, "this salvation of God has been sent to the nations; *they* also will hear it". The position is thus made clear for us, the Jews having to come in as men. Luke would eliminate the Jew altogether and bring in men on one level, the position now is one Mediator between God and men. This involves the new Head for man and what Simeon says, "a light for revelation of the Gentiles". The position of man is also brought out in the rejection by the Jew of Stephen's testimony involving the Son of man. It was pointed out that Luke's account goes back to Adam not Abraham and Ezra in Chronicles also goes back to Adam. @Romans 11 was quoted because of the peculiar place the Jews have. Paul was careful not to offend the Jews. Read @Romans 9: 1 - 5. Then read chapter 11: 11 - 21, and then verses 32 - 36; God has shut up all in unbelief so as to have mercy on all. When the church period is over the Jews will again have their place. This is imminent. They will be brought in in connection with Abraham. Now it is man, not the Jew; it is a mistake to say the Lord's supper will be passed on after the church is taken.
*Lord's day, September 14th, 1947*.
NO. 7
@2 Corinthians 9
We have here an illustration of what has already been noted in considering Paul's service, that is that he says it is superfluous his writing to them. This is
{488}
a consideration which should enter into our exercises as to the saints, attributing liberality and grace to them instead of using severity. He might have come with a rod, he knew how to use this, but instead of doing so he sends Timotheus. He attributes to them even movement towards God; their giving, however, is not "unspeakable" as God's is. A reference was made to chapter 8:7, showing how much they are credited with by the apostle, with the addition in verse 8 of "I do not speak as commanding", though both epistles are in the nature of commandments, "but ... proving the genuineness of your love". He credits them with much, and speaks in verse 5 of their fore-announced blessing (see note), "that this may be ready thus as blessing, and not as got out of you". He honours them in speaking thus and they are becoming like God in principle. He wants the things for the poor saints in Jerusalem, but he wants the Corinthians to be in a right attitude, too.
God elected to take the place of Father and imparts the thought to Abraham that God Himself is the source of all blessing. Of Canaan it is said that He espied the land, as it were 'a find', and elected to give it to them; @Ezekiel 20: 6. Hence the inheritance comes into view as it is said, "blessed ... with every spiritual blessing in the heavenlies in Christ".
The personnel is indicated in chapter 8:23 in Titus and others -- how interested Titus was in them -- so thoroughly characterising the service. We are to think of those engaged in the service as dignified according to God and deserving of honour, not as common or marked by a holiday spirit. The apostle would convey the importance of the messengers; they are representatives of assemblies, the expression "Christ's glory" in the original is properly linked with the persons.
Princes have a great place in the book of Numbers especially in chapter 7, where they are introduced
{489}
almost immediately and designated by name, offering the same gifts and so expressive of unity. Then in the last verse of that chapter we have the remarkable testimony of God; Jehovah spoke to Moses, "he heard the voice speaking to him from off the mercy-seat which was upon the ark of testimony, from between the two cherubim; and he spoke to Him". God was at that time inaugurating the system in which we so often have "the Lord commanded Moses". The princely position characterises all, entering into the communications of God through the Mediator from between the cherubim, thus dignifying the whole position.
This in principle should characterise all our meetings but in particular the special occasions, those marked by invitation, which would distinguish the persons. How easily the truth flows out when you have these conditions! Reference was made to chapter 8: 9, "ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ". The position of Christ in @Ephesians 4 was then referred to as Mediator in view of imparting gifts; in Ephesians the persons themselves are the gifts. Read @Ephesians 4:4 - 11, every gift is a fresh testimony to Christ's love to the assembly. The level is very wonderful "above all the heavens"; the Spirit is carrying all the gifts down here from that elevation for the work of the ministry, the saints to be brought to the high level from which the gifts come, not of course to Christ's level, which would involve the untreated sphere, yet involving their elevation. We are to remember, however, that the gifts come from that environment. Thus in 2 Corinthians we are led on to the thought of a man in Christ and visions and revelations of the Lord.
These graces among the brethren afford conditions in which the Lord can unfold these things, hence we have the general meetings and the character they have taken on, and the principle of invitation involving
{490}
the best that heaven can give. In thinking of this we have to be careful not to disparage sisters or brethren not invited, and the invitations sometimes, as a practical matter, may not be too careful. The local position needs to be in keeping with the invitation, this cannot be ignored. The "deputed messengers" in chapter 8 undertake the service with the support of their brethren, being "Christ's glory". We may have men of great ability but there may be moral difficulties in their locality. The assembly, however, has ears and ought to know and take account of such local exercises; if there is well-regulated hearing what is current would be known. The Lord showed that each brother ought to be right in relation to the others, as for instance Peter and John in @John 21. Invitations ought to reflect Christ's glory in the persons invited to grace the occasion.
The fore-announced blessing of the Corinthians was referred to and it was said that the apostle was extremely easy and gracious to them, the coming of these persons enabling them to complete the service of which he had boasted a year ago, but they needed these precautions that they might be ready when the messengers came. The first day of the week was referred to as influencing the matter of giving and @1 Corinthians 16 was referred to, only it was pointed out that it was local not only in place but in time, having in view the priority of the Jew.
There seems to have been a little slackness at Corinth in completing what they had in mind. Spiritual brethren coming into your district or meeting are sure to influence you for good and many exercises are met and completed, especially as to the money needed. The running on of the thought into verse 15 is remarkable: "thanks be to God for his unspeakable free gift". The expression of feeling is not so marked, but it is a simple statement of fact. There is no special emphasis or exclamation mark;
{491}
compare the end of @Romans 11, which is exclamatory. Reference was made to @Exodus 40 where all is seen functioning feelingly: God fills out the scene with glory. In Exodus the whole system was the fruit of their giving. Verse 12 was read showing that all goes back to God in thanksgiving. There is an intimate connection between righteousness and thanksgiving as seen in verses 9 and 10. How much comes into the mind in thinking of a subject like this, as the Spirit is free, leading on to God all in all. @Psalm 111, 112 and 113 were referred to, the first two commencing, and the last commencing and ending with "Hallelujah"!
This brings up the skill of David in the arranging of the Psalms. Reference was made to @Luke 24: 44, the Lord opened up the Psalms to them as they are together. The Psalms give experience, hymns are to the Father, spiritual songs are more general. We have the deepest experiences of the Lord in the Psalms. Reference was made to J.N.D. having said that there was more of the spirit of Christ in the Psalms than anywhere else in Scripture. The epistle to the Hebrews is characteristic of the writer's exercises as to Israel and brings the glories of Christ out of the Psalms.
*Lord's day, September 14th, 1947*.
NO. 8
@Mark 10: 1 - 16
It was said that the household entered into the present setting and that it was 'question-time'. The Pharisees are specially stressing the question of divorce: it says, "And Pharisees coming to him"; Matthew says the same (chapter 19), though there the disciples are brought into it. Here it says "tempting
{492}
him". It is thus that servants of the Lord are put to the test as questions are asked. How careful they have to be! It was said that the questioning here was not honest, and that we are not ignorant of Satan's devices. Questions like this may come up in any meeting; we are not tempting each other; it is homely and practical to ask such a question. In moving about in connection with our businesses, important matters may arise in dealing with men "Who do men say that I the Son of man am?" and then, "Who do ye say that I am?" Peter is helped of God to answer, and we can count on that in our questioning. The Lord is ready to help us in that.
Matters may well arise in this way that may govern the testimony, and light is available. It was said that the Lord passes by the glory of all other dispensations to the glory of Him who created all, and verses 4 to 6 were read, emphasis being laid on going back to the beginning. For us, we are to be marked by piety, which brings God into His own institutions as He made them.
God waited in the depths of time to bring man in.
Man must come in for this, because angels do not marry, except that some fell from their own estate in doing so. Verses 7 - 9 were read and it was said that the 'beginning' here was a limited thought, not as in @John 1. Male and female are mentioned as if we are to be concerned over it, especially in view of divorce. "No longer two but one flesh"; how are Adam and Eve to regard each other? Union must come into it, and with us it must lead on to Christ and the assembly. In verses 10 - 12 the disciples come into it but the Lord does not bring in so much here as in Matthew; we must keep the different settings in mind. It was said that there was less latitude here as the setting was in view of service, and that a minister of Christ is left with less instruction. In Luke we have the priest, and whether the
{493}
one or the other, the testimony or the service of God, neither is to be marred by these features.
We always have to consider the persons in mind in the instruction. The Lord steers clear of what might not help, but rather hinder. Matthew's view would be larger and leave much for every person listening, to think for himself as to anything he may need for his marital relations. The levite, however, is to keep to the point. In Matthew the Lord leaves things to the exercises of the company; it is in view of Christ and the assembly, steering the saints in the right direction, training them to hear: "ears to hear". It is always a question of who is listening; the levite would be guarded in a mixed company. The whole matter is out in Matthew, but leaving the door open to go on to Christ and the assembly. The rule in Mark is more rigid, in Matthew the matter is left open. J.N.D. in his letters on the subject surveyed a wide field, bringing in Matthew's point of view. The Pharisee is not concerned about the truth, but is tempting. We have to speak with restraint in the presence of a mixed multitude, but in a Matthew setting the matter can be opened up freely, the levite having a real conscientious wish to help anybody. Matthew leaves things to our spiritual calibre, what we can be trusted with; he makes much of Joseph, the reputed father of the Lord, as one who can be trusted with certain things. The levite has to be on his guard as to holiness, and to think of the stature of those listening. Hence here we now go on to little children (verses 13, 14 read). The Lord is free in enlarging on the children but not so as to the subject brought up by the Pharisees. It was suggested that He would be concerned in view of the coming generation in the testimony, whereas the Pharisees speak of mere doctrine with a view of tempting the Lord; He would have no compunction or reserve in speaking of the children. The levite is concerned about the
{494}
truth, and those who hear; he might have good reason also to be indignant about a matter that is brought up. We see how trustworthiness enters into all this, as in Joseph to whom the care of the Lord Jesus is committed, and also as in Matthew's setting, the most delicate things may be brought forward; not so in Mark, however.
The Lord's thoughts run on from the little children to the kingdom. How beautiful that He should bless them! He is concerned that no damage should be done to children, wives and the like. Matthew would make full way for these things, being concerned about Christ and the assembly, and having union in mind. In this connection the note in verse 8 was stressed; see also note to @Matthew 19: 5 "*for* one flesh", corresponding with the Hebrew in @Genesis 2. It was pointed out how the marriage bond is attacked in the world, the enemy seeing Christ and the assembly behind it. It was also said that Matthew had a wide range spreading out to eunuchs, referring to those able to receive the word; let the one who listens be on his guard as to how he thinks it over.
This all leads to the thought of the general meetings, which are on the principle of invitation, involving brothers of spiritual formation, se that things can be spoken of freely, as there is more spiritual calibre and we are not afraid of saying anything for delicacy; it is a question of what the truth requires.
The four gospels having each a different bearing was again stressed, having regard to the persons involved. Here in Mark there is no question of putting away at all; Matthew would have in mind that no one is permanently disqualified, everyone who has the Spirit must be in the assembly. In Matthew the Lord is regarded as with them personally "all the days", and in Mark, "working with them", so He *must* be here Himself, solving everything personally. Matthew's reference to Emmanuel, "God with us",
{495}
would show this. The Pharisee would excommunicate someone, having a hard and critical outlook, but the assembly is regarded as having the power and understanding to administer forgiveness; the Lord affords much latitude to the disciples in Matthew. Luke might make way for large numbers, three thousand and five thousand, but Matthew is concerned about material for the assembly. John would go down the whole dispensation and meet all the difficulties arising in it. He makes way for seven brothers going fishing, but the Lord does not rebuke them, yet they are all gained, for we have to consider how *deep* a thing may be; recovery maybe effected quickly; in Galatians we see that an erring one is to be restored wholly to what he used to be in the system.
*September 18th, 1947*.
NO. 9
@2 Corinthians 10
This chapter brings in the militant side of Paul's dealings with the Corinthians, he says, "I myself, Paul", and speaks in another place of "such a one as Paul the aged", not that he is that here; we may compare him with John in Revelation, who also calls attention to himself personally. Paul is calling attention to himself here. He is not long in reaching the militant side (verses 1 and 2 read), he soon reaches the thought of boldness and daring though beginning with the meekness and gentleness of Christ. @Matthew 11 was referred to where the Lord says, "I am meek and lowly in heart". It is well to keep before us the need of being militant in the midst of the enemy's power even on this ship.
Paul is qualified for this militant attitude by the meekness and gentleness of Christ; only in moving with Paul can we maintain the militant position.
{496}
Paul on his voyage becomes strong and acquires moral power; he says, "Ye ought, O men, to have hearkened to me". Next we find that the people with whom he was in contact were with him, "the chief man of the island, by name Publius ... received us and gave us hospitality three days in a very friendly way", indicating the results of moving in moral power among those who are around us. Providentially Paul was attacked by the viper, what we gather may become a means of attack, but then it says that seeing nothing unusual happen to him they changed their opinion. People are apt to be aggressive and critical about us but they may change their minds like those referred to. The Philippian jailor was an example of this. In connection with "overthrowing reasonings and every high thing", Abraham's presenting seven ewe lambs to the Philistine king was referred to, as showing them the spirit which should mark them. The armour in @Ephesians 6 was aggressive and this would be in line with verse 4 of this chapter. We need to be aggressive to overthrow; David took the stronghold of Zion; they said he could not come in. Paul uses remarkable language about such opposers, but is always on the look-out for their recovery; verses 5 and 6 were read. Disobedience was in the Corinthians from the outset, he does not, however, bring in military thoughts at the first; this would be like the capture of a salient position, he would be tender towards those whom he might rescue, and opportunity is given to those who are hostile. He would conciliate such. Persons are here named as disobedient. Once when F.E.R. was at Plainfield a man came in who became quite violent; F.E.R. said, 'I do not know who you are but it is very impertinent of you to come into this meeting and speak so'. The man remained quiet.
We have almost every element of wisdom in Paul's service here and, at the same time, every effort for
{497}
the recovery of the brethren. @Song of Songs 4:4, was read, "Thy neck is like the tower of David", then verse 5, "thy two breasts are like two fawns", the suggestion being that militancy precedes the development of affections. So chapter 3:7 refers to defence, threescore mighty men around Solomon's couch, experts in war, whereas the chapter ends with the thought of the "day of his espousals". This links with @2 Corinthians 11:2, "I have espoused you unto one man". @Song of Songs 6: 10 was referred to: "Who is she that looketh forth as the dawn, fair as the moon, clear as the sun ... ?" her vision was as clear as Christ's.
Paul's advance is marked by a blend of what is priestly and militant, so in the passage in @Song of Songs 6, the moon is subjective and the sun objective, involving the clarity of Christ. Behind the militancy of Paul we have what is subjective and priestly; his beseechings are priestly; the arms of our warfare are priestly; this feature of priestliness is what is seen in Christ in the gospels, and in Mark the militant side is seen in the Lord's indignation. Strongholds are brought down by the spirit of meekness; verses 4 and 5 were read; the weapons of our warfare are powerful according to God. The mental side is clearly in mind in the conflict; verses 7 and 8 read as referring to their thinking. The authority which the apostle had was for building up and not for overthrowing; it was not for the overthrowing of the Corinthians, but for the overthrowing of the strongholds. We must call these persons wicked men. References were made in this connection to the "uncircumcised Philistine" and to Korah and his band. This section has the most extreme terms because it is Satan himself who is attacking. The Collected Writings of J.N.D. use all the weapons; those who are in the ministry should have in mind what the conflict really is and what the weapons are
{498}
that are available to meet it. J.N.D.¬s answer, in his reply in 'Essays and Reviews', to Dr. Temple is very sweeping. Paul has to deal with his opposers as David with Goliath; David ran towards the enemy to get near him, we have to get near to such men who are attacking the truth, we may use artillery but the sword also is needed.
Paul speaks of his measure as reaching to the saints as loving them and anxious to save them; this is all part of the meekness of Christ. The strongest language is needed to expose the devil but we need also the meekness and gentleness of Christ for we want our dear brethren. It would never do to have a meeting to attack, meetings are to be characterised by the meekness and gentleness of Christ, yet what is of the devil is to be exposed, for Satan may be at the meetings (see @Job 1). The Lord was always armed with grace though speaking strongly where needed, hence we have John's ministry involving grace and truth. Matthew and Mark are militant, the utmost severity being used even against Christ, Luke and John have no 'forsaking'. Someone has said we hang up our swords with our coats when we go into the meeting. That is not right, for the sword is always needed at hand in case of an attack. In Nehemiah they worked with sword and trowel, conflict and construction together. @Ephesians 4 shows what has to be met, that we be no longer babes, the enemy's attack being subtle and with a view to systematised error. The whole armour of God is needed to meet this attack. Read @Ephesians 6: 13 - 18, the seven features of the armour are features of Christ coming into evidence in the brethren and suggest what is constitutional. The military matter has in mind the bringing out of the bride character in the assembly at Corinth. The masculine is seen in the Lord; we have the whole thought of the feminine side in this chapter in the expression
{499}
"a chaste virgin to Christ". Satan would attack this, hence Eve is brought in here. Reference was made to @Psalm 45: 3 as a completed position; the queen on the right hand. Also Nehemiah; the queen sitting by in sympathy with the situation. In @1 Samuel 25, David at first was not right, not that he would be a type of Christ in this, but Abigail set him right; the masculine may not always be right. The thoughts of God concerning Christ are not complete without the assembly, the complete idea must be here in view of translation. When Paul says in chapter 10: 6, "when your obedience shall have been fulfilled", it is in view of translation.
The thought of measure is very important, all the saints having measure; completeness is in Christ, "one man", the thought being to present the saints "a chaste virgin to Christ". The time of presentation is future but we come to completeness in some sense before the assembly goes. It was given to the apostle to complete the Word of God and to fill up what was behind of the tribulations of Christ. Paul was governed by measure; reference was made to @Romans 12: 3, "not to have high thoughts above what he should think; but to think so as to be wise, as God has dealt to each a measure of faith". Reference was made to @Ephesians 3: 18 and also to @John 16: 13, "the Spirit of truth, he shall guide you into all the truth", involving the completeness of things, "until we all arrive ... at the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ". The Spirit is here mediatorially; it is said: "whatsoever he shall hear he shall speak". The Spirit is really mediator between Christ and us and God and us. Read @John 15: 26, "the Spirit of truth who goes forth from with the Father, *he* shall bear witness concerning me", His witness running continuously throughout the dispensation. "And *ye* too bear witness", involves the twelve having a witness of their own; moreover the witness
{500}
of the Spirit involves Paul's ministry. We can see Paul's teaching in these chapters, i.e., @John 13 to @John 17. John is the disciple whom Jesus loved and goes through in spirit to the end of the dispensation; he is the Lord's reserve man. The recovery has been to Paul's ministry in the last days, and we are maintained in that in the power of John's ministry, hence in Philadelphia the whole assembly is in mind. We have the structure in Paul but John fills it out with glory. Some have objected to large gatherings on the ground that they were too pretentious and showy. In Mr. Darby's time one thousand were together in Ryde, we have no need to fear numbers. Luke speaks of large numbers, but Paul does not mention these except five hundred at once, and this is not very many. John speaks (@Revelation 7: 9) of "a great crowd, which no one could number". Enoch, the first prophet, speaks of "holy myriads", @Jude 14. In contrast to this Paul emphasises unity, "one man" and "one body".
*Lord's day, September 21st, 1947*.
NO. 10
@2 Corinthians 11
The apostle begins here with the thought of folly, "a little folly", he says, yet he hesitates to proceed with it but goes on to Christ and the assembly, touching perhaps the highest thoughts as to this. "I have espoused you", he says, "unto one man, to present you a chaste virgin to Christ". All these things which he regards as folly shall be spoken of at the judgment-seat of Christ. We should remember that he is not at the end of his journey here but nearer the beginning. He recites enough to make one marvel. "Folly" is used to impress them with what is in his mind and as to what he had gone through --
{501}
*so much* -- it was all for Christ's sake to secure something for Him. He was jealous of any influence Satan would exert over them. One of the names of God is 'Jealous'. Jealousy is said to be "cruel as the grave", @Song of Songs 8: 6. No doubt the list in the chapter would be added to later if not at the judgment-seat of Christ, involving the things done in the body.
He speaks here of the serpent, a degraded name for the devil; he is among the cattle in Genesis. Satan is a name taken on later, meaning 'adversary'. It is an out-and-out matter between him and God, and also between him and the apostle, the apostle regarding himself as a personal adversary of the devil.
The apostle is regarding all the Corinthians in a feminine sense; this is a very striking thing, whereas they would be thinking of their masculine ability. They were all to be presented as a chaste virgin to Christ, this involves skill in education through the ministry, standing in contrast with the ancient system where from the Pope downwards all is aimed at producing masculine features. The devil has harnessed the old system of pagan Rome to oppose Christ. The "mystery of iniquity already works"; that kingdom also, being in mystery now, is about to be revived. It may take on the character of a Pope or an emperor. The beast is on the masculine side, it has five heads, really seven heads of imperial power will be arrayed against Christ. It was pointed out that the woman riding the beast is a masculine thought.
The reference to "thoughts" in verse 3 is important, the mind is brought into our readings in the sense of thoughts; the whole system of education is taxed against Christ.
The thought of the "chaste virgin" is not worked out fully in these two letters; it is touched on in @Romans 16 and worked out fully in Ephesians. He
{502}
regards all of them at Corinth femininely for Christ, this thought being typified in @Ezekiel 16, and particularly in verse 8, "thy time was the time of love; and I spread my skirt over thee, and covered thy nakedness". Paul thus clothed them in his ministry in view of their being a chaste virgin for Christ. It is Jehovah who speaks in Ezekiel but it is worked out here in relation to "one Man". Allusion was made to the Old Testament, all the marital types being in mind in this matter, the type of Eve being the greatest of all. The word used is 'Ishshah', a new word is coined, 'Ishshah' springs from 'Ish', involving derivation in view of union. It is remarkable that Adam should have such intelligence. It is important to keep in mind that what we have here is before Eve was corrupted. Then we have Rebecca; she was marked by intelligence when so young, personal beauty and energy, there is a certain wonderment connected with her, the servant wondered at the grace of her actions; power, too, for she drew water for all the camels. These types are all to be worked out in our minds; in @Genesis 24 the servant journeys and Rebecca journeys with him. At the present time we are engaged in journeying, and every moment of the journey should be filled with thoughts of Christ and the assembly.
Reference was made to the note to chapter 11: 3, 'what a faithful heart retained in simplicity, as taught in the truth'. Whilst we may have the most exalted thoughts yet we are to be simple as was Paul. J.N.D.¬s language was scorned by classical scholars; he was not troubled about rounding off his words, his concern being to get the truth out. The labours of the apostle were spoken of; it is quite evident that J.N.D. was imbued with this kind of spirit. In reading the Collected Writings we can only be impressed with his ability to get the truth and hold to it.
{503}
The apostle says in verse 10, "The truth of Christ is in me", he is calling attention to himself. The love of the truth was spoken of as in @1 John 2: 20, "Ye have the unction from the holy one, and ye know all things". The "truth ... in me" as Paul says, is a subjective thought. These men at Corinth, the opposers, were great imitators, saying perhaps the same things as Paul. Such imitation is most subtle and dangerous. Reference was made to the serpent in @Genesis 3; it was said that these men were not modernists but claimed to teach as Paul did, the most subtle kind of opposition to the truth, Satan transforming himself into an angel of light and his ministers transforming themselves as ministers of righteousness. Reference was made to Simon Magus and to Absalom. These men are very skilled in evil, verses 20 to 23 read, showing how Paul condescends to come down to their level to meet the attack. The weight of what is moral, the texture of the man enters into this. He presents an unassailable front morally, he does not take their money, a contrast to what is said in verse 20, "if any one get your money"; the Romish system makes much of money. These false teachers had not suffered, whereas Paul establishes his credentials in his sufferings.
Bringing in sin at the outset in the reference to the serpent, and connecting it with these men, clearly bears on the way the old Roman principles have been taken into the assembly, the professed bride of Christ, the antiquity of the system around us today being connected with the mystery of iniquity. Let us be sure of having the truth, the whole truth, and work it out; John would help us in every matter of doctrine. We have to be sure the truth is governing us and not personal feelings. John is always present in spirit to support us in regard to the truth. In John's writings we have sisters and brothers spoken of as loving the truth, Demetrius is spoken of in this
{504}
connection, also the "elect lady", Nehemiah also suggests the same thought in taking counsel with himself, and then with the brethren. Special meetings for the working out of the truth have been blessed by God for many years. It is important that each should be free from all partisan spirit and work out the truth for himself, important also for sisters to be moving in the truth.
John's gospel mentions perhaps ten women, Paul also speaks of many women, Peter too says, "she that is elected with you in Babylon salutes you". This is not the woman the Church of Rome speaks of as the 'mother of God', a most blasphemous statement, but clearly some sister in Babylon. John speaks of an "elect lady" loving the truth. This raises the question as to how sisters are getting on in the truth and whether there are those who prophesy. The question is whether the sisters carry the truth as the brothers do. The daughters of Zelophehad were referred to as carrying an exercise which later became the exercise of all Israel and was divinely supported. The close of the dispensation calls for sisters coming more into the truth, the man and the woman are needed for the working of it out. It is difficult to see anything outstanding in the way of sisterly ministry, perhaps sisters are not sufficiently thought of in this way by brothers who minister; brothers tend to think of themselves.
The truth of headship and the covering in @1 Corinthians 11 is not much enquired into and apparently not much interest is shown in this; Eve let the enemy in through not maintaining headship.
In this chapter all brothers and sisters are included in the womanly idea and embraced in the "chaste virgin" for Christ. Of course other aspects of the truth indicated in the expressions 'brethren of Christ' and 'sons of God' must also be kept in mind. The feminine idea has to be worked out involving a great
{505}
process, how each is to come into this; God can only reach it through a process.
Sisters are expected to prophesy; @Acts 2: 17 was referred to in this connection. This involves bringing in God's mind as to a current issue; in this connection Deborah was referred to as a good example. She was the wife of Lapidoth, meaning 'light', moving in subjection and helping Barak to come forward into his right place, yet she has the music and the poetry. Nevertheless she is not mentioned in @Hebrews 11.
In speaking of sisters reference was made to the general teaching of @1 Corinthians 7: 26 - 40, in particular verse 34, where the unmarried sister is commended as caring for the things of the Lord "that she may be holy both in body and spirit".
*Lord's day evening, September 21st, 1947*.
{506}
'THE MAN OF THE EIGHTH OF JOHN'
@John 8:54 - 59
My thought is to be very brief, for I apprehend that brevity should, in general, mark ministry. I have selected this gospel of John. Much has been said of it; persons who should know have said much of it, and no doubt every one of us has some sense of the peculiarity, and preciousness, I should add, of John's gospel. This chapter speaks of Abraham. The Lord says here, "Abraham rejoiced to see my day: and he saw it, and was glad". How beautifully and preciously the Lord Jesus is presented in this gospel! Well might the Lord say, "Abraham rejoiced to see my day: and he saw it, and was glad", and so there is a certain gladness that one has in undertaking to speak a word from John.
I am reminded in speaking thus of a servant not known to me personally but certainly known to most of us by record -- that is, Mr. John Bellett -- who, as he was about to die, referred to 'the Man of the eighth of John'. Many a time I have been touched in reading what he said when he was about to die, and it is very important, dear brethren, as many of us probably will have to die, although it may not be, for the Lord's coming is near. At the same time, the apostle Paul said that "to depart, and to be with Christ" is "far better", and one does not hesitate to say that he believes in that word, "to depart, and to be with Christ; which is far better". At the same time, the coming of the Lord is imminent, and should be expected by us; in fact we should love His appearing. And so I took the liberty of referring to this servant who said, 'the Man of the eighth of John'. That is a word that ought to touch us -- not simply the Man of the gospel
{507}
of John, but the Man of the eighth of John, and I am reading it now. I may say, dear brethren, I am not without feeling about it, too, that there were such men in earlier days, comparatively recent days, too. We rejoice to think of the great revival that we have to do with; we are participating in it on this very day, the revival that the Spirit of God has brought about, and amongst those having part in it was this dear man whom I have quoted, who said this of the Lord Jesus, 'the Man of the eighth of John'.
@John 8 is a most crucial chapter, in which, as I might say, things are fought out, the Lord Himself combating for the truth, not simply using others but coming down Himself to combat for the truth. He has shown us an example, for it is a time of combating for the truth and the spirit of the truth, and so the word here is, "Jesus answered". Many things had been said, for it is a very long chapter, and it is occupied with combat, the Lord combating Himself for the truth against the Jews. And so it is here, in verse 54, "Jesus answered". How lovely it is to stop to listen to what the Lord would say in an answer! What answers He made! So here -- you would hardly get one more glorious. "Jesus answered, if I glorify myself, my glory is nothing". We can see how this word 'nothing' enters into the matter, how utterly it is out of place if we apply it to the Lord Jesus, but it says of love in @1 Corinthians 13, "if I ... have not love, I am nothing". That is a very humbling thing, a very searching thing, when we are inclined to be ambitious in ministry and the like -- "if I ... have not love, I am nothing". So there is no encouragement at all for anyone to be ambitious on the line of man's will. It is a time of love, dear brethren, and we are living in it. There has never been such a time as this dispensation; there never will be, because the millennium which is coming after it will not be equal to this time, but the
{508}
Lord says, "How is it then that ye do not discern this time?" @Luke 12: 56. It is our time; it is the time of the assembly, the time in which the Spirit of God is opening up the truth of the assembly, and building it up, too.
The Lord says, "If I glorify myself, my glory is nothing: it is my Father who glorifies me". Beautiful! "It is my Father who glorifies me". The Lord was not depending on the Jews¬ praise, nor is He on ours in that sense. The Father is abundant in His praise of the Lord Jesus, glorifying the Lord. "This is my beloved Son", He says, "hear him", and again, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased". And so there is abundance of praise for the Lord Jesus by the Father, and that is what He is saying here, and, of course, we might well rest in it, too, and imitate it, understand how to praise the Lord in everything, and again in everything how to give thanks. And so it goes on, "Jesus answered, If I glorify myself, my glory is nothing: it is my Father who glorifies me, of whom ye say, He is our God. And ye know him not". How the Lord met everything in combat, not hesitating to say the strongest things in support of the truth -- an excellent example for us! And so He goes on to say, "and if I said, I know him not, I should be like you, a liar". He does not hesitate to use that strong word in the ears of men who are opposing Him; and again He says, "But I know him, and I keep his word". How God comes into the chapter! It is full of Christ, but full of Christ in combat for the truth, 'the Man of the eighth of John'. It is a question of what He was here in testimony and in contention for the truth. He goes on further, "Your father Abraham exulted in that he should see my day". Now the Lord brings Abraham in; it is not Adam, or Enoch, or Noah -- it is Abraham; it is a question of the man whom God has selected in a fatherly way; that is to say,
{509}
to bring out the idea of generation among the people of God -- the true generation on the ground of the new birth, because that is what John brings forward. So it says, "The Jews therefore said to him, Thou halt not yet fifty years". They were challenging Him as to His age, implying that they thought He was nearly fifty years old, as if He was suggestive of that in His appearance. Our hearts should be touched at such allusions; but then they are the allusions of the world. They say, "Thou hast not yet fifty years, and hast thou seen Abraham? Jesus said to them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Before Abraham was, I am".
That is my word, dear brethren, and I commend it to you; the testimony of the Lord Jesus here, according to John's gospel -- what it is, what it is in the body of it, this wonderful book, and this wonderful chapter. And so it may not be wondered at that "they took up therefore stones that they might cast them at him; but Jesus hid himself and went out of the temple, going through the midst of them, and thus passed on". So we can well rejoice that He passed on; His hour had not yet come; they could not kill Him till the time came, but He submitted to it when it did come. He delivered up His spirit; it was His own action. They did not do it; it was His own action. We can thank God and rejoice in it. The Lord Jesus did not have to die, but He did die. They could not take His life from Him; "no one takes it from me", He says, "but I lay it down of myself". We glory in this, that they could not take His life from Him, but then it says that they took up stones to cast at Him. So that it is a time of persecution, and this chapter is to bring out, among other things, how the Lord stood the test of combat for the truth against all comers -- He did not give way for a moment. So it says, "Jesus hid himself".
Why did He do that? Was it cowardice? It was
{510}
not cowardice; it was wisdom. Why should we put ourselves in the way of destruction if we do not have to? We are to avoid such; and so it says here, "Jesus hid himself and went out of the temple, going through the midst of them, and thus passed on". He passed on; it was His own doing; they could not take His life from Him till He allowed them. And so, dear brethren, we may therefore rejoice in the Saviour that we have, and the Person that we have, who is presented to us in this gospel, and above all in this wonderful chapter -- the Lord Jesus contending for the truth, and ready to die, but, not yet having to do so, hiding Himself. The time had not come; so that He was entirely superior, entirely in charge of everything, so that nothing could be done against or without Him.
