{7}
THE KING AND THE KINGDOM
@Psalm 45: I; @2 Samuel 23: 1 - 4; @Daniel 4: 24 - 26; @Romans 5: 1 - 18
Tonight I should like to speak of Christ in relation to the kingdom, believing that @Romans 5 stands for the kingdom. So, beloved friends, I feel free to touch on the two passages in the Old Testament because the first one indicates what the king is like, what kind of person the king is, and the second indicates what the kingdom is for. And then in @Romans 5 we get the kingdom enlarged in its reference to christians.
Now, beloved friends, I think I have indicated what I should like to dwell upon by the Lord's help and one feels that one always carries the sympathies of God's people in speaking directly of Christ. David does speak of Christ. You will all remember that the passage begins "Now these be the last words of David". David was a wonderful speaker, a wonderful singer. He was said to be the sweet psalmist of Israel. He had wonderful things to say in his psalms; wonderful things to say about Christ. @Psalm 45 in an especial way indicates the substance of the Psalms in that respect; he gives an account of what is going on in his heart and of what he said concerning the king, and what he said was in perfect accord with what he thought. His thoughts and his words had Christ as their theme. He said "My heart is welling forth with a good matter". It was spontaneous, his heart welled forth with a good matter and his affections were stirred as he was led to see Christ, which he did; for all the men of faith saw Christ. David saw Christ and in occupation with Him he said, "My heart is welling forth with a good matter ... my tongue is the pen of a ready writer". His tongue was in perfect keeping with his heart and his heart was full of Christ, and his heart welled forth with a good matter. It is not always with us that our hearts well forth with a good matter, for out of the heart of man everything proceeds which is
{8}
corrupt and bad. A new source had entered into his heart and welled forth with a good matter and what he spoke about was the King. He says, "I speak of the things which I have made touching the king". Now that to my mind sets before us what you get from David, he was the sweet psalmist of Israel, he spoke of Christ, and he goes on to say, "My tongue is the pen of a ready writer". He then goes on to expatiate on the beauties of the King. That was what David was engaged with; therefore, when you come to his last words you may depend upon it that they are not in any way inferior to the words that marked him in his lifetime. As the psalmist he was engaged with Christ and he is going to speak his closing words, and what were they about? About the King. I take it that David was perfectly qualified to give an account of the King and it appears to me that christians should become acquainted with the King. David gives us an account of the King and he goes on to tell us what the King should be, not only from his own experiences, but from what Jehovah had told him. He says, "The Spirit of the Lord spake by me, and his word was in my tongue. The God of Israel said, the Rock of Israel spake to me". What did He say? "He that ruleth over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God. And he shall be as the light of the morning, when the sun riseth, even a morning without clouds". Now you get not only David's personal estimate but God's conception of the King. He says, He must be just and must rule in the fear of God. I do not dwell on it -- my thought is simply to seek to indicate to you what the King is. I wish to engage you with Christ viewed as the King. The Lord is just and is the very embodiment of justice. He rules in God's fear and His rule is marked by infinite justice. I only bring that forward so as to encourage you to consider Christ as viewed as the King. You can come to Christ with the utmost confidence that He answers in every respect to God's King. David did not answer as he did not rule always in justice. There were very many discrepancies in his rule but there are no shortcomings with Christ. The Lord Jesus Christ answers perfectly to God's requirements
{9}
in every respect: He rules in the fear of God, and He is a morning without clouds. One experience which a great many pass through and which is conducive to spiritual health and prosperity is indicated by the horror of great darkness which fell upon Abraham. I know that there are very many of God's people in that state, in a state of darkness and bondage. What is Christ? A morning without clouds. David says, "He shall be as the light of the morning, when the sun riseth, even a morning without clouds". It is very wonderful when your soul is in a state of darkness to have Christ arise upon you, as the light of the morning, even a morning without clouds. That is what He is. I only touch on that so as to encourage your hearts to exercise faith in that Person. He dispels the darkness directly you place implicit confidence in Him. He is as a morning without clouds: the mists and fogs disappear.
I know what I am saying: there are many souls filled with doubts and the result of doubt is discouragement, but in the presence of Christ all that disappears. Faith brings you into the presence of Christ and the clouds disappear and the experience of your soul is as one arising in the early morning when the sky is without a cloud. The more clearly you see Christ the more every doubt and fear disappears. It is a wonderful thing to be in a state of soul as a morning without clouds. That is what Christ is in resurrection. That is God's conception of a king and that is what Christ is. The Lord Jesus Christ is a king according to God's own heart; there is not a shade of divergence between God's thought of a king and Christ. Has your soul ever entered into the presence of Christ in that light, Christ in resurrection? Having referred to the end of @Romans 4 1 feel free to touch on this, "Who was delivered for our offences, and was raised again for our justification". He was raised on our behalf, He was raised for our justification, but chapter 6 shows another side of the resurrection; He was raised by the glory of the Father -- He was raised because the Father's affection was set upon Him. His Father's delight was in Him; He was raised by the glory of the Father. That is another view entirely; but the end of
{10}
chapter 4 shows Christ raised on our behalf. He is raised for your clearance. God has so considered our consciences that He has raised Christ for us. He was delivered for our offences, and was raised again for our justification; but when you come to chapter 6, He is not raised for our justification; He is raised by the glory of the Father. The Father's pleasure was in that Man, and that Man went into death, and the Father must have Him out of death. The Father's pleasure is in Christ, and if Christ goes into death the Father must have Him out of death. Directly Christ is raised you get the thought of the King. I do not say for a moment that resurrection in itself takes us to heaven. Christ Himself was forty days on the earth before He went to heaven. He was as much risen from the dead during the forty days of His sojourn here as He is now in heaven. Resurrection set Him in a position in which He could go back to heaven at any moment as having accomplished the counsels of God. As risen, Christ goes into heaven with every qualification of King; every qualification necessary to be the King was witnessed in the person of Christ and then He goes to heaven.
In Jacob's last words to his twelve sons in @Genesis 49 he gives an account of the twelve tribes. He said, "Gather yourselves together, that I may tell you that which shall befall you in the last days", and thus to one tribe after another he has something to say; and when he comes to Naphtali he says, "Naphtali is a hind let loose: he giveth goodly words". The animals in creation afford to God a mode of expression, and the hind undoubtedly is used to indicate to us the resurrection of Christ. The hind is let loose, she bounds, she is an active animal, and would suggest Christ as risen from the dead. It is a wonderful thing to get in your soul a conception of Christ as a hind let loose, let free. He went down into the domain of death but He came up out of it in all the glory and strength of His own Person, He burst the bands; as a hind let loose He came forth. It says, "He giveth goodly words". Did you ever sit and listen to the goodly words of Christ risen? Christ risen is the Speaker. He bounds from the grave, He
{11}
comes up as a hind let loose, He can go anywhere in His own domain, He can go to the very highest point. In one of the gospels it says He "was taken up into heaven", @Mark 16: 19; in @Luke 24: 51, it says He was carried up into heaven, and in @John 20: 17, He says, "I ascend". Christ is as a hind let loose and He goes to the highest point in heaven. He is installed as King there and He sends the Holy Spirit who appeared here as cloven tongues as of fire, and who sat upon each of those assembled at Pentecost -- what for? He is going to give goodly words. The Lord Jesus Christ is going to speak to man and so He gives goodly words. The gospel may be taken as the goodly words of Christ. I think the gospel is what Christ has spoken and there are no such words in all man's eloquence. There are no compositions equal to the gospel. I need not remind you that there were many great works of literary men and speakers, but what could be compared with the goodly words of Christ? I take the gospel to be the goodly words of Christ. Are they not goodly? Are the terms of the gospel not goodly? How they meet man! You remember how the Lord Jesus Christ spake when He was baptized and was anointed by the Spirit -- it says they marvelled at the words of grace which proceeded from His lips. His words were goodly. He was announcing the glad tidings. God had anointed Him to preach the gospel. Now He has gone up to heaven and the Spirit comes and He speaks, not now personally but nevertheless He speaks and His words are goodly. The apostles were His mouthpieces in the Acts and as long as His Spirit continues on earth we have a continuance of Christ speaking.
I read the passage in the book of Daniel because it indicates to us what the kingdom is. David tells us about the King and Daniel gives us an idea of the object of the kingdom. It is given in a few words. Nebuchadnezzar was the ideal king; according to the image he was the head of gold. Now, he was exalted, he was self-occupied. In the next chapter after Daniel's wonderful interpretation of the king's vision, Nebuchadnezzar makes an image of gold, which was undoubtedly suggested by the vision; he made
{12}
an image of gold and called upon everybody to worship it. The image typified his own personal greatness. God says, you have to discover that the Most High ruleth in the kingdom of men. You may say, Nebuchadnezzar deserved that lesson, but do we not all deserve that? We all have not an empire like Nebuchadnezzar but if we had we should be just like Nebuchadnezzar, you may depend upon that. Your empire may not extend beyond your own body but that is ruled by you and you take pride in it, naturally the greater the empire is in extent, the more the pride; but the pride that is in an individual in regard to his own body is the same as is seen in the emperor; so each has to discover that the Most High rules. Have you discovered that? You may ask me who the Most High is? It is not difficult to answer. If you go to the Epistle to the Ephesians you can see it is Christ. Evidently the Most High is a Person who is the highest, and He has gone far above all heavens. There is no one higher than Christ, He is really the Most High. Every individual has to recognize that He rules. Nebuchadnezzar had to come to it and you have to come to it. If you do not come to it now while He has blessing for you, you will come to it later when it will be judgment; for God has decreed "that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow ... and every tongue confess that Jesus Christ is Lord", @Philippians 2: 10 - 11. Nebuchadnezzar had to learn through bitter experience. He was driven from men, and had to eat grass like the beasts of the field that he might know that the Most High rules. It was well for Nebuchadnezzar. I do not believe there was ever a king outside of Israel that God took such an interest in as He did in Nebuchadnezzar. This man, Nebuchadnezzar, was of great interest to Jehovah. It is a wonderful thing if God undertakes to discipline you. In the presence of God we are just beasts; so it is well when God puts His hand on us and the result is we learn that the Most High rules. Christ is the Most High and He rules. God has given Him that place, He has given Him the highest place and every knee is going to bow to Him. Nebuchadnezzar was driven from men for seven years, he "did eat grass as oxen, and his
{13}
body was wet with the dew of heaven, till his hairs were grown like eagles¬ feathers, and his nails like birds¬ claws" -- a terrible experience to go through. His reason left him, but God's hand was with him and there was hope for him. I speak in that way to encourage you. If God's hand is *there*, there is hope for you, but you must come to the point of surrender to Christ. There is no blessing for man until he surrenders to Christ. And Daniel says, "Thy kingdom shall be sure unto thee, after that thou shalt have known that the heavens do rule". So will yours. He gives you His own kingdom, and God's kingdom is very much greater than your kingdom, and He purposes to give us the kingdom in all His infinite goodness, but you will never experience that until you bow to Christ; not until then will God ever give you a footing in His kingdom, there can be no tolerance of your will in God's kingdom.
"And whereas they commanded to leave the stump of the tree roots; thy kingdom shall be sure unto thee, after that thou shalt have known that the heavens do rule". The stump remains, that was a great mercy. I wish to call your attention to this because I believe that the state of many persons who are regarded as believers is due to the fact that there is no surrender to Christ. He says, "Thy kingdom shall be sure unto thee", but where? You know we often hear that the sheep of Christ never perish, but there is no present blessing if there is the retention of our own wills. "Thy kingdom shall be sure unto thee, after that thou shalt have known that the heavens do rule". It is after you discover that the heavens rule that your kingdom is made sure to you. You have not anything while your own will rules. While you retain your own will you have no guarantee of anything, but directly you surrender to Christ, directly He is known as King, you have the guarantee -- He says, 'Your kingdom is made sure'. Is your kingdom made sure? Not if your own will is retained. You may wonder why I am dwelling on this; I know that there is no guarantee for present blessing and enjoyment while you pursue your own way. Nebuchadnezzar lost his kingdom and all his enjoyment for seven years. Many a
{14}
man has shone amongst God's people until he began to tolerate his own will and he had to be driven out from among them. You have to learn that Christ rules. "After that thou shalt have known that the heavens do rule". God will not have any other kind of rule. The king that rules in heaven is described by David. God has a just ruler, a ruler as a morning without clouds, and He is not going to tolerate any other.
It says in verse 36, "At the same time my reason returned unto me; and for the glory of my kingdom, mine honour and brightness returned unto me". Is that not an apt description of the believer who surrenders to Christ? His reason returned, his brightness returned. I have seen christians, who had gone on well and positively, allow their own wills and then it did not look as though they had any reason. A man who has been controlled by Christ who turns and follows his own will has lost his reason, but in returning and surrendering to Christ he says, "My reason returned unto me; and for the glory of my kingdom, mine honour and brightness returned unto me". It seems to me that there is very great encouragement in this remarkable case of God's discipline and the whole point was that Nebuchadnezzar had to discover that the Most High rules, and that is Christ. Christ rules in heaven and God will not therefore tolerate any other.
Daniel shows us that man's will has to be broken, and that the heavens rule. @Romans 5 enlarges on this, and we see the positive side of the kingdom, that is, that everything that God has got now for us, for believers, is administered through Christ. I think that each one can readily take in that the King is not only to subdue but He is an administrator, not only a suppressor of evil but an administrator of good. You take Joseph as an example, he was practically in the place of the king and he administered good. He had all the wealth of the world at his disposal; all the corn of the land was under the hand of Joseph and it was all administered by him; so you have in Joseph another picture of the King. He is truly for the suppression of evil and for the subordination of one's will, but he is the great administrator.
{15}
Saul of Tarsus was met by the Lord on the way to Damascus and struck down. He had to learn what Nebuchadnezzar learned, that Christ was ruling. Saul bowed his knee and said, "Lord", recognizing the lordship of Christ; but the Lord did not leave him there. He had a servant in Damascus, Ananias, who was under his direct control; He sent Ananias to Saul and he ministered to him. Now that is what Christ does for us, everything God has for us comes to us through Christ. He may use vessels on earth but it is all by Christ. He administers blessing when you submit to Him, so the apostle says, "Being justified by faith, we have peace with God" -- but by whom? "Through our Lord Jesus Christ", and the end of the chapter shows we have life. He says, "Even so might grace reign through righteousness unto eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord", so that Christ is not only an absolute ruler to break your will but He administers all the blessing of God to us, He has all the corn of Egypt at His disposal and you will never want. I am sure there are believers here in this room who can testify to it -- since we have bowed the knee to Christ we have found that He has a bountiful hand. The Lord Jesus Christ administers to the needs of our souls in a bountiful way. He meets us in every possible exigency of our path.
It says, "So might grace reign ... unto eternal life".
It is given to us through Christ, not exactly in Christ in this chapter but through Christ -- it is a question of administration -- it comes to us through Christ, so we may readily and absolutely submit to Christ. It is wisdom.
"Wisdom is justified of her children". They speak of wisdom and recognize the authority of Christ and in result wisdom is proved because Christ does care for us and we shall never want. Can you not testify to it that you have never wanted? David said he had not seen the seed of the righteous begging bread. He had not seen it, I certainly have not seen it. I take the seed of the righteous to be those who are related to Christ, they never have to beg. You will never have to beg if you are related to Christ. The believer does not have to beg. The Lord Jesus Christ has in His
{16}
hand all the wealth of God and if you have to beg it shows that you are no relation of Christ. We are children of Abraham the righteous, and we do not have to beg. Many christians are in poverty but it is because they do not know what is in Christ.
May God bless these few words in regard to Christ.
{17}
SALVATION AND PRESERVATION IN CHRIST
@Genesis 47: 27 - 31
In reading these verses my thought is to show that salvation and preservation for God's people now are found in Christ as rejected by Israel and accepted among the gentiles. Joseph's possessions in Egypt foreshadow the present place that Christ has gained in the affections of the gentiles. Egypt was not strictly the place of glory for him who foreshadowed Christ. Canaan should have been the sphere of his glory, for it was Canaan that God had promised to Abraham; therefore if Joseph, who represents Christ, is glorified in Egypt it is evident that there was no place for him for the moment in Canaan. He was rejected there. And what I wish to say is, that although rejected in Canaan, rejected by his brethren, salvation for the remnant of Israel is found in him and preservation; and moreover, salvation for those who lived in Egypt -- salvation for the Egyptians was found in Joseph. Now that is what I should like to make plain for it seems to me that, although in a general way God's people are clear enough that salvation is in Christ, they are not so clear that it is in Christ rejected.
And hence many true believers in Christ retain their place in this world. So long as you maintain your place in the world out of which Christ has been rejected you will never realize salvation. I do not say that you will not go to heaven, because everyone who believes on Christ in the present dispensation will have a place in heaven; but I do say that, unless you accept the rejection of Christ, present salvation will not be yours. Now I do not say that you will not have a good conscience in regard to God because faith in Christ gives you that. Faith in Christ risen involves clearance for the guilty sinner; that may occur in Egypt, viewed as the world, or it may occur in Canaan, viewed as the sphere out of which Christ has been rejected; but, beloved friends, that in itself is not salvation. It is a most blessed thing for man to be conscious that there is not
{18}
anything between God and him; and faith in Christ risen involves that for the guiltiest person on earth. Christ risen from the dead means that God has been glorified in His death, for we are told that He was "raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father", @Romans 6: 4. He is raised from the dead in right of what He is in His own person and in right of the virtue of His atoning sacrifice. God has raised Him according to @Romans 4: 25 for our justification. That involves that God was perfectly glorified in His vicarious sacrifice. In chapter 6 He is raised by the Father's glory -- that refers to His person. The fourth refers to His work -- the sixth to His person. Believing in Christ risen, the guiltiest sinner may see himself as clear as Christ is in the presence of God. I should like to establish everyone in the light of that. I would not like to detract from any joy you have in your soul in that blessed light. I should encourage you in it, beloved friends. But what I wish to show you is this -- that salvation is in a rejected Christ. If you asked me for the scripture I would quote @Acts 4: 11 - 12. Peter is speaking to the leaders of the world, to the leaders of Israel, and he says, "This is the stone which was set at nought of you builders, which is become the head of the corner. Neither is there salvation in any other: for there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved". Whose name is that? The name of the rejected Christ. It is in His name that salvation is. And those who prefer to retain their place in the system of things out of which Christ has been rejected do not realize salvation.
Well now, I wish to go back in the book of Genesis for a moment in order to show you the beginning of the section from which I have read. You must remember that the Scriptures were not written in chapters, they were written in sections, and this section of scripture really begins with chapter 37. Chapter 37 begins with the generations of Jacob. "These are the generations of Jacob", and the only person mentioned is Joseph. I do not know if you have noticed it but it is worthy of inquiry as to why it is, although Jacob had twelve sons, that when the Spirit of God undertakes
{19}
to give us the generations of Jacob, the only son mentioned is Joseph. You get no record of the generations of the other sons and children of Jacob until you come to chapter 46. That is to say this section of Scripture begins with Christ. Chapter 37 is Christ here in the flesh and when the Spirit of God undertakes to give us an account of the generations of Jacob the only person He can light upon that He can take account of is Christ. Every other man in Israel was unworthy of divine notice. "These are the generations of Jacob, Joseph". God, as it were, looking down from heaven upon the millions of men upon the earth finds that there is only one man He can take account of and that man is Christ. In all the myriads of Jacob's seed there is only one upon whom the eye of God can rest with complacency and that is Christ. Christ is taken account of by God as the only one worthy of mention. And the Spirit goes on to tell us that he was hated by his brethren but his father loved him. He was hated because his father loved him. Jacob loved Joseph and his brethren hated him all the more because his father loved him. So chapter 37 is the beginning of this section. Joseph is the only one whom God can mention. When you come to chapter 46 you find that the Spirit of God now mentions all the others; but, beloved friends, Christ has to be rejected, He has to die, and the intervening chapters record for us the rejection of Christ and the path of Christ figuratively and His glory in Egypt. All that took place in the intervening chapters. Christ is glorified in Egypt and now the gospel is preached. Joseph himself becomes the preacher. Now I allude to all that because I wish you to see clearly the present situation, which is this: Christ is glorified among the gentiles and everything of God is bound up with Joseph, with Christ as glorified among the gentiles. No nation under the sun had such privileges as Israel, but if they were to derive anything from God after the death and resurrection of Christ, and the setting aside of the nation, they must go out to the gentiles. Blessing henceforth was not in connection with Canaan but with Christ exalted and honoured among the gentiles.
{20}
When you come to chapter 46, Jacob is going down to Joseph. I wonder if there is any one here tonight who has never left Canaan. You may wonder why I say that you should leave Canaan, because you may have it in your mind that it is a sphere of blessing; but it cannot be if Christ is not there. It took Jacob a long while to learn that; his hopes, his faith were connected with Canaan, and rightly, because God had promised Canaan to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, but Joseph was rejected. Ah, beloved friends, be the society what it may that you are connected with, be its history ever so ancient or so honourable, Christ is rejected, Christ is not there. You may find it hard to leave -- Jacob did. But tidings from Egypt moved him. What were the tidings? "Tell my father of all my glory in Egypt". The spirit of Jacob revived. Would God the light of Christ's glory among the gentiles would enter into our souls -- that is what moved Jacob. And Jacob found himself at Beer-sheba. I do not know if you have noticed Beersheba but it is the southern extremity of the land of Canaan, and Jacob was there -- it was the exit out of Canaan into Egypt. What must Jacob's feelings have been as he crossed the border of Canaan? The eyes of his heart would travel back into the territory promised by God to Abraham, Isaac and himself. Is it all over? Are the promises unavailing? Have they fallen to the ground? The God of Isaac appears to him there. Who is the God of Isaac? The God who raises the dead. Isaac is Christ risen. And God virtually said to Jacob at Beer-sheba, 'Jacob, do not be distressed; every promise I have made to Abraham, to Isaac and to yourself is to be fulfilled and shall be established in due season'. Not the God of Abraham, but the God of Isaac, the God who raises the dead -- the God of Isaac appeared to him at the southern extremity of Canaan, virtually saying to Jacob, 'Everything that you have cherished in your heart, every thought of God shall find its answer in the risen Christ, nothing can fall to the ground'. It is Jacob's extremity: he is about to die of hunger, the promise cannot feed him or sustain him in his soul. Christ figuratively is in Egypt, He is glorified there
{21}
and if you are to live you have to go down to Joseph. Joseph had plenty, all the corn, and that in abundance. No one could tell how much corn Joseph had. The famine prevailed everywhere. In Egypt it was no better than in Canaan, but everything centred in Joseph. Everything! The wisdom of Joseph had devised that which should be the sustenance of the life of the world. His name, Zaphnathpaaneah, signifies that he was the preserver of the life of the world. Everything the world required for its sustenance was in Joseph. All was in Joseph -- Egypt was as dependent on Joseph as Canaan. The gentiles today are as much dependent as the Jews. He is glorified among the gentiles but that does not mean the gentile world is any better than the Jewish. It is not among the kings of the gentiles, it is in the affections of God's people taken from among the gentiles that He is glorified. It is among those who have affections for Christ. And He is honoured among the gentiles and it is there that all the wealth of God is under His hand. Jacob had his face toward Egypt and directly he turned his face toward Joseph in Egypt God said, 'I will take account of you and all your posterity'. The only one worthy of notice is Joseph but in chapter 46 every one who belongs to him is mentioned -- not now rejecting Christ -- they are going out to Christ -- they are forsaking Canaan for Christ. What would do that but faith? Only faith would depend on God's promises. One cannot read the Acts without being struck how reluctant even the apostles were to leave Jerusalem and Judea, but faith went over all the barriers. Barnabas was one -- he went down to Antioch fearlessly. He was a good man and full of the Holy Spirit. Ah, beloved friends, he believed on Christ glorified among the gentiles. Was Christ not glorified at Antioch? We are told that there were those there who were ministering unto the Lord. Did they not glorify Him and honour Him? Barnabas was a good man, and full of the Holy Spirit and he recognized Christ among the gentiles. The Spirit of God tells us about Barnabas, and I think if you wish God to take account of you now and call you by name you have to turn your face towards Christ rejected in the
{22}
world but glorified in the faith of the gentiles. I only touch upon it, but directly Jacob and his family turn their faces to Egypt God takes account of them. He not only tells us about Jacob's sons but his sons¬ sons and his daughters. All are taken account of by God directly they turn their faces toward Joseph in Egypt. To my mind that is a wonderful picture of the present moment and I would inquire from everybody here as to whether you are clinging to any earthly system, any worldly system, for there is no salvation there. I am not depriving you of a good conscience. I wish to emphasize -- every one who believes in Christ risen is justified by God; but salvation is in a rejected Christ. Forgiveness is not in a rejected Christ -- it is in Christ risen; but you must accept Christ rejected in the world. The apostle says, "Neither is there salvation in any other", @Acts 4: 12. Who is that one? The one whom the builders rejected is become the head of the corner. So I say if you are connected with any earthly system, be it what it may, you will not find salvation there. You have got to go to Beer-sheba and Beer-sheba means that you are abandoning every earthly tie, every earthly association -- you are abandoning it all -- it is imperative. There is no choosing; if you are to live and be sustained in your soul you must go to Christ -- it is imperative -- no one could fail to see it in reading Genesis. What could Jacob have done? Famine reigned. It is easy to understand what famine involves, it involves death, and so he goes to Beer-sheba and that is where we have to go. We have to abandon every earthly hope, otherwise we shall die, because there is no food or sustenance in any earthly system today. Christ is outside. I am not making demands upon you but what I am presenting to you are facts presented in the Scriptures. Everything is bound up with Christ and Christ is not connected with any earthly system. He is outside of them all. If you want to five, if you want to be sustained, you must go out to Christ.
So he sends a message to Jacob -- "Tell my father of all my glory in Egypt". And he sends with the message a testimony to his power and to his wealth -- the wagons and
{23}
abundance of sustenance for Jacob and his household. But the point was they were to go down to Joseph in Egypt. Well, they go down and so they and their posterity are preserved on earth. Where are the Jews preserved today? Many efforts have been made to locate the lost tribes of Israel and we ourselves are acquainted with one of the tribes. Where do you think the true Israel of God is being preserved? Christ is preserving it. Who could do it but He? Who has the power to do it? The Lord has. Christ has power to feed and sustain the true Israel of God. They are found of Christ as glorified among the gentiles, they are found in the land of Goshen, in the best of the land. I am speaking for the moment of the remnant of Israel; for Jacob represented the Israel of faith abandoning the earthly Canaan for Christ rejected; and what do they find? What did they find in Egypt? Just turn for a moment to chapter 47, verse 11, where it says: "And Joseph placed his father and his brethren, and gave them a possession in the land of Egypt, in the best of the land, in the land of Rameses, as Pharaoh had commanded. And Joseph nourished his father, and his brethren, and all his father's household, with bread, according to their families". There it is -- I take it you see there the Israel of God preserved. Zaphnath-paaneah was the name given to Joseph by Pharaoh, king of Egypt, and the import of it is, the preserver of the life of the world. I have not any doubt that Joseph was that; at any rate he preserved the posterity of God's people upon the earth and these are the only people in whom God has any interest. God will preserve His own people; but not only is the Israel of God preserved by a risen Christ but the gentiles find refuge there -- the Egyptians came to Joseph. The Egyptians were suffering from the famine -- the famine prevailed everywhere in Egypt and Egypt was as dependent upon Joseph as his father and brethren, and they found sustenance in Joseph. And so tonight, beloved friends, may it be your position, by implicit faith in Christ, to know what it is to be blessed and to be nourished by Him in Egypt.
Then it says, "And they had possessions therein".
{24}
Some of you here tonight may think that christians have not very much; but then you do not know what they have. It is all a mystery to you. You know the gospel speaks about "The unsearchable riches of Christ". What do you know about that? You are a stranger to all that. Joseph's father and brethren found something in Joseph; they got possessions. You know christians do not go in for the possessions -- that is really where the difficulty lies with many. Jacob had possessions in Canaan, he did not have Canaan, he lost Canaan for the moment, but he had the assurance in his soul before he left that everything was secured in the God of Isaac; but when he came down into Egypt he had possessions in Egypt. Where do you think all the possessions he tonight for christians? All in the Spirit. They are in Christ, I admit, but they are laid hold of and enjoyed through the Spirit. It says: "And Israel dwelt in the land of Egypt, in the country of Goshen". Goshen was a place especially set apart for Jacob.
And then it says: "And they had possessions therein, and grew, and multiplied exceedingly". Now, I think, these are things, beloved friends, that should mark us. You know a man who has possessions in the Spirit of God is not looking for them in this world. It is as sure as possible if a man is endeavouring to possess something in this world he has not possessions in the Spirit. Now Barnabas had some. "Barnabas ... a Levite, and of the country of Cyprus, having land, sold it, and brought the money, and laid it at the apostles¬ feet", @Acts 4: 36, 37. They were earthly possessions, they were legitimate possessions, they were possessions he was entitled to, doubtless, as a man here in this world; but he sold them. What did he do with the money? He laid it at the apostles¬ feet. How do you think he did that, how could he do that cheerfully? He had other possessions. The Spirit of God had come to Barnabas "For he was a good man, and full of the Holy Spirit", @Acts 11: 24. The Spirit is the earnest of the inheritance and in the Spirit we have spiritual possessions and in virtue of these we sell the earthly ones. So Barnabas sold what he had and laid it down at the apostles¬ feet. The
{25}
apostles were the representatives directly of Christ, hence Barnabas laid the money at the feet of Christ. The Lord Jesus Christ knew how to reckon the value of that offering of Barnabas. You need not think for a moment that Barnabas lost it, he got it back with interest. The Lord is the banker who pays the best interest on deposits -- and here was the interest: Barnabas was a man filled with the Holy Spirit. Did not Simon offer money for the *power of imparting the Spirit*? The Lord Jesus Christ gives you that which is infinitely beyond money. He gives the Spirit, and with the Spirit you have the possessions. And if the believer has not these possessions he is hankering after the world. The believer has not only possessions therein but he multiplies.
It says, "And grew, and multiplied". It is a wonderful thing that here the people of God who were about to die in Canaan are now cared for by Christ in a hostile country; for there was no love between the Egyptians and Canaanites. Jacob was a shepherd and a shepherd was an abomination to the Egyptians. There was no natural love between an Egyptian and Jacob, but there was between Joseph and Jacob. Joseph loved his father and his brethren and so it is now. The gentiles as such have no love for us as God's people, not any more than the Jews; but Christ has love for us. Christ has an interest in us, He gives us the Holy Spirit, and in the Spirit you have possessions and there you grow. Did you ever see a christian grow? A true mark of the growth of a christian is that he loosens his hold on things here. Jacob was going to die and he did not want to be buried in Egypt. He had no interest in Egypt, neither has a believer. The only interest you have is this -- that there are some among the gentiles who believe in Christ. Canaan is the place of your hope; so Jacob requires an oath from Joseph. It is, as it were, that you were making a contract with Christ. Did you ever make a contract with Christ? He loves His people to draw near and make a proposition to Him. You have got the counsels of God at heart, every enlightened believer has the counsels of God at heart. You want to see the counsels effected. You are
{26}
nourished for the moment by His power and His wealth but another king is rising who knew not Joseph, and Canaan was to be the sphere of blessing. It was the sphere of the famine for the moment, but God never deviates from His counsels. Jacob says: "If now I have found grace in thy sight, put, I pray thee, thy hand under my thigh, and deal kindly and truly with me; bury me not, I pray thee, in Egypt: but I will he with my fathers; and thou shalt carry me out of Egypt, and bury me in their burying-place. And he said, I will do as thou hast said. And he said, Swear unto me. And he sware unto him". He makes a contract with Joseph. That was in perfect accord with Joseph's own mind. You may depend upon it that the Lord Jesus Christ is infinitely more set upon the accomplishment of the promises to Abraham than you can be, but He does delight in having us express our interest in divine counsels. Jacob says, Do not bury me in Egypt. If you are going in for the things of Egypt today you cannot consistently require that you shall not be buried there. It is consistent if you are going in for this world that you should have an honourable burial and a monument; that is consistent; but if on the other hand the only interest among the gentiles for you is Christ and His people, there is no burial there. Canaan now is in prospect -- Canaan is the sphere of blessing, Canaan it was that God had spoken of as the inheritance; in Canaan eternal life shall be established; in Canaan man shall live for God, man out of the tomb shall five for God. Jacob says, 'That is what I want. Do not bury me in Egypt: but I will lie with my fathers; and thou shalt carry me out of Egypt'. Now you see faith and it is a picture of faith today in a christian who thinks only of the bringing to pass of God's counsels. God is the God of Isaac and that means He is the God who raises the dead and everything is to be on that footing in Canaan. God had assured Jacob of that at Beer-sheba, hence he says, 'Bury me with my fathers. There it is God will come in, there it is He will raise the dead, and I want to be there amongst them'. So we wish to be, we shall be, brought into the sphere of blessing in the power of Christ's resurrection;
{27}
but in the meantime we are enjoying the land of Goshen -- Christ is for us -- here He sustains us by His power.
In the next chapter we have a most delightful subject. He bowed himself upon the bed's head after securing Joseph's oath and now he blesses both the sons of Joseph. Why did he bless when he was dying? A perfect expression of faith in Scripture. "By faith Jacob, when he was a dying", when he was at the extremity of weakness, "blessed both the sons of Joseph; and worshipped, leaning upon the top of his staff". That is faith when a man blesses when he is dying -- he has no outward strength, no outward power but faith in God and the God who raises the dead. He blessed both the sons of Joseph. Isaac had blessed Jacob and Esau in relation to things to come, in relation to present things. There is nothing outward for us -- Isaac's blessing had relation to things to come and Jacob blessed when he was dying -- nothing in this world. Faith connects everything with God's world and the blessing of Jacob descended on the heads of Joseph's sons in connection with God's world for Joseph.
I do not know that I have kept strictly to my point but I think you can see if you are to enjoy what is in Christ today you have to accept His rejection. It is useless to expect it if you cling to an earthly association. There are multitudes of believers in Christ who are mixed up with associations of this world but salvation is not there -- it is in connection with Christ risen and glorified among the gentiles, and if you are to have it you must accept the rejection and go to Beer-sheba and go to Egypt, that is to say, to Joseph and he will nourish you there, and you will have possessions and you will grow and become multiplied. May God grant it to us.
{28}
THE VOICE OF GOD AND THE VOICE OF FAITH
@Hosea 6: 1 - 9
I read these few verses mainly because they contain the voice of faith: On the one hand the voice Of God, and on the other hand the voice of faith. The voice of faith is first introduced in this chapter, but I suppose that before there can be the voice of faith, the voice of God must be heard in our souls. The Lord causes His voice to be heard in our souls to the intent that there should be an enunciation Of faith Godward. Now, if God speaks to us, He speaks very pointedly. Many seem to think that God is very indefinite, but those who have heard His voice testify that He is very direct and very pointed. He goes to the root Of the matter, and it is not at all likely that He should speak to you about things that are beyond you. It is more than likely that if God speaks to you, He will remind you of things that are immediate, that need calling attention to, things that are obviously of moment. That was the service the prophets rendered to the people. Their office was to call the attention of the people to certain things then existing, and it was essential that they should be noticed. Is that clear to you? "Have I hewed them by the prophets". That is a remarkable expression. The figure is that of hewing down trees. When we come to the Scriptures we find that the instrument by which God cuts is the word. "The word of God is quick and powerful ... to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. Neither is there any creature that is not manifest in his sight, but all things are naked and opened unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do", @Hebrews 4: 12, 13. In other words, if God speaks to your soul through a vessel, a prophet, your soul is brought into direct touch with God. The vessel is Of no importance in that respect. When God speaks to you, everything is exposed. The dissecting instrument Of God is so keen and so sharp that everything is rooted out. Let
{29}
us recall the ministry of Samuel and the prophets which was to bring the word Of God unto the people of God. The Lord says, "Have I hewed them by the prophets". You may remember one instance of it in the prophet Elijah and the prophets of Baal (@1 Kings 18: 17 - 40). God exposes everything; Elijah says, "How long halt ye between two opinions?" That was God's way Of addressing the conscience Of Israel at that time. "If the Lord be God, follow Him: but if Baal, then follow him". What a word that was. If some Of those seven thousand in Israel, unknown to Elijah, who had not bowed to Baal, were in the audience, they would have responded to the call of the prophet. Usually people that come to gospel meetings are exercised, though some may come out of curiosity. If you come persistently, it shows that you are exercised. Exercise of soul is very often covered by a thick veil, but when I observe people persistently coming to hear the preaching of the word Of God, I think that generally there will be results. The word Of God is loathsome to the flesh. It is a bore, and there is nothing attractive in it to the flesh. Many of God's people are hidden, and Elijah ought to have known that. God knew of them. They were not in public; if they had been Elijah would have known it. Even today many of the Lord's people are covered up. They come to hear the word Of God. What do you come for? There must be some bit of interest in your heart or you would not come. There must be something there, and that is what encourages one. Elijah called the people together and on that occasion, by the help Of God, he exposed the prophets of Baal. What a marvellous moment for the prophet of God, one man alone in the presence Of four hundred prophets of Baal. The people were halting between two opinions. If you are halting between two opinions, your leanings are against God. You may appear to be neutral, but your sympathies are sure to be against God, just as the people's sympathies were with Baal. Neutrality in the things of God is an utter impossibility. Let us suppose there were some of those seven thousand there in Israel who secretly refused Baal, refused to kiss him or to
{30}
bow the knee to him. How they would have appreciated Elijah and his call to the people: "How long halt ye between two opinions?" God had His mind about Baal. I know many here that are on the Lord's side because they have taken a public stand for Him. They are not hidden. If Elijah were here he would see them. There may be some here who are hidden. There is no doubt a resolution in your heart that you are not going to serve Baal, but you have not come out publicly for Christ, and taken a stand, yet you are secretly approving of what I am saying. The Lord says: "Have I hewed them by the prophets". God had His way in that respect. You will remember that Elijah took the four hundred prophets of Baal and slew them. That was direct wrath upon those prophets; the wrath of God executed by His prophet. But he did more than that, he hewed the people as well as the prophets, but in the case of the people, he hewed their consciences. That is what one would like to do. There is no work outside conscience work. The prophets were engaged in ploughing up the consciences of the people. The Lord said that men had laboured, the prophets had laboured. They had been ploughing for centuries. They had been hewing the consciences of the people by the word of God, and the greatest and the last of them, John the Baptist, continued this ministry. He went out to the wilderness and preached to the people, and by the word of God he effected conviction. There is nothing at all for God in your soul if you are not convicted of sin. Peter says, "Depart from me; for I am a sinful man, O Lord", @Luke 5: 8. Now John the Baptist says, "The axe is laid unto the root of the trees", @Luke 3: 9. That is the idea of hewing. The moment was come when the tree was to be cut down by the roots. Not at the centre but at the roots. Do you understand that? God goes to the very bottom. God intends you to be rooted and grounded in love. That is where the roots are to be. The root of the tree is shown by its fruit and if the fruit is bad (and, in the case of man after the flesh, it certainly is) the tree has to be cut down by the root. That is the idea of conviction. The word of God enters the soul,
{31}
and the whole moral being is ploughed up by the heart being rendered thoroughly unhappy and uneasy. I was saying elsewhere some time ago, that you never have a good conscience until you have had a bad one. When the word of God enters your soul, it brings home to you what you have been and what you are, and you smite your breast and say: "God be merciful to me a sinner", @Luke 18: 13. You may thank God for any vessel that brings the light of God to your conscience. It is a mercy to you.
In the beginning of the chapter we read "Come, and let us return unto the Lord", and what I want to show you by this, beloved friends, is that the word of God not only exposes you, but it brings to you the light of God, the God who is love. Look at the gospels, which are the unfolding of what is intimated in these few verses: "He hath torn and he will heal us". In a sense these few words put together contain the ministry of the Lord Jesus. The Lord exposes by divine light and then He ministers grace -- a wonderful thought. The law came in by Moses, but grace and truth came by or subsist in Jesus Christ. The Lord anoints -- He does all that is necessary for those who are wounded in spirit. He binds up the broken hearted. "He hath torn"; do you know anything about this experience? The tearing is what one may call surgical work, and then follows the binding up and the healing. There is a wonderful picture of all this in @Luke 10. There was a man going down to Jericho having the oil and the wine, and he bound up the man who fell among thieves. That is the ministry of grace, "He hath torn", and "He will heal". How is it with you? Is your spirit torn, your soul rent with sorrow and conviction? You remember the bride in the Canticles, how she says, "I am black but comely". Why was she black? The sun of conviction had looked upon her and had scorched her. I say, turn to the Lord. It is better to turn to the Lord than to suffer, for we know that they who are under conviction do suffer. It is a question of the grace of God. Christ died. Death had to be accomplished before anything could be effected for man. The Lord Jesus went into death that God might have a free hand to bind up.
{32}
"He hath smitten, and he will bind us up". Faith does not stop there. You want to get on to new ground. The man who was bound up in @Luke 10 was not left on the road. On the other hand we have the woman in @John 4. The Lord did nothing for her but He set her in motion. She left her water pot. There is no intimation of His doing anything for her. She moves herself. That is in entire keeping with the fountain of water springing up into everlasting life. In @Luke 10, the man is carried. The Samaritan placed him upon his own beast, and he is carried and taken care of until the Lord comes back. That is what the Lord does. What souls require is to be led on to a new position, on to new ground. Do you follow what I am saying? There are multitudes of believers hidden away, and they are as yet on the old ground, they are simply where they were before their conversion. I want you to see that a change of ground is involved in the gospel of God. Notice what is stated further: "After two days will he revive us". Everything has to be noticed in Scripture. The two days must be taken account of. Then it says: "In the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight". Now without enlarging on this subject (because it is a very great subject), I may say the verse suggests life, and there is nothing in the Scriptures of wider bearing than life. I may say that the Lord raises the question of eternal life every now and again with His people. Many saints are not clear on the subject, and the Lord will not allow us to rest until we understand it. The question of fife and everlasting life arises here. "After two days will he revive us". Not binding now but being in the position of death. Faith accepts it. Have you accepted it? The apostle Paul says, "If one died for all, then were all dead" (@2 Corinthians 5: 14), so that they who live should not henceforth live to themselves but unto Him who died and rose again. Here there was before the eye of God a Man who answered in every way to God. Adam had transgressed the covenant, but the Lord says, "Thy law is within my heart". He had not transgressed the covenant. He delighted in the law; He magnified it. That Man must live before God. He would
{33}
have a title to live before God, and the two days were testimony to it. "After two days will he revive us" is the testimony to a man that lived before God. He was here for God's pleasure. He was endowed with the power of the kingdom, and with that power cast out demons. "I cast out devils, and I do cures today and tomorrow, and the third day I shall be perfected", @Luke 13: 32. In other words the Lord would die and take up life in an entirely new state. He was entitled to life in the flesh, but in the spirit He has taken up life in a new condition, and that was on the third day. The Lord rose from the dead on the third day, according to the Scriptures. Hence the resurrection of Christ is for faith: "In the third day he will raise us up". Now I want to ask you if you have any part in the divine thought expressed in the apostle's words: "Lay hold on eternal life", @1 Timothy 6: 12. Life after the flesh would not answer to the mind of God. The Lord established a title to live, but in resurrection He has taken up a life which is a life out of death. So that it says, "in the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight". I wonder how many of this company have gone through these three days. You have got to pass through them in your soul. Jonah was three days and three nights in the whale's belly. "So shall the Son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth", @Matthew 12: 40. The fourth day is the day of decay. "In the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight". I understand that to be everlasting life. It is life after three days, a double testimony. This, beloved friends, is death and resurrection. It is what I understand to be the peculiar blessing of God for us, reviving us and raising us up that we might live before Him. Where do you live? I fear most of us live before men. The apostle's idea was, he judged that if one died for all, then all have died. Christ was raised that they who live should not henceforth live to themselves but to Him who died and rose again. "O that Ishmael might live before thee" (@Genesis 17: 18), said Abraham, but God said, not Ishmael but Isaac; and Isaac had to die in figure and he rose in principle out of death. Hezekiah also is brought up out
{34}
of death in figure to live before God. It is "The living, the living, he shall praise thee, as I do this day" (@Isaiah 38 19). God accomplishes that for Himself. "After two days will he revive us: in the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight". If you get hold of that you have something that will give you a footing on new ground and that ground is the ground of resurrection. It is not Ishmael, but Isaac; as the apostle Paul says, we are children of the free woman, and hence we live before God. You want to keep in God's sight. He takes pleasure in you. You may not know it, but God has pleasure in the believer. He will raise you up, and it is to the end that you might live. What is the idea of living? I understand it that your affections are taken up with another. The Lord's word to the woman at the well was that a fountain of water springing up into everlasting life was to be in her. The Spirit takes hold of the believer's affections, transfers them from the world to divine Persons, and in that way the fountain springs up into everlasting life.
In the next verse, the language of faith is "Then shall we know, if we follow on to know the Lord". There is a resolution, a resolve to follow on to know the Lord. God is before you and you wish to know Him, and you follow on to know Him. So it says, "His going forth is prepared as the morning; and he shall come unto us as the rain, as the latter and former rain unto the earth". It points to His highest present position in heaven, and He comes down as the heavenly rain. We shall follow on to know the Lord, and we shall have, as I understand, the heavenly influence of Christ. This influence comes out of heaven upon our souls, so that you and I are on new ground and under a new influence. And, beloved friends, the Lord Jesus as in the highest place should influence all below, as the sun influences the earth. It is an immense thing to be under the influence of a heavenly Man. May the Lord bless the word to us.
{35}
THE LORD AS PREACHER AND AS WISDOM
@1 Kings 3: 16 - 28; @Luke 4: 16 - 22; @Luke 7: 11 - 16
The thoughts that are specially in my mind have reference to Solomon as a type of the Lord both as Preacher and as Wisdom. I think it will be found in the Scriptures that these two things go together. That is, the idea of Wisdom is coupled with preaching. You will find in the book of Proverbs, which gives us an account of Wisdom, that Wisdom is presented to us as a preacher, and you will find in the book of Ecclesiastes that the preacher was Solomon; and, moreover, that as preacher he was king. He tells us formally that "I the Preacher was king over Israel in Jerusalem".
Now I wish to dwell for a moment on that, before I go on to the thought of Wisdom. I think it is exceedingly important to us who are interested in the gospel, to see that the one who is in charge of the preaching is also the anointed King. There are several preachers spoken of in the Old Testament, but I think that you will find that Solomon is the only one who is formally designated as "the Preacher"; and in introducing himself as the Preacher he tells us that he was also king -- not that the king was preacher, but that the preacher was king. In other words, the power vested in Christ as King or as Lord is to underlie the preaching. Hence you have universal preaching, because the power of Christ is of universal bearing. Exalted to God's right hand, Christ is in a position from whence He can affect any part of the earth below. He is in a position to carry out His designs in any part. So that the evangelist Mark, who presents to us Christ as the Preacher, tells us at the close of his gospel that Jesus sat at the right hand of God, and that His disciples went everywhere. They went "everywhere", which meant that every part of the earth was now at the disposal of Christ and His ministers. There were none who could stand in the way for the reason that Christ was on high, having all
{36}
power in that position. He could open doors everywhere, so that the apostles went out "everywhere". And what did they do? They preached -- and we are told that the Lord worked with them. That is to say, as seated at the right hand of God, He was superintending the preaching, and He worked with the apostles "with signs following"; so that the testimony was not only presented but it was confirmed by the acts of power on the part of the King.
That is the position occupied by the King, who is the Preacher. Now, it may not have occurred to you in that way that Christ is the Preacher. He is charged with the proclamation of the glad tidings and so He could say -- "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor". That was a great thought. There was now a man in the midst of men anointed by God to preach. And what preaching, beloved friends! He began at home -- every servant of Christ must begin in his own local sphere. If he does not shine there, he will shine nowhere; and if he is possessed of spiritual power he will manifest it there. No conditions can interfere with spiritual power; it will show itself, be the conditions what they may. So the Lord begins in His own city where He was brought up. And the Lord's outward circumstances in no way enhanced His mission. He was born of poor parentage and His outward circumstances were of the most lowly character; it is touching to see that He deigned to enter the world in the lowliest of circumstances and in a despised city -- Nazareth. But He began there; He began "where He had been brought up", where everybody knew Him. And what was the testimony? Every movement of Christ in that synagogue was marked by grace. The movements were wholly new. They had been accustomed to Jewish teachers, but now there was a different kind of Teacher. He opened the book, not in a haphazard way, but at the right text. He opened it, beloved friends, at a passage that referred to Himself in that particular position and in those particular circumstances; and He read the scripture. And it says, "He closed the book, and he gave it again to the minister, and sat down". Those were the movements,
{37}
those were the actions of the Preacher. We are told that the eyes of all that were in the synagogue were fastened on Him. That was God's anointed Preacher; and then He began to speak; and we are told that they marvelled at the words of grace that proceeded out of His mouth. That is, His mouth was, as it were, an anointed mouth. It was the mouth of God's Preacher -- and the words were words of grace.
Well, that Preacher has gone to God's right hand. He has laid the ground in His death for universal preaching. By His sacrificial offering upon the cross, He has wrought atonement, and now God has Christ in resurrection; for remember, that God has Christ now, not as He had Him when He was here in flesh. God was ever infinitely delighted in the Son, both before His death and after. There could be no change in Christ personally, but before His death His preaching was, of necessity, limited, now the preaching is universal.
@Luke 14 refers to what God found in Christ as having wrought out redemption. It is the celebration. It says, "A certain man made a great supper". The Lord had been discoursing in the Pharisee's house, and when one of the company said it was blessed to eat bread in God's kingdom, it gave the Lord the opportunity of unfolding the present gospel moment. He says -- "A certain man made a great supper and bade many: and sent his servant at supper time to say to them that were bidden, Come; for all things are now ready". Now what do you think the Lord has in His mind? The Lord looked on to the moment when He should have accomplished redemption and in every way carried out the will of God in regard to sin; when He should have glorified God on the earth where God had been disowned by men. I do not know anything to compare with that passage from a gospel point of view. It implies that God is free, and that there is now nothing in the way. He has Christ out of death, righteousness is accomplished; and God celebrates it. It is a question of what He finds in Christ as He is now. Not what He was, but what He is as having accomplished redemption. It is as if God was saying,
{38}
I have Christ now in resurrection; and I have Him on a platform upon which I can invite all men everywhere to participate in the celebration.
If you ponder that, it will convey to you the character of the present moment, and that is what is unfolded in the gospel that Christ is charged with. He is the Preacher as having accomplished redemption; and God has translated Him from earth to heaven. It was due to Christ that He should be translated; but according to the gospel of Mark, who presents the Preacher, He took His seat in heaven so as to superintend the gospel here upon earth. In Luke He is carried up, and as He is carried up His hands are extended in blessing. That is, we have a man up there whose hands are extended in blessing for humanity below. In John, He goes up on account of His people, He ascends to His Father and their Father. But in the gospel of Mark, He takes His seat in the place of power on high, and the preaching goes on everywhere.
The preaching is this; all things are now ready; and God freely invites all to come. I need not repeat the familiar passage, but I would just make one further remark as to @Luke 14, and that is that it involves the house of God upon earth. The feast is celebrated here. It is celebrated where men are and its celebration is in the house. I wish to say just one word on the house. In John's gospel it is connected with the family. It is alluded to first in chapter 8, where the Lord says that the Son abides there for ever. In chapter 14 the Father's house is connected with the family of God. "In my Father's house", He says, "are many mansions: if it were not so, I would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you". That is, it is an eternal abode for the heavenly family. But Luke is engaged with the house in its provisional character. I want you just to ponder that word. The house of God as it is in the present moment is provisional. It is constituted to meet the need necessitated by the gospel, for it is to confer on those who hearken to the gospel the blessing of God ere the time of the fullness of blessing arrives upon the earth. That fullness of blessing cannot be fully entered into now; it is presented
{39}
to us for our faith to lay hold of; it is now in faith. But we are told of the "unsearchable riches of the Christ" -- they are unsearchable; and, beloved friends, it involves a heavenly position. So the gospel of Luke shows that the excess of grace lies in this -- that God has a place in heaven for man. Yet all this is presented to faith to be thus laid hold of; and it is to be awaited on the principle of faith. But meanwhile we are not left without something. Hence you have the institution spoken of in Scripture as God's house, and that is set up here in the presence of men, and all are invited into it. As the parable goes on to say -- "Go out", He says to the servant, "into the highways and hedges, and compel them to come in, that my house may be filled". So that one can say to anybody -- God's house is open to you. God has established here, where need is, that which meets your requirements as a believer in the gospel, that in which you may find the comforts of the home, and where you may taste the blessings of the gospel in a practical way. So that a great element in the preaching is where the celebration is. And what is the celebration? It is not eternal blessing that is viewed, nor the abode in the Father's house to which John refers. It is present blessing. It is that which God provides for you as a present thing ere the time of the fullness of blessing when we are introduced as God's sons in the Father's house.
So in the 15th chapter the same is true, for the merriment is in the hearing of the elder brother who was in the field. It is therefore what men can take cognizance of. He heard it and he did not appreciate it, in spite of the fact that the Father appeals to him on the ground of relationship. He says, "It was meet that we should make merry, and be glad: for this thy brother was dead, and is alive again; and was lost, and is found". That is, it was as if God was appealing to the Jew that he should rejoice in the return of the gentile.
Well, I have referred to all that to indicate what is involved in the preaching. I wish now to say a word in regard to the way in which wisdom is evidenced in the preacher; and here again, Solomon is a type of the Lord Jesus.
{40}
You will all recall how he sought wisdom. As made king, the one great desire of his heart was that he might be endowed with wisdom. Now wisdom is one of the most wonderful things that Scripture speaks of. Indeed we might say it is the only attribute that is personified. I need not refer you to the book of Proverbs, for we are all acquainted with chapter 8 in which Wisdom is personified. And as personified what we find is that Wisdom is intensely interested in men. I believe that is the great point in writing the chapter. Wisdom gives us its own history. It tells us it was with Jehovah "before his works of old" -- before anything was made; and it tells us moreover that it was by Him when everything was made. And then it goes on to say that it rejoiced in the habitable parts of God's earth. In that we see that Wisdom was engaged with humanity; and then it says, "My delights were with the sons of men". That shows that we all are subjects of Wisdom's interest; and the reason is that we are men -- that is what commends you to Wisdom.
Now I wish to show you that what comes out in Solomon is ability to discern what is going on in the heart of each individual. As I said, he sought wisdom; and after he had received it he is put to the test. These two women present themselves before the king, and the question that was to be answered was -- did Solomon really possess wisdom? The result was the triumphant evidence that he possessed wisdom such as none had ever had before. I want you to note how it came to light. There were two women, and there was one child in dispute; there was the dead child and the living child; and the question was to whom the living child belonged. Now there may be one here tonight who is passing through exercise; you are wholly unable to settle it yourself, and no one can settle it for you. What I wish to impress upon you is that the Lord Jesus can; He is the Wisdom of God. It was that wisdom that came to light in Solomon's ability to discern the heart of a mother; it is capable of reading a mother's affections. Now, I think a mother bereft of her child is a type of humanity destitute. Now you may not think yourself destitute, but you are
{41}
destitute if you have not Christ. If you take actual conditions into account, death has come in, and family relationships are bound to be dissolved and broken up. All that you may cherish must disappear presently. You yourself are to disappear in the most humiliating way; dissolution confronts you, and it is the judgment of God upon you. Now I say, is not that destitution? The Lord Jesus knows the exercises of one who has come to the recognition of that truth.
Every true believer in Christ has been enlightened inwardly by the light of God, and by that light he has been enabled to take account of these circumstances, to look at death as it is upon humanity, at his own condition as it really is; and the moment that takes place in your heart, the Lord Jesus is engaged with you. This woman to whom the child really belonged is a type of a truly exercised soul. She yearns for her child, she was the true mother. Whatever else might be said about her she had the heart of a mother, and Solomon decided the case by showing that she truly owned the child because she yearned after it. But look at the other woman, the wicked woman. She had no mother's heart, she says -- "Divide it". That is not the heart of a mother; it is a wicked heart; and that is the heart of the unsaved who is under the domination of the wicked one. Satan is a murderer from the beginning, and all who are under his influence have the same spirit. I do not say that everyone is a murderer, but the spirit of the world is a murderous spirit. Now Solomon refers to this spirit and says, "So are the ways of everyone that is greedy of gain; which taketh away the life of the owners thereof", @Proverbs 1: 19. That is, the spirit of the world has no regard for human life. And so the woman who was not the mother of the living child did not have a mother's heart, the other did. And I bring it forward for the comfort of any one who may be exercised, who may have soul need. The Lord Jesus is interested in your soul, and He reads what is going on there. God's wisdom is evidenced in Him.
It was because of that that I read @Luke 7. The Lord is brought face to face with a scene of death. I was speaking
{42}
this morning of such a scene that John records. John records for us the death of one of God's people, the death of a member of the divine family, and he shows how Christ was moved and how He wept at the graveside of Lazarus. But the death scene that Luke presents has no reference to the family of God. It has reference to man. That is, Luke is, an evangelist, and the evangelist is engaged with the race -- with men; engaged with them because they are men. Now it does not appear that the Lord ever knew this widow, nor does it appear that He knew the young man, whereas in the gospel of John, the Lord knew Mary and Martha and Lazarus. And in calling Lazarus out of the tomb, He called him by name; He says, "Lazarus, come forth", @John 11: 43. Now here in contrast to that it says -- "When he came nigh to the gate of the city, behold, there was a dead man carried out". It was a man. The next thing we are told is that he was the only son of his mother, and she was a widow. There is a point to take note of. What was it that elicited the Lord's sympathy? It was the widow's heart. The widow in Luke is a type of the race, and what elicits the sympathy of Christ is the need of the human heart. As found in the midst of humanity the scene draws out His sympathy on account of the widow. It says, "She was a widow".
Well now, the Lord touches the bier. In the case of Lazarus He simply said, "Lazarus, come forth". Here He says -- "Young man, I say unto thee, Arise". Apparently He did not know his name. The point was that he was a man. It is of no moment whether you regard yourself as known to Christ, or otherwise. If you have need in your heart, you belong to humanity, the Lord Jesus is set for your relief. And notice, He did not take the young man to Himself. If you think of Lazarus you will remember how the Lord said, "Loose him, and let him go". Now, what will Lazarus do? What will a member of the divine family do when he is released from death? Will he go back to his own relatives? No. Suppose you are released from death and let go, what will you do? The Lord gives you, as it were, an opportunity. Where will you go? Well, we are told that
{43}
Lazarus was found at the table with Christ. But what the Lord did with this young man was to deliver him to his mother. What is emphasized is the Lord's consideration for the widow's heart. She had been bereft of her only son, the object of her affections; and the Lord does not claim him. He thought only of the widow for the moment, and so He delivered him back to his mother. That is to say, the widow was reinstated in the city of Nain. The Lord Jesus sends her back into that city with her son; and thus she has means of support.
That is what Christ will do for everybody. He will do it for you. He will reinstate you, not indeed to simply live here upon the earth, but He will supply you with all that is requisite for your position down here. He will do infinitely more for you; but the point in this passage is to show how the sympathies of Wisdom are drawn out. There should be comfort in that for anyone exercised. Solomon commanded that the living child should be given back to its mother, and Christ commanded that the living man should be delivered to the widow. That is, He supplied each heart with what it needed for the moment. And what do you need? What does the human heart really need? What can satisfy you? Why, only Christ. Wisdom not only reads your heart, but supplies what it requires. Your heart requires a satisfying object, and Wisdom provides such an object in Christ. And then, what a change! The dark blank of the future is changed into eternal brightness. You are set up in the presence of the Lord. You have Him.
Much more might be said, for the gospel not only presents an object in Christ, but a range of things in connection with Him, even as we are told, the unsearchable riches of Christ. All that is bound up in the gospel. But for the moment I would press upon you how the Lord Jesus knows what is going on in your soul, and that He knows how to bring in the remedy.
{44}
THE ASSEMBLY SUITED TO CHRIST
@1 Samuel 25: 1 - 3; @Ephesians 5: 25 - 27
For a complete understanding of these Scriptures, it is essential that we should know something about the assembly. I have no doubt that the apostle Paul may be likened to David in his exercises: there was a point beyond which David's prayers did not extend, and I assume that Paul's prayers would end as he saw the assembly in heaven. It would be the great end of his exercises. What a man cherishes he desires, and what he desires he prays for, spiritually. Now David had a great conception of royalty and of rule. He is the man whom God took up to set forth that idea, and he had a great conception of it; his prayers were ended as he saw that Solomon had been provided by the Lord to be his successor, as he saw a man endued divinely with wisdom to occupy his throne, and as he saw that man in his throne fill it according to God, his prayers were ended. So that the great end of his exercises is seen in Solomon. I have no doubt, beloved friends, that the apostle Paul had such desires in regard to the assembly. In fact no one could read Ephesians without perceiving that. That was the great end, that the Lord Jesus who had appeared to him on the way to Damascus, the one man who filled his vision afterwards, should have a companion. It is the outcome of affection for Christ, that is the secret of all ministry. That Man became the controlling object of Paul's life, and as he saw the assembly afterwards in its beauty, his reproaches were unmeasured that he ever persecuted it. He had been exceedingly mad against it, and would have obliterated it, member by member; afterwards as he saw all these members as members of Christ in their beauty, his reproaches against himself were unmeasured. Thus, beloved friends, he saw to it that it was the great aim of his life to bring in every member -- to present every man perfect, that there should be nothing lacking; and I do not suppose that while the apostle was here he ever
{45}
ceased praying for the members of Christ. That which, he says, comes upon me daily -- the care of all the assemblies. Now that indicates somewhat what a vessel Paul was, and how the great aim of his life was to present the saints in heavenly glory to Christ. The assembly is presented as a suited companion to the Lord Jesus. So that in order to shine in our peculiar light we have to apprehend this, that there is a Man in heaven walking alone there. He has no link upon earth. That is what we see in Isaac. He walked alone in the field and the tent was desolate. Paul came upon the scene, as it were, then. He would fill that tent. He would bring in that companion in a heavenly garment so that she should grace the courts above. She should be perfectly at home there, and suited to the grandeur and glory of the scene. Now that was what was in the heart of Paul; that was the great burden of his life. What a mission that was! To bring in one great enough to occupy provisionally the tent of Sarah in testimony, and great enough to occupy and grace the courts on high. Well now, the Spirit of God foresaw all that and whilst you get in the Old Testament types of the Lord's personal ministry on the earth, as for instance in Noah, Abraham, and Jacob, you also get types of the twelve and finally types of Paul's service. They do not interfere with each other; they run in parallel lines in the Old Testament, and I need not say that Paul's line is the special line. To begin with we have to understand the assembly's position in regard of Christ in His varied connections.
Now the Spirit of God here shews us the Lord in type at the head of the creation. You will find that in every relation the Spirit considers for Him. That is what the Old Testament teaches us, and if the Old Testament considers for Christ we ought to consider for Christ. There is nothing we think less of than the desires of Christ. We all have our desires and we pray for them. But what about the Lord's desires? He has got desires. One could cite passages where He solicits sympathy in his desires -- He covets sympathy. As typified in David, He longed for the water, the water that was in Bethlehem, and there were
{46}
those that entered into His longings, and satisfied His longings at the risk of their lives. At the cross He looked for sympathy. Nothing could be more touching to our hearts. He looked for it. Now what I want to shew you is that the Spirit of God in the Old Testament anticipates the desires of Christ. You have Him in view in Adam as the head of creation. Look at the dignity with which Adam appears. He stands out as obviously the Head. He gave names to each of the animals. Such was the intelligence in the Head, and the Lord is the great Antitype. He said to Peter, "Thou art Peter", and the name described what Peter was, the name suggested the assembly. And so, when Eve appears, Adam says, 'This is different'. Would that we could distinguish so that we could see the strong line of demarcation. He observes the difference. This time, he says, "Bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh". I alluded to that to shew you that the Spirit of God considers for Christ in that connection. He is not to be alone in that relation. The Spirit of God considered for Him, and so we have in the woman the helpmeet suited to Him in that relation. The assembly is intended to fill that place in regard of Christ in every possible relation, and she must understand Him. She is suited to Him now. She comes in on that line, she comes in in that relation and she is in every way suited to Him in that relation.
Now when you come to Rebecca you have another idea. It is not now Christ in regard of creation, it is Christ viewed as alone. He is walking alone in the field in @Genesis 24. Now you will understand that if Christ appears as in Isaac He must fill the whole scene, and He does. In @Genesis 21 Isaac is the great object of interest, but Abraham's house does not extend to heaven. In chapter 22 he is the object of angelic interest from heaven. The angel calls to Abraham out of heaven. It was to remind Abraham that that young man was no longer limited to his sphere, that that young man was claimed in heaven -- no longer limited to the sphere of Abraham. Abraham cannot compass all that Christ is. That young man was no longer limited to Abraham's house. The heavenly beings were occupied
{47}
with Christ in Isaac. It is well to remember that. Not only is it said that the angel called to Abraham, but that He called out of heaven. The fact of it was the Angel of Jehovah emphasises the heavenly position. Therefore directly Isaac appears as owned in heaven we get the genealogy of her who should be his companion. In other words, it is that the heavenly man now is dignified, and he must have a companion. She is brought in according to her genealogy. She is in every way suited to her glorious calling. Christ is a heavenly Man and He is alone there, and the Spirit of God in the Old Testament anticipates His desires in type and He provides a companion.
In Joseph you have the Lord, loved of His Father, hated by His brethren, but Head of the gentiles. He must have a companion. Moses, the deliverer of God's people and orderer of the house of God, is another type of Christ. As deliverer of Israel He is rejected, but He has a companion when he is rejected. He has got a companion in the house of God. He has a right to marry whomsoever he will. Moses is a type of the Lord in His sovereign rights and therefore he chooses whom he would. It is a question of asserting his sovereign rights, and he or she who quarrelled with that right became leprous. Who dares to question the rights of the Lord? The great controversy with Paul was whether he should go out among the gentiles. This instance is no question of beauty. There would be no beauty in an Ethiopian woman. It is a question of asserting the sovereign rights of the Lord. Anything that goes with natural feelings is never right in the things of God. The sovereign grace of the Lord alone is right. You may depend upon it what He does is right. He is wise.
Now we come to Ruth and Boaz. You get rule there, you get the Lord typified in Boaz. What a Man of wealth He is! He is not to be alone in that. It is a great deal to have salvation and light, but these things do not satisfy affection. He secures a companion on the ground of redemption. Who can raise a question as to His rights over the assembly? See how the apostle Paul alludes to it in writing to the Ephesians.
{48}
Now when we come to Abigail we see she is a worthy personage. She was of good understanding, and of a beautiful countenance. That is what the Lord is looking for. She is to become the wife of David. Now what you find in this passage is that the links with the old order are gone. Now my suspicion is that the defect with regard to the professing church lies there. Samuel died. Christendom disregards that. Every link between God and the old system is severed. Saul should have been the link as the anointed king. Alas, in Saul's case there was no link. In Saul you get every form of religion but no divine answer, no divine work. Hence while Samuel lived the link was with him; he was the link between God and the people. It is of all moment to see that every link between God and organized religion is broken at Samuel's death. Every link has been severed between all earthly organized religion and God. We have not to go far to find such religion. There is that all about us. Samuel died: now it is just there that the assembly appears in her beauty and intelligence. I believe the Lord would speak to us as regards these two points, intelligence and beauty. She is said to have been of good understanding. She embraces the light of all previous types. We have been singing that heavenly light makes all things bright. Everything seen in that light is seen in its true relation. We have to do with spiritual things, and spiritual things are spiritually discerned. Now we are told that God has given to us an understanding: it is a wonderful thing to have. If I did not have it I should ask for it. The courts above shall be thronged with people that have such an understanding. Do you think for a moment that God will people heaven with people that are ignorant below? That is the kind of people that shall be in heaven -- a people in whose hearts God's laws shall be. They shall be subject to God's laws. The apostle said, "I have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God". The heavens shall be peopled with such persons. God has given us an understanding. Paul said to Timothy, "Consider what I say", @2 Timothy 2: 7. It is to be considered as distinct from the understanding. As I said before, if
{49}
you have not got it, ask for it. I believe we are extremely deficient in prayer. The Lord gives liberally. He does not upbraid; He loves. How much would a man require to go in for all that is represented in this town? You require an understanding for the divine order of things. Paul told Timothy to turn to the Lord. The Lord will give it to you. See how it altered the Ephesians. After Paul had taught them he prayed for them; and more than that in @Ephesians 1, he prays that they might have the eyes of their understanding opened, and in chapter 3, that they might be strengthened in the inner man. In other words we have to be great enough to take this in. The ministry may enlighten you, but only God can build you up in your heart, inwardly, that you may know the love of Christ; and that which you are to know surpasses knowledge. You turn away from all organized religion and He gives you an understanding. He loves you then, He loves you for what He gives to you. He puts beauty upon you, and the beauty He puts upon you increases His affection. In @Psalm 45 it says, "Forget also thine own people, and thy father's house; so shall the king greatly desire thy beauty". The Lord is more attracted to you. In Abigail we have the two things combined. She has a good understanding, and she has a beautiful countenance. I do not suppose there is anything more attractive in the Lord's creation than a beautiful countenance. These things are real. If there is a good understanding, it is produced in you; if you have a beautiful countenance, it is God's work in you. Solomon says, "Let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice; for sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance is comely", @Song of Songs 2: 14. Just contemplate that account for a moment. David was a spiritual man. I doubt if Abigail was ever appreciated until she met David. Nabal was a churl: David was a man of refined spiritual sensibilities. The Spirit of God tells us she was a woman of good understanding, and of a beautiful countenance. Who would appreciate that more than David? David had no equal in his day; how appreciatively he would contemplate Abigail! He would appreciate the good understanding and beautiful countenance. So, dear
{50}
brethren, the Lord is looking for that now, and He is seeking to produce it. Let us not assume it is in us the moment we believe. A good understanding and a beautiful countenance are the fruit of divine work in you. If you are changed, you are changed only by the work of God; nature gives way to what is spiritual. The apostle could not leave the Ephesians without bringing in this beautiful subject. The Supper was to produce love. You do not find the Supper in Ephesians. They knew something about the love of Christ. The apostle placed them in the love of Christ. I wish I could make that clear. The Lord says afterwards, you have left the point which you reached. It was the point of departure from a position already reached. They had not left it when Paul wrote. So he could write about the love of Christ to the assembly. "Christ also loved the church and gave himself for it". In Galatians Christ gave Himself for you, but in Ephesians, Christ loved the assembly and gave Himself for it. She is in every way suited; the good understanding and the beautiful countenance, she is given all these things. The Lord gives them; He does it by the work of the Spirit. The Holy Spirit has come down to produce all these things in us. He has got that which we need, and if we have not got it, the simplest thing is to ask for it. If we have not got it the Lord will have no pleasure in us. May the Lord lead us into it in our prayers.
{51}
THE HOUSE OF GOD
@Genesis 28: 11 - 22; @Genesis 35: 1 - 7
In taking up these passages one feels that one is likely to be treading on ground already well trodden by most of us here. In saying that, I am assuming that the most of us are in the house of God, for if one has to show the line indicated in these passages, we begin with the light of the house, and end with dwelling there -- the highest possible privilege for the moment. I say "for the moment" because it is a provisional order of things, pending that into which we are about to be introduced definitely and finally. The Father's house is not provisional, it is a fixed order of things which abides, but the house of God is not that. It is very near to Heaven as you see in chapter 28; there are direct communications between Heaven and it, and as these communications are all from the top they are not likely ever to be cut. The house of God is the gate of Heaven -- very near to Heaven, although not exactly Heaven -- and it affords every possible comfort and satisfaction for the moment. Such is the house of God, beloved friends; one hopes that most of us are there; if you are not there may there be interest that you might get there! There is only one road to it and what you fund at the outset is that God proposes to be with you there. He says so to Jacob. If God were not accompanying the believer, he would never really reach the house. But God proposes to be with you, and that is a great encouragement. What I would desire is to show how divine interest in the believer is manifested, however crooked he may be; for the fact that you are a believer is no guarantee against crookedness. But however crooked and objectionable you may be to those who know you, God has undertaken your cause and will never leave you; He will pursue you. Although you may go into the world, His eye is never withdrawn from you, and He shows that His eye is upon you. I am dealing with a believer, you will observe, for Jacob is not a type of an unbeliever. The
{52}
circumstances that brought out his crookedness proved that he was a believer. If not, he would never have sought the blessing. He believed in the blessing -- do you? Esau did not. After it eluded his grasp he became a believer, but his belief was of no avail then. He sought the blessing with tears. He valued it when it was beyond his grasp. That will be the case, alas, with many a soul living at the present time. Jacob, though outwardly a much less desirable man than Esau, was a believer -- a believer in the blessing. I take it everyone here is such as that, some perhaps not quite prepared for the consequences of it as yet, not prepared for the condition suited to it, nevertheless you believe in it. I believe in it, I never knew the time I did not believe in it, but there came a time when I appropriated it. Not to be a believer is to be a profane person. Do you desire to be classified in that way? It is not a question of outwardly gross profanity in divine things as we understand it, that was not Esau; his profanity lies in this that he despised the blessing. That was all. He sold it for a mess of pottage. There were certain circumstances which seemed almost to excuse him -- he was about to die with hunger -- but really no circumstance warrants despising the blessing of God. One may go down to the gates of death, but there is no warrant for despising the blessing of God. What does it evidence? Profanity, man's utter nakedness; he is exposed. What has the western world become -- that world to which the blessing of God has been presented? What are the grand results? It has been wonderfully favoured. Look at the western nations! The light of God has been presented to them in such a man as Paul, accredited with all that he was, for he was altogether in accord with his testimony. He brought christianity into the western world and set it up. The result is outwardly a world of profanity, a profane world. That goes without saying. And in what does it consist? In despising God's blessing, which is simply bartered for immediate gain.
Let me appeal to you as to whether you are in that class, despising what is proposed to you -- the blessing of God, what God proposed for man? Esau despised it, but Jacob
{53}
did not despise it. But while he valued it and had his eye on it, he was not prepared to give up the present world for it. This is the state of many at the present time -- true believers in the blessing, but unprepared to go in for it where it is to be found, for, mark you, it is to be found in a place.
I want to dwell on Jacob, as what one notices is that the house of God comes to light in connection with him. It is a very remarkable thing that God should bring such a wonderful truth into evidence in connection with one individual. Do you know that if there is a movement in your soul -- just the initial movement in your soul -- not only the house of God on earth but all heaven is interested in you! The very initial movement in the soul of this man produced movement, not only in the sphere called the house of God on earth, but in heaven. "There is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner that repenteth", @Luke 15: 10. As if God would say, Now look at that! How quickly the angels discern the joy and sympathize with it. The joy is in their presence, not in them for the moment, over one sinner -- one! Now all the great happenings in the world, all those great events occurring in the present world, will not occasion any movement in heaven; they produce no stir in heaven; but one sinner repenting causes joy there. Such is the interest that a response in the heart of man occasions in heaven. Nothing brings into evidence what God is more than that does.
So here in Jacob you have a man in whom divine operation had taken place. He had on the principle of faith secured the blessing; it was his. You make it good as a matter of title, even if you are prepared to defer it as a matter of blessing. Is it not so? We are prepared to defer it for *years and years*, and we go into the world to make a show there! Yet God waits upon you, and Jacob's history begins with this -- a ladder is seen. He was asleep -- like many a soul -- fast asleep. But divine interest is in you though you are asleep, and even in your sleep God would make known that interest in you. Depend upon it you are as precious to God as Paul is. Only God could speak to a
{54}
man in his sleep. I could not. God alone can speak to a man asleep. He has his own way of doing it, "in a dream, in a vision of the night", @Job 33: 15. God has His own way of causing His voice to be heard, so He produced in Jacob whilst asleep a sense of the care He had for him. Jacob woke up; he never woke up before to such light! The sun had set when he went to sleep; the sun had gone down. It depicts the state of the soul, for Jacob felt apparently there was not a friend on earth -- not one to befriend him among all the sons of men. He was alone -- alone with a stone for a pillow -- when the sun went down. But the sun goes down to come up; it never sets but to rise, and Jacob never woke to a brighter sun than on this occasion. He woke to all the light of heaven, the light of the opened heavens. Not simply the light of the sun but a light above the sun! Heaven was opened. We are in that dispensation, the dispensation of the opened heavens. The heavens are opened now. We are not told that he looked in. He was like a young man who valued the blessing and hoped to go in, but who, for the moment, looked elsewhere -- anywhere but there. Stephen looked in. He did not look anywhere else, he looked steadfastly in. He was a christian, a fully developed christian; and in the power of the Spirit he looked in.
Jacob awoke to all that light. How I wish I could make known that light, the light of Christ in heaven reflecting all the heart of God. You see it in the face of Christ. How wonderful to wake up to all that light. The light is too much for you, you say. It was too much for Jacob. He did not deserve it. It was not too much for Stephen -- is it too much for you? "The glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ", @2 Corinthians 4: 6. What is it intended to do? To shut out all other things from your heart. "The light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is the image of God". Satan hates that image and would do all in his power to shut it out. He blinds the minds of them that believe not "lest the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should shine unto them", @2 Corinthians 4: 4. That is what Jacob awoke to -- the light of heaven, the Lord at the
{55}
top of the ladder and angels ascending and descending on it. Think of that! that friendless man, and rightly friendless, for he was a supplanter, a man of no character, friendless on earth but not friendless in heaven. Ah! you are not friendless in heaven. There was the Lord on the top of the ladder, and the ladder came just to Jacob. And angels, the sympathetic emissaries of Him who was at the top, were communicating with man at the bottom, and were ascending and descending on the ladder!
Just think for a moment of a praying father and a praying mother! I have great sympathy with parents. God has placed the idea of a christian household here, where there are affections, where there are brothers, sisters, father and mother. God has got the affections of a Father, and He understands what it is to be deprived of the obedient affection of children. Those who are parents know what that is. Now Jacob though friendless on earth, as we were saying, was not friendless in heaven. And what I would say in this connection is that God causes His sympathies to flow out through the saints here at the present time -- through those that are near to you. They manifest divine sympathy to you. So that although you may feel yourself under the conviction of sin, and thus shunned by your companions and the world, yet you will not be without sympathy. And your companions will shun you -- it is as sure as possible -- directly you begin to feel what sin is, and what the world is, and to judge these things, the world will despise you. I refer to Lot; he was the mayor of the town (or city) but directly he receives the messengers of God, and brings forth unleavened bread, the people of Sodom turn on him. He is no longer a popular politician, no longer a mayor; he is an alien now, a "fellow" coming from the country. "He will needs be a judge", they say, @Genesis 19: 9. Directly you begin to feel what sin is and own it, and what the world is and own it, you will be despised and shunned. You will feel yourself friendless, but you are not friendless. Jacob was not. You will have truer friends than ever you had. God will stand at the top of the ladder and be your Friend.
{56}
Well, Jacob regards all this as a terrible thing. And why so? "How dreadful is this place" he says, "this is none other but the house of God". The house of God dreadful! It was a place in which he was not happy or comfortable. But what we find is that the element of righteousness came into Jacob's heart. There is no progress spiritually until the element of righteousness comes into your heart. How did it show itself with Jacob? He responds to the claims of God -- the God at the top of the ladder who was so interested in him -- *He* had some claim. "I will surely give the tenth unto thee", Jacob said -- a very poor answer, but it was the element of righteousness. Would to God all the christians of Christendom would give a tenth, there would be some righteousness. With Jacob it was to be himself nine times out of ten, but God was to be before him once out of ten; and that was something to his credit. I would ask you how many times have you got God before you? He will not despise it. If it is only one hour out of the week He will give you credit for it, but oh! how much you will lose; and will lose all the other hours. They will all go for nothing. Jacob was one-tenth righteous; it was enough to give him a footing, but it is as if God would say, Jacob, there must be more than one tenth before I am through with you. God loves us too much to allow of nine-tenths for self, and only one-tenth for him; for remember -- it is only what God has that we get as a matter of practical enjoyment.
When we come to chapter 35 we find that Jacob has had twenty years of God, and twenty years of himself too, twenty years with nine-tenths given up to self. Now, how is it with you, young man or young woman, how are you to start? Look at the eunuch in @Acts 8; he had been up to Jerusalem; he was returning reading the Bible -- would that men would read the Bible -- and he read a wonderful section of it, @Isaiah 53. And his soul was entranced by a wonderful man. He had never read of a man like that before -- a Man who was prepared to go down to death as a lamb. Is that the prophet? he inquires. Oh no, it is not the prophet. No prophet could conceive in his heart to
{57}
depict such a man as that. It requires the Spirit of God to depict Him. The Spirit of God in Isaiah outlines such a Man as that. No, that is not the prophet. And Philip opened his mouth and preached unto him Jesus. What did the eunuch do? Did he give a tenth? Oh no! He went down *altogether*. "See, here is water", he says, and he is baptized. What did it mean? It meant self was gone. He gave himself up for Christ. Wonderful moment in the history of a man's soul when Christ comes before him in all His beauty, and self is abandoned for Him!
Well, as I was remarking, there are twenty years between the 28th and 30th chapters, and during all those twenty years God saw to it that there was one great end to be reached in that man's soul; that end was the house. Jacob had said, "If God will be with me ... so that I come again to my father's house". Ah no! Jacob, it is not that, you left your father's house in disgrace, you are not going there; you may go there incidentally, but you are coming to Bethel now. Thus would God address him, for remember you may go into the world and make a name -- and you will suffer -- but God never withdraws His eyes from you *never*. He will follow you for years, and directly you are on the way back He will meet you. It is wonderful to be met by God! Two hosts met Jacob: what a reminder! But it was only the beginning of something much more wonderful, for in the same chapter we find that God meets him. All he has -- the result of the achievements of his life -- go over the brook, his wives, his cattle -- *they* are not going to the house of God, his cattle are not wanted there -- and he is left alone. He was no insignificant man, he was a man of means; but he was alone -- alone with a man who wrestled with him. The only thing I would emphasize in this connection is that in result Jacob said, "I will not let thee go, except thou bless me", @Genesis 32: 26. Ah, he has reached it now! He wants the blessing now; he must have it. Mark, it was Jacob who said this, not the One who wrestled with him. He wanted to go -- it was the Lord Himself, and He wanted to go, but it was only in order to bring out what was in the heart of Jacob. The Lord has
{58}
put something in, and he compels us to give it out. He loves that.
Now Jacob is limping. He went over the brook limping. The limping will bring you into reproach here, but you have got the blessing of God in your heart, and the limping will not hurt you in the house of God. Jacob got the Spirit typically. It constituted him a prince, and that is the only kind of person who goes into the house of God. "Thy name shall be called no more Jacob, but Israel". All is wiped out now, not at the cross alone, but in the history of your soul: you are no longer a supplanter, the Spirit of God has taken possession, and you have a new name. What a wonderful name Israel is! Jacob can lift up his head in dignity now. He has got means now. He can come to Bethel. It is now God the God of Bethel.
Paul says, "We are making our boast in God"; he says, "through whom now we have received the reconciliation", @Romans 5: 11 (New Trans.).
I could say a great deal more, but what I would desire to leave with you is a sense of the interest God has in a soul. He will never leave us till we are entirely adjusted down here, so that we may be fully equipped for His house. May He give us the answer to that!
{59}
THE PERFECT SERVANT
@Mark 8: 22 - 26
What one specially sees about the evangelist Mark is a recovered servant -- a servant who had turned aside from the path and who was restored; as restored he is enabled by the Spirit to portray for us the service, walk, and ways of the perfect Servant. If you think of it in the divine ways of grace that God should honour a servant who had failed by allotting him such important work you can only say the grace of it is wonderful. Further, what is characteristic of his gospel is increase; with most of us there is a tendency to decrease and to retrogression.
In @Numbers 29 which sets forth in figure the best period in the ways of God as to the earth -- the millennium -- we see that even that is characterized by decrease. Its brightest period is the beginning. The feast of tabernacles, the last great, feast is typical of the millennium, and we find in verse 13 of that chapter that the offering begins on the first day with thirteen bullocks, the second day twelve, the third day eleven, the fourth day ten, the fifth day nine, the sixth day eight and the seventh day seven. That is decrease! But a perfect number remains -- seven. The millennium is not typical of complete breakdown, but things are at their best in the beginning. This is a sad picture. The number, however, does not go below seven, and all the sacrifices that refer to the Lord Jesus remain. Mark is different from this.
Matthew begins, when giving us the parable of the sower, with the best soil producing a hundred fold, then it decreases to sixty, and finally to thirty; whereas Mark begins with thirty and advances to sixty, and finally reaches a hundred. Mark increases. That is very encouraging for us. You should never allow the number to go below thirteen, which the feast in @Numbers 29 begins with.
The apostle Paul said he had shown the Thessalonians how to walk and to please God, and he wishes them to
{60}
increase (@1 Thessalonians 4: 1). Now this is what you get in Mark's gospel in connection with service, and I need not say that Christ is the perfect Servant. It is a wonderful illustration Of grace that God should be pleased to take up a man like Mark who went away from Paul and Barnabas, and give him such a great work to accomplish -- to write an account for us Of the perfect work Of the perfect Servant.
Another feature Of his narrative is the sympathy present where the Lord is operating. For example -- a man "borne of four" (chapter 2). That man had sympathizers in his paralysis. There is plenty Of paralysis spiritually. I believe in gospel meetings and I love to have the Lord's people at them; they support me and give me their sympathy. In this chapter you find sympathy with this man who is blind; Mark says they "besought him", there was sympathy with the blind man. If you put a notice outside the door, that board has no sympathy, nor has the notice; but if you go and invite a man to hear the word he is impressed with your sympathy.
One great feature in Mark is that there is an air Of sympathy in the operating room (so to speak). It is one thing to carry on your labours surrounded by hostile critics and another thing to have sympathizers; the latter is what Mark gives us. Mark brings in houses. Households are places Of sympathy, places Of relationship marked by affections. In the house into which you are born there are relationships in which you are cared for. If you grow up in these you get the idea Of God's house. Relationships carry affections. Had the paralytic been carried by two it would have been an evidence that there was sympathy, but when there are four it indicates that there is sympathy everywhere; four signifies universality.
If you do not want the Lord Jesus you are apt to turn your back on the Lord's people. If you have to attend a meeting you look for the end more than for the beginning; but let me tell you those christians are your friends, they are your only true friends; your unconverted relatives are not nearly such good friends as they. A christian relationship is the best.
{61}
The four men who bore the paralytic could not get to the door Of the house where the Lord was, but they were allowed to break up the roof and let him down. Evidently the owner Of the house was sympathetic. Also they bring the blind man to the Lord and He takes him by the hand. Think Of the Lord Jesus whose hand upholds all things -- think Of Him putting out His hand to a blind man. A blind man is not an asset but a liability. If you are governed by your own will you are a liability, not an asset! The Son of Man came not to be ministered to but to minister. Even at the right hand of God He is, according to this gospel, still working with His servants. The operations Of Christ from heaven are world wide. The Lord is working with the preaching not to honour the preacher but to help souls. He is with the preaching and extends His hand to help (chapter 16: 20).
A city is a place of concentrated evil. We read of the two witnesses in @Revelation 11; they witnessed for 1260 days, but after their testimony is given the beast slays them, and the bodies of these two men lie for three and a half days; there is indignity heaped On their corpses. They "lie in the street Of the great city, which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt". Do not seek the cities except you go for testimony. Elders were appointed in every city in connection with the testimony (@Titus 1: 5). If your eyes are to be opened God will not open them to be occupied with the city. The Lord led the blind man outside. God has his eye On the elect. Before you are converted you are kept out of the influence Of the cities. God keeps and orders things so that you may not see evil, as in @Isaiah 33: 15. He "shutteth his eyes from seeing evil".
How one loves to bring forward the grace Of Christ! He casts out the demon with a command, but He did not lay His hands On the demoniac. Look at the gentleness with which He leads the blind man out of the town, what confidence it inspires; encouraging away from evil. Then He spat upon his eyes and put His hands on him and asked him what he saw. (Spitting indicates the humanity of the Lord.) He saw something. You who say that you
{62}
are converted -- can you give an account of what you have seen since you were converted? I believe one way the Lord has with us is to ply us with questions. Do not let these questions pass. He asked the blind man if he saw anything. He replies that he saw men as trees walking; his view of men was out of all proportion.
This world is divided into governments -- the newspapers take account of it in that way. We are told in @Revelation 13 about the number 666. "Let him that hath understanding count the number of the beast" -- who can do it? Only the spiritual. The number is there and directly you have the spiritual eye you see the number. In the coming day the number will be as distinct as possible, so that no person with the eye of wisdom can fail to see, and that number is 666. And so with the word city -- "which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt where also our Lord was crucified". That is written across the face of this world. There was a writing in Daniel's time in connection with the gentile world; the fingers of a man wrote upon the wall. There was a heart behind the hand that wrote on the wall. I say this so that you may have right eyesight -- the humanity of Christ brought to the attention of the eye. Before the Lord could put his hands on the man the second time He had to die, for the second touch is the gift of the Spirit. "He that is spiritual judgeth all things", @1 Corinthians 2: 15.
I would raise the question with the young people here -- since you have been converted what have you seen? This man saw "men as trees walking". This describes, I believe, a great many young christians, their vision is distorted. The apostle John says far more to the babes than to the young men. He says very little to the fathers and little to the young men. He speaks to the babes because of the dangers. Their chief danger was antichrist. Already (he says) there are many antichrists. The blind man saw men entirely above the ordinary level, but the Lord laid His hand upon him the second time. This is the second portion completing the matter. The first touch involved that He had to die. To see men as trees walking and to have been left there would have been dreadful; but the Lord works
{63}
out the great work of atonement for us. He lays His hands upon this man, not one hand only! After that he puts His hands again on his eyes and made him look up. If you look up, you look past the trees. Stephen looked up. He looked steadfastly into heaven. He saw no men as trees there but he saw Jesus. After the Lord had put his two hands on the blind man the second time, he saw everything clearly. It is not that you see men as trees, but you take account of them clearly. Deception is brought about by man. The Lord sent the man home to his house. I wish to emphasize specially that the effect of the work of Christ in Mark's gospel is to put one right in one's own house. He does not say, go back to the village, but to the house. After you get a bit of light, what is the next step? That light is made good in you. The Lord takes good care that you are not left to yourself. He sends to his house this man who had hitherto been a liability, but who was now an asset. A wonderful advantage to the house! The Lord Jesus sends you to the house. This is the idea in Mark's gospel: in John's gospel we get another thought in connection with Lazarus. The Lord did not send him anywhere after He raised him, but says, "Loose him, and let him go". It is as though He said let us see what he will do; and we see what he does in chapter 12; he is found there in company with the Lord Himself; "Lazarus was one of them that sat at the table with Him".
The trouble with many is that they are deceived by man -- their vision is distorted -- they "see men as trees walking", but the Lord will give the second touch; and the second touch is the gift of the Spirit. Then you have got Christ before you -- not man. If you have that one Man before you, you will not be deceived.
{64}
THE GOSPEL AS LIGHT
@John 1: 8, 9; @Mark 7: 24 - 30
It is of great importance to present the Gospel as light; as one said, "I have even given thee for a light of the nations", @Isaiah 49: 6. One would aim at that -- that in what is presented there might be light, and for this reason I read the passage in the gospel of John -- the evangelist who loves to present Christ as Light; indeed he is accustomed to use astronomical figures in his gospel and in his epistle. Allusions are frequently made in his writings to what is known to science as astronomy. But the allusions are of the simplest kind, as the physical things referred to are visible to everyone and indeed living conditions on the earth depend on them -- the sun and the moon and the stars. John's language is far from scientific in the ordinary sense, but extremely spiritual. He is very fond of monosyllables, in which he expresses the profoundest possible truths; so that while the greatest mind may be ministered to, the youngest child also may find interest and food. 'John's simple page' conveys what I am referring to. It is "simple", and yet, as I remarked, profound.
Well now, I have referred to John in that way so as to bring forward the thought of light, and I want to specially dwell on the word 'true'. He says of John the Baptist, "He was not that Light". The Baptist was a faithful witness of the Light. He was like a star. The Lord says of him: "*He* was the burning and shining lamp", and that the Jews "were willing for a season to rejoice in his light", @John 5:35. But the evangelist says, "He was not that light". He was a light but not *the* Light. And then he proceeds to tell us what the Light is; he says, "The true light was that which, coming into the world, lightens every man". Not every Jew, nor every Englishman or Irishman. The true light knows no special nation; it is impartial. Partiality is a most baneful thing. The true Light is contrary to that; the true Light makes no difference.
{65}
It sheds its beams on every man. That is the true Light. That is in contrast to the Jew. The apostle John always slights the Jew, as assuming to be privileged. The true Light was there in their midst. "He came to his own, and his own received him not". He dismisses them. "His own received him not". They are dismissed from that point onward. They are out of court. The true Light henceforth is for man as such. And so also in the earlier statement. "In him was life, and the life was the light of men". Of men, not of Jews specially. If they take their place as men, certainly, but if they retain their position as a privileged class, not for them. Terrible thing to be excluded from the light. A total eclipse shuts out those assuming to be privileged. John goes back to the beginning. What was there? Wisdom. "In the beginning was the Word". There was no Jew in the beginning; there was no gentile in the beginning; *men* were in the divine thought. Wisdom said "I was daily his delight ... rejoicing in the habitable part of his earth, and my delights were with the sons of men", @Proverbs 8: 30, 31. Palestine is not the only habitable part, nor this country. No; there are habitable parts elsewhere. God laid out the earth; Wisdom designed it for men. Wisdom not only builds the house, but she also designed the earth for men to dwell in; and in laying it out there were certain areas specially prepared for men -- habitable parts. Hence as to the future we read: "He has not subjected to angels the habitable world which is to come, of which we speak", Hebrews 2: 5. Thank God, He has put *it* under the Son of man. Do you not love the thought anticipated of a habitable earth to come -- an earth peopled by men like Jesus and ruled over by Jesus? That is the design. As He came into this world life was in Him, and the life was the light of men. It was as if God said, 'That is the idea, there is my thought as to man living on the earth'. That Man moved about for God's will only; He did always those things that pleased God. In that Man also all that God is for men was set forth. That was the true Light. I am dwelling on this because of the importance of it. We are living in a period in which there
{66}
are so many false lights. Now in navigation a false light is infinitely worse than no light at all. Anyone who goes to sea knows that. There are many false lights today. Young people and old people are exposed to them, hence John the evangelist here gives us a guide as to the true Light. Everything claiming to be light should be compared with this passage. Is it partial? The true light is impartial; it makes no sect; it takes account of no class of men specially; it takes account of you because you are a man; that is the true Light. We should test everything that comes to us as gospel by that. Does it take account of you just because you are a man? If it does, it is the true light. When it came into the world it shed its fight on all; it made no selections. Think of the way the gospel takes account of you! Consider the Epistle to the Romans: it finds man just as he is; it tears away all the varnish. When light comes it exposes every contrivance by which men would conceal their true state, and all is "naked and laid bare to his eyes, with whom we have to do", @Hebrews 4: 13. And so also is it naked to the conscience of the awakened one. Have you ever been awakened by the Light? Well, that true Light is shining upon you. Standing before the great white throne no one can say, The fight has not shone on me. It shines on every man that comes into the world.
One word more about the Light. He that doeth truth comes to it. He that does evil hates it. You may not persecute the christians but you have no appreciation of them or the things they cherish. This often marks children of christian parents, and if not judged it develops into hatred of the Light. "Everyone that does evil hates the light, and does not come to the fight that his works may not be shewn as they are; but he that practises the truth comes to the light, that his works may be manifested that they have been wrought in God", @John 3: 20, 21. Thank God, He is working. One would not attempt to preach were it not that one believes this. The preacher presents the light, and reckons on the work of God. If there is a work of God with you, you come to it; you love it. What is wrought of God in you is made manifest; your interest in
{67}
the saints, your love of the Scriptures, your hatred of evil are evidences of it. But then you not only come to the light, you are to become a child of light. In chapter 12 it says, "While ye have the light, believe in the light, that ye may become sons of light"; as a child of light a believer is like a star -- he shines as a light in this world.
Well now, I read the passage in Mark, because it shows you how the true Light acts. It says the Lord went into the borders of Tyre and Sidon. He had gone about doing good in Galilee and Judaea; now He goes out into the gentile borders. Mark presents the manner in which the Lord carried on His ministry. It says He went into the borders of Tyre and Sidon and entered into a house. How many thoughts enter into such a position! The Creator of the world in a house! He was there as light. It says, "He could not be hid". Do you wonder at that? Has He come into your house? Yea, to come closer home, has He come into your soul? Let that question be answered by each of you. A new day dawns when the light comes into your soul, He finds a conscience there; He finds a heart there; He finds an intelligence; He sets about to put all right, to adjust everything. Romans presents this adjustment, the whole man -- body, soul and spirit -- is set right. If the Lord has an entrance into your soul He adjusts you; He sets your conscience right. That conscience! It has been an uncomfortable occupant of your house, so to speak. Did you ever thank God for it? God gave man a conscience in His mercy. It is the avenue through which He reaches us as in our sins. Happy the man who is at peace in regard to it as in the light of God. The Lord Jesus sets the conscience at perfect rest; He cleanses it with the meritorious value of His blood. As the conscience charges, the blood of Christ comes in its atoning value to the soul; it "cleanses us from all sin" (@1 John 1: 7). Mark, it does not only say "sins". The conscience is set at rest, not only in regard of one's transgressions; by the blood of Christ it is set at rest in regard of indwelling sin as well. Indwelling sin has no power in the presence of the light of the blood of Christ in the conscience; the conscience is
{68}
purged; the believer in Christ is thus at rest in regard of sin and sins.
The Lord placed Himself on the frontier of the gentiles in a house, and He could not be hid. A certain woman whose house had been upset and deranged by the devil came to Him. The woman had a house, too; the gentile world had been invaded by the devil and the household arrangements were upset. Mark says, "little daughter --"Matthew says "daughter". She was one who normally would be the delight of her mother but she had an unclean spirit. How Satan likes to attack the heart of a parent, and this too through the little one who should be its delight. Satan had got in. Mark does not tell us how. Those of us who are parents have some knowledge of how he affects children. Will begins to work with a child. I have remarked lately that the apostle Paul in his exhortations to the christians at Ephesus speaks about the child before he speaks about the parent. Satan attacks through the child; he is the weak point. This was a little one. The mother's heart takes account of the fact that Satan is there. It was a solemn overwhelming fact that faced her morning, noon and night; her little girl was indwelt by a demon. What havoc Satan had wrought in the households of the gentiles! It says she "was a Greek"; she belonged to an enlightened nation, but all the philosophy and learning in the world will not save her child. Learning, national reputation -- all is utterly futile against Satanic inroads. That is what Jesus finds amongst the gentiles. Well, there was blessing in store for the woman and little girl, and there is blessing in store now for us who are parents and for our children; for God does not give us children to become a scourge to us. Satan creates the scourge. A child is a gift from God. "Happy is the man", it says, "that hath filled his quiver with them", @Psalm 127: 5. Well, there was blessing in store for the woman and the little girl, but in this instance it came through the faith of the mother. But salvation for a child necessarily implies that he has faith in Christ also.
I wish just to dwell for a moment on the manner of it. She "fell at his feet", a right attitude surely, and she
{69}
besought Him that He would cast the devil out of her daughter. The Lord says to her, "Suffer the children to be first filled". She might have said, 'I am talking to you about a child', but she did not. Her child did not belong to the children He had in His mind. There were children -- think of the grace in which He regarded Israel! They were the children. The Lord is bringing to us in this figure a household scene -- a table, children at it, and dogs under it. The dogs do not get up on it and take the crumbs off the table! Nevertheless it was very humiliating to be likened to them. Very. Now the Lord says to her, "It is not right to take the children's bread and cast it to the dogs". She answered, "Yea, Lord; for even the dogs under the table eat of the children's crumbs". Are you equal to that? It would be difficult to get a finer picture of a truly humble person than this. Sometimes one has to explain things to people, and I often think that too much explanation takes away the edge of the truth. Anecdotes do not help. What is needed is exercise. The more exercise the less necessity for explanation. The Lord did not resort to it at all; He simply brought forward this simile. How simple and yet how forcible. Now He says, Look, is it right to take the bread the children are eating and cast it. Mark you, it says "cast it". It is another thing to take the bread and cast it. The Lord Jesus was not doing that. He was in the midst of Israel and He was ministering to Israel. He was true to the position and it was the position of a householder. The woman asked nothing as to what He meant. I do not deprecate questionings, for it is a good thing to have questions -- but be sure that your questions are conscience questions and heart questions. Sometimes the Lord refused to answer at all. Why? He is thinking of the question and the questioner that is behind it. But when you get a soul really exercised and the truth is put to him, he bows. That is what she did. She says, 'Yea, Lord, but the dogs eat of the crumbs'. And they were falling thick and fast and they are falling now. I am not saying that there is such a scene today exactly, but see how the Lord comes to where the gentiles were, and presents
{70}
the household idea to the woman, and now she says, Yea, Lord. Would to God that someone here tonight would say that in his soul before God, 'That is my position -- a dog beneath the table'. Mark you, you are not a vomiting dog, you are not a dog that needs to be guarded by a chain; that is not the idea here; it is the domesticated creature who knows his place. I wonder if you do! We are all apt to be a bit bumptious, every one of us. It is a wonderful thing to arrive at a knowledge of your place before God, and kneel to all that God has set up here. That is the truth of Romans -- one is recovered, that is, he respects God and respects every institution of God, whatever it is, down here. The woman says, 'Yea, Lord: yet the dogs' -- she was one of them. At once the Lord says to her, "Because of this word, go thy way, the demon is gone out of thy daughter". In Matthew He exclaims at her faith: a wonderful thing to find faith like this! Think of the Lord Jesus Himself exclaiming at it, and yet the woman had just said a word; she said "dogs". "Thy faith is great"; and when He speaks of a great thing it is a great thing. It was a wonderful thing to Him to find faith like this in the borders of Tyre and Sidon. He says, "Because of this word". Now I was speaking about one bowing, but the Lord loves to hear you speaking. What have you got to say? You have been given a mouth to say something. Have you ever said anything in regard of Christ? Or in regard of His work in you? The Lord loves to hear that. He says, "In the multitude of words there wanteth not transgression", @Proverbs 10: 19. We say a great many things that are utterly useless, but there are sayings that the Lord takes account of. And he says to this woman, "Because of this word, go thy way, the demon is gone out of thy daughter". Many a time relief comes to the conscience by a confession. I believe there are a great many private christians; they live in private; they never say anything about the Lord Jesus; they never say anything about their belief in Him -- what He has done for them. Be sure that you have a saying that the Lord can take a note of. And it says further, when she was come to her house she found "her daughter
{71}
lying on the bed" (verse 30). Who did that? I wonder. The demon did not lay her upon the bed. It is the touch in Mark. Mark would interest you in the gospel. He would attract you by it. Matthew does not tell us anything about the bed; Matthew occupies you with the power and with the rights of the Messiah. Mark is engaged with the servant and how he does his work. And how touching it is with this mother, with a true mother's heart, as she returns to her house; for she had a house; thank God she returned to it. She finds the demon gone and the little girl on a bed. Was that not care? Young people need that. You know when the demon goes he leaves a certain fagged-out state spiritually and you need care; you need rest, the soul needs rest. Mark gives us the picture with the bed, the little girl is on the bed without the demon. What complete victory by the word of Christ! Well, that was all I had to say, but I wanted to make dear to you how the Lord Jesus carried out His service as the Light. It was said of Him by Simeon that He was "a light for revelation of the Gentiles", @Luke 2: 32. He brought them into evidence for blessing. Hence he goes to their borders and into the house and a woman hears about Him who also has a house; she comes to Him and her house is adjusted.
Now I would advise you if you have got similar trouble, come to the Lord Jesus; He is available. I need not remark it is in a different house today, but nevertheless a house. He is available there for the adjustment of your house, for the adjustment of your conscience and your heart; for the establishment of your soul before God.
{72}
RECOVERY IN RELATION TO HOUSEHOLDS
@Luke 18: 9 - 14; @Luke 5: 18 - 26; @Luke 19: 1 - 10
I think it will be understood by those who are instructed that it is the gospel that effects the recovery of man to God, and that involves his adjustment with God. My thought tonight is to show how a man is adjusted in regard of his house, because if the head of the household is recovered we may say that God has reached His thought, for it involves all the other particulars of a man's position. I have selected this thought because of its importance in the mind of God. It has a much greater place with God than we are accustomed to think; it involves the family. God intends that the human race should be subdivided into households, the family thought being prominent. The household in Scripture is a prominent thought, indeed it is taken up by God in regard of Himself. He has a house, and our enjoyment of God's house necessarily depends upon adjustment in our own houses. The introduction of the gospel into the western parts of the world was marked by the recovery of households. I refer to @Acts 16. You will recall how the testimony through Paul brought about the recovery of households at Philippi. Now I want to show in the passages I have read how adjustment takes place. That is why I read chapter 18 first, because it shows how a man went down to his house justified. Chapter S shows how a man was sent to his house by the Lord, but there is another thought, and chapter 19 shows how such a man receives the Lord in his house. I want to speak a word for every conscience, for there are those here tonight who have not houses. There are children here, and there are those perhaps who have no parents, so I want to speak a word to everyone. The parable of the Lord in chapter 18 serves to show how repentance is brought about. There are two motives whereby men generally are governed in regard to God, one is religious respectability, the other is a genuine desire to be right with God. Now we are in relation with
{73}
God from one of these two motives. It is for each one to determine before God which of the two motives governs us. The pharisee spoken of went up into the temple to pray, evidently priding himself in the religious garb in which he was clothed. His going down was not prompted by any inward desire to be right with God, in other words he was a mere religionist, and it does not say that he went to his house. The other man had another motive; God had been working, he had discovered certain conditions in his breast which were contrary to God, he had discovered that he was a sinner. Satan did not tell him that, Satan never tells you that; a motive and conviction like that arises from God. He had discovered something in his breast, and that was that he was a sinner. If there is anyone here who has not discovered what this man discovered, I would speak to you. You are in a dangerous condition. I am a great believer in the fact that man is responsible to God whether he acknowledges it or otherwise, but when light comes from God, by whatever means it may come, there is the acknowledgment of responsibility to God. When Peter stood up with the eleven at Pentecost, he announced the gospel with the effect that men said "what shall we do?" Peter does not say, 'It is not for you to do anything'. Let us not make any mistake. You cannot do anything to make yourself acceptable to God, but I again remark that Peter did not say, 'It is not for you to say that'. It was for them to say that, it was in perfect order for them to say that, every man has to say it in principle in his soul before God; for there are requirements. Peter's word is "Repent", which is an active verb. "Repent, and be baptized every one of you ... and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Spirit", @Acts 2:38. You shall receive it. God offers it, that is another matter. "When they had nothing to pay, he frankly forgave them both", @Luke 7: 42. God has nothing else in His mind towards man, nothing but forgiveness, "That repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name among all nations", @Luke 24: 47. If however one refuses it is another matter. What good or value is it to you if you do not receive it? It is similar in regard to
{74}
the Holy Spirit. "But this spake he of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should receive", @John 7: 39. "If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that saith to thee, Give me to drink; thou wouldest have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water". That is the gift of God, but there is the act of receiving: "Have ye received the Holy Spirit?" Paul said, @Acts 19: a. I have to receive things. Have you received the remission of sins and the gift of the Holy Spirit? There are two sides to the truth. So the element of responsibility is in a man's soul, responsibility attaches to everyone, the great white throne is on that line. "The books were opened: and another book was opened, which is the book of life". In the books are recorded all the acts in responsibility. "And the dead were judged out of those things which were written in the books, according to their works", @Revelation 20: 12. These are the books in which God has recorded man's walk in responsibility. We read of "the righteousness of God revealed", but "the wrath of God is revealed from heaven" too, @Romans 1: 17,18. What is done in secret is all known to God, it is all recorded; and man is held accountable at the great white throne. Then it says, "Another book was opened, which is the book of life" so as to make it quite certain that no one consigned to eternal perdition should have any question that his name is not in the book of life. Well, the question of responsibility had come into this man's soul, he had to do with God; it does not say how it came about, but it was there, so his cry to God is "O God, have compassion on me, the sinner" (@Luke 18:13, New Translation), as if there were no other sinner in the world. Have you come to that, to the sense that in your responsible life here you have sinned against heaven, and in God's sight, as if there were no other sinner but you? The Lord said, "This man went down to his house justified". His wife and children would now have a different man in the house. He did not have the Holy Spirit, it is not so presented; all that is said is the elementary thought of righteousness, but it is very important. It does not say he went to his business, or his club, justified, but he went
{75}
to his home and he went there a different man. How is it with us as heads of our houses? Are we righteous? You cannot represent God there if you are not righteous. Righteousness must be shown there first, afterwards in the business, and in other relationships, but it must come out there first. It does not say he was sent there, his going there was a normal result.
Now we come to chapter 5, a remarkable passage well known to many here; I have read it to bring out one principle, for it indicates how a man went to his house in power, carrying his bed, and in so going he glorified God. That is another matter; besides that he was sent there by the Lord Jesus. As if the Lord would say, 'I can commit myself to that man, he will represent me in his house'. It is incumbent on me to be righteous without being told to be; it is the normal result of righteousness in my soul. As I am sent to my house by the Lord, it is that I am to represent Him there, not only God in righteousness, but to represent Him as I take my place as head in my house. How remarkable, it is God's thought that there should be in the house not only the acknowledgment of what is right but the headship of Christ effected in the head of the house. This man was paralytic, he was a kind of head who had to be attended on, he never did anything for anyone, he could not, for he was without strength. He was a sinner in his house and therefore unrighteous: no unconverted man can be righteous before God. It does not appear either that he was specially marked by faith. If there are those here who think a person cannot be saved on the faith of others, I would call your attention to this chapter, "When he saw their faith". It is great encouragement to have faith about precious souls, especially about our children; one is encouraged to have faith because it says "When he saw their faith". I am not denying that the man had faith; he did have it, and the Lord forgave his sins. He also said, "Arise, and take up thy couch, and go into thine house"; the Lord empowers him and then sends him to his house. Am I so in the dignity of the power of Christ bestowed on me that I can rightly represent Him in my house? For
{76}
He sends me to it. See the dignity upon one who is sent there by the Lord Jesus; he is given power to be there on His behalf as representing Him in headship in all his movements in the government of his own house. He went out before all who were there and God was glorified of all. What a result, a man by his movements glorifying God. I have often thought of the incident in @Acts 3, the man who sat at the gate of the temple who was healed: "And his name through faith in his name hath made this man strong"; he entered the temple "walking, and leaping, and praising God". What a marvellous triumph. His ankle bones were made strong, evidently the point was the limbs, it was a question of walking, so he stood up "walking, and leaping, and praising God".
Now I pass on to Zacchaeus, who gives us a kind of climax as to the household. Zacchaeus did not offer the Lord his house, the Lord as it were says to Zacchaeus, I am going to your house. Have you ever received a servant of the Lord or any of the saints of God in your house? Do not think you are honouring them. If you regard them in the fight of their relation to Christ you are really being honoured by their presence. The Lord said, "I was sick, and ye visited me", @Matthew 25: 36. It would be a serious thing to say the Lord Jesus was ever sick personally. He was not, but there is in His thought complete identification with His people, so it is the sickness of His people He refers to, the nakedness of His people, not His own; the hunger of His people, not His own. If you look at the saints in their relation to Christ you will feel honoured by their presence. The Lord told Zacchaeus that He was going to abide that day at his house. Zacchaeus¬ position in the tree was quite justifiable, there was such a crush round the Lord that he could not see Him. Large multitudes of people came round the Lord as He was ministering and He would not send them away hungry. However justifiable your position may be, your house must be regulated by the Lord Jesus. I want to be regulated by His word in everything and it is incumbent on me to be so. A spiritual man is one that is regulated by Christ. So the Lord says to
{77}
Zacchaeus, 'Come down, your position must be regulated by My word and commandments'. The Lord is interested in our circumstances and the relations in which we are found. Am I regulated by the commandments of Christ in my household? "Zacchaeus, make haste and come down", the Lord says: "Make haste", do not waste any time. If any adjustment is shown to be necessary in your circumstances do not delay, look into the matter at once and make the alterations that are necessary in order to conform to the will of Christ. The Lord said, "Make haste", and Zacchaeus made haste. When the Lord's mind is made known there must be no delay, you must act. So he came and it says he received the Lord joyfully. It was a happy house under the blessed direction of Christ, and Christ the guest. The Lord said He must abide at Zacchaeus¬ house and Zacchaeus received Him, really as a priest regulated by the word of Christ. He was like the priest in the temple when the Lord Jesus was taken there as a babe. Simeon was there and received the babe into his arms -- a wonderful scene; he was a priest in the true sense as he held the true Ark of the Covenant in his arms. He went into the temple by the Spirit; like Zacchaeus here who received Christ into his house, he received Christ in the temple of God in a priestly way. Then he says, "Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word: for mine eyes have seen thy salvation", @Luke 2: 29, 30. He praised God, he worshipped, his hands were filled, he was before God in the temple of God in all the acceptability of Christ. Zacchaeus¬ house is not the temple of God, but He receives the Son of God into that house and then there is joy. There is nothing so lacking among the people of God as joy, and I believe the reason is that we are not regulated by the Lord. He says to Zacchaeus, "Come down", and Zacchaeus came down and received him joyfully. Then the Lord gives him his status, He says "he also is a son of Abraham". Perhaps you think that is not saying very much. Is it not? It is the most dignified genealogy that I know of. Abraham is the heir of the world. Everyone who has got heirship has got it on the principle of
{78}
faith, the children of faith are the children of Abraham. I referred to the priest to show you that as you are regulated by the word of Christ you come into priesthood; He comes into your house and then you are knighted, and the greatness of your genealogy makes you suitable. Zacchaeus is constituted a priest and is regulated by the true High Priest; as a priest his genealogy is recognized, he is a son of Abraham.
That is the substance of what I had before me, I commend it to you. You cannot have things right in the assembly unless they are right in the households of God's people. The gospel adjusts man's place in that connection. Eternal salvation is a great thing, but I am thinking of our position here in regard of testimony. The gospel qualifies you for that. May the Lord give us grace, power and intelligence, for the gospel adjusts one in regard of all these.
{79}
RIGHTEOUSNESS
@1 John 2: 29; @1 John 3: 1 - 14
J.T. The 29th verse of chapter 2 bears much on the beginning of the third chapter, and it indicates the important fact that righteousness flows from what God is. The introduction of Abel as the typically righteous man, as the man whose works were righteous, is helpful on that line, because his righteousness was not the fulfilling of any specific injunction or command. It flowed from a certain manifestation of God's attributes.
G.W.W. It flowed from an appreciation of divine revelation really. Your thought is that that must be the basis of righteousness with us at the present moment?
J.T. That is what I thought. In John's epistle it is connected with our nature as born of God, but I think Romans works it out as the result of our appreciation of the light of the revelation of God.
W.L.P. Pursuing righteousness shows that it is practical.
G.W.W. How are you connecting this with Romans?
J.T. Romans is the unfolding of righteousness, in an objective way, in God. It says, "The righteousness of God without the law is manifested" (that is to say, that kind of righteousness) "being witnessed by the law and the prophets; even the righteousness of God which is by faith of Jesus Christ unto all and upon all them that believe", @Romans 3: 22. That is, God has come out in Christ to show what His righteousness is; and the result of that is the practice of righteousness in the Christian by the Spirit; whereas here it is the outflow of the nature more. As born of God we practise righteousness.
G.W.W. Do you limit, in Romans, the thought of righteousness to God taking account of what is evil and dealing with it according to His own holy nature and being?
J.T. No, I think it includes His taking us up -- His taking man up in mercy. His righteousness is seen not only in dealing with the evil, but in the blessing of men.
{80}
He reserves the right to act in mercy, so that righteousness works out in a positive way. "He hath dispersed, he hath given to the poor; his righteousness endureth for ever", @Psalm 112: 9. In God and in us it is not limited to the negation of evil or the dealing with it authoritatively. It is also evidenced in blessing.
J. S. In the retention of man.
J.T. Yes, in retaining man here in blessing. That is what His righteousness is. It works out in the same way in the christian. Men are to be retained here before God in blessing. If we were to withdraw (as we speak) from a brother for evil, destruction of the brother is not in view but rather his retention in blessing.
A.F.M. In @Romans 4 we are said to be reckoned righteous, and that precedes the practice of righteousness, according to chapter 8, does it not?
J.T. Yes. One has to be reckoned righteous on the principle of faith. I think the practice of righteousness in Romans is by the Spirit, and so it is the result of the light. The power of it is the Spirit.
G.W.W. Have you not a little thought more as to God's side? Is it God's righteousness?
J.T. Well, I think what was said as regards the retention of man in blessing is most important. God is just and justifies him that is of the faith of Jesus. Now it seems to me that "of the faith of Jesus" (@Romans 3: 26) lays the basis for the order of man that is to be retained. It is not exactly that you have faith in Jesus there. It is that you are of that faith, light as to that order of man is in your soul, and God justifies one who has that faith. He is to be retained here in blessing; but then there is no other man to be retained. Chapters 8 and 12 show the result for God. I speak only of the truth as presented in Romans. Ephesians shows that those justified and indwelt by the Spirit are set down in heavenly places. The "faith of Jesus" lays the basis for all that follows, because it is that order of man that God has in His mind.
B.T.F. Would you say that Romans sets a soul free before God on a righteous basis?
{81}
J.T. Yes, I think it gives us a good conscience, but at the same time, corresponding with the good conscience, we have light as to the order of man that is seen in Jesus. That is the order of man that is to be retained and sustained here.
J.D-s. Therefore the importance of righteousness and its place. It stands at the threshold of blessing. I suppose that is the reason why we have it so prominently presented in the Romans.
J.T. It really is in that respect the foundation of God, and it is therefore so important that we should have it. Now Abel is the first one that is said to be righteous. In @Hebrews 11, he is said to be righteous; his works are said to be righteous, and it is in the light of the fact that he had faith. He had some apprehension of Christ. It is not that he was told to do this or that, he apprehended what was suitable to God from what had taken place in regard of his parents.
J.D-s. From what had been made known of God to his soul; and is not that the way we get holiness, as well as righteousness, and indeed everything else that reflects the character of God in the believer?
G.W.W. What was remarked as to Abel is very interesting. He had got some sense in his soul that there was something for man out of death. This he must have learned from the coats of skin with which his parents had been clothed. He appears to have laid hold of the fact that God would find a righteous ground for action through death.
A.A.T. Cain did not avail himself of this light.
G.W.W. There was no appreciation of light with Cain. The same light was shining for both, but Cain had no appreciation of it.
W.L.P. Abel justified God. When speaking of being *retained*, do you mean set apart?
J.T. Ultimately all will be removed in judgment save those that are according to Christ. In the meantime God sets apart him that is godly for Himself. Of course we know Abel was put to death, but that does not set aside the fact
{82}
that he is for God, and he will be raised up at the last day.
A.F.M. Would you say that Abel in a way is a type of one who has the faith of Jesus?
J.T. I think he is. I think God takes account of him in that way. The order in which we find righteousness in the Old Testament I think is first of all in Abel, and then in Noah. Noah preached it. I do not apprehend that he preached simply that men should pay their debts, although of course that would go with it. He undoubtedly presented some expression of the righteousness of God.
G.W.W. It is a remarkable thing that God came out in Abel and Enoch. God found Enoch righteous. He walked with God and was pleasing to God. Noah presents the thought that every bit of revelation God made, when responded to in the believer, becomes the foundation of righteousness in his soul. This he presents in testimony.
J.T. So it would be very interesting to know just what Noah spoke about when he preached.
G.W.W. If we studied those earlier chapters of Genesis we would see the way revelation came out; with each fresh dealing with men on His part there was a shining out of what God was; and what is still more interesting is to see it all coming out in testimony in Noah, because he preached it to the men of his generation.
B.T.F. And a very effectual part of Noah's testimony was preparing the ark for the saving of his house.
J.T. That supported his preaching. It was a public testimony that was unmistakable. He condemned the world by it. But then God had said that His Spirit should not always strive with man; but his days should be 120 years. It was a merciful thing for God to extend the time in which His Spirit strove in grace with man. I suppose Noah would be in keeping with that. One acquainted with the mind of God, and in sympathy with it, would not wish to have the period of grace shortened. The full year -- the acceptable year of the Lord -- is to be spent out.
G.W.W. It is very interesting. Noah was a just man in his generation, and Noah walked with God, and so the testimony of Abel and Enoch is assumed in his.
{83}
J.D-s. Noah would understand what was set out in Enoch.
J.T. He would at least have the testimony of a walk pleasing to God, and that man taken up to heaven.
A.N.W. And would he not condemn the world by what he did rather than by his preaching?
J.T. The building of the ark condemned the world.
J.S. It was a right thing morally to build the ark.
J.T. Quite. It was built for salvation.
A.A.T. And it was a right thing for the family to get into the ark. Is the thought of righteousness involved there?
J.T. In the ark there was the testimony of salvation; however limited, it is there. It was a divine thought.
A.A.T. I gather from a remark made here that one's apprehension of God is expressed in one's practical righteousness. If so, is it not possible to know forgiveness of sins and not know about righteousness?
J.T. But a true apprehension of righteousness leads to the doing of it. For instance, forgiveness; according to the parable in @Matthew 18 the man did not forgive as he had been forgiven; the Lord says to Peter "seventy times seven" (@Matthew 18: 22), I suppose it is unlimited forgiveness, and that is righteousness. It is righteous to forgive.
G.W.W. The fact is, the failure on that point comes to this, that people have taken up the thought of forgiveness without seeing that forgiveness of sins is that which has been proclaimed on God's part through the death of Christ, and that they stand before God on that wonderful footing.
J.D-s. "We have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins".
G.W.W. Not merely past sins, but the believer is set in the forgiveness of sins with God, and if there is a sense of that in his soul he must maintain the spirit of forgiveness with all he comes in contact with. If he does not he is a wicked servant, and, as you say, the man in @Matthew 18 is taken up on that ground. He did not show this to his fellow servant; he did not act consistently with the grace of his Master. That constituted his wickedness.
{84}
J.T. It is not that you would suggest any licence. "There is forgiveness with thee, that thou mayest be feared", @Psalm 130: 4.
W.H.F. You were saying God's righteousness is in asserting His rights in mercy in forgiveness.
J.T. That is what He is doing now. But man turns that into lasciviousness. The world shall learn righteousness when God's judgments are in it. The enforcement of His rights in mercy does not produce that now, but rather lasciviousness in an unconverted man. It does not affect him at all. It rather produces, you might say, disrespect for God, and righteousness has to suffer. This is the suffering time for righteousness, but presently righteousness shall reign. Now grace is reigning. That is a very important thing to remember; it is grace reigning through righteousness now, and therefore the unconverted man turns it into lasciviousness and righteousness has to suffer, but when righteousness rules it will not suffer. Then wrong suffers, sin suffers, so the inhabitants of the world learn righteousness when God's judgments are in it.
A.F.M. You would not say that is the character of the present time exactly? You would not say God's judgments are in the world now?
J.T. Except as seen morally in the saints; but the public situation, as proclaimed in the gospel, is that grace reigns through righteousness unto eternal life through Christ Jesus our Lord. Man in the flesh takes advantage of this, and therefore it is the suffering time of righteousness. Every believer, being a righteous man, has to suffer.
A.F.M. Would you compare that with Abel?
J.T. The first righteous man was put to death. He had to suffer.
A.A.T. You would not say righteousness was suffering in the assembly although it is in the world?
J.T. That of course raises a very important line of thought, that there are the two spheres -- the one over which Christ rules and the other over which God rules in a special way. In the first, normally, righteousness does not suffer. Christ rules over the house of God directly and He
{85}
rules in righteousness, as @1 Corinthians 15 and @Revelation 2 and 3 abundantly show. In the Scriptures the history of righteousness follows on to Melchisedec, who is said to be the *king* of it. He is a very important man to come in at that juncture. By interpretation he is king of righteousness, and at the same time king of peace.
A.F.M. That is the righteousness enjoyed in the world to come, do you mean?
J. T. Well it shows the great place righteousness had in the course of the testimony.
A.F.M. "A king shall reign in righteousness", @Isaiah 32: 1.
J.T. Yes, but Melchisedec coming in in @Genesis 14 is very important. As regards righteousness, he comes in when a man had suffered in the rescue of his brother. He comes in to bless Abram.
J.S. Are God's rights in mercy foreseen in the clothing of Adam and Eve?
J.T. I should say that is the first great testimony of His righteousness. He had a right to do that and He did it. On this ground, although driven out of Eden, Adam and Eve were, in a sense, retained. Adam recognizes his wife as the mother of all living.
A.A.T. And He would have retained Cain if he had availed himself of God's provision.
J.T. "If thou doest well, shalt thou not be accepted? And if thou doest not well, sin [sin offering] lieth at the door", @Genesis 4: 7.
G.W.W. The great object with the enemy was to sweep man from under the eye of God. He would carry all off. Well now, if one might so say, if God had allowed Satan to carry that out it would have cast an eternal slur upon God. He intervenes through the death of Christ, procuring for Himself a perfectly righteous ground on which to set on one side the effort of the enemy and retain for Himself that order of being that He had desired.
J.T. That is very beautiful. So the "faith of Jesus" is important to note. Those that are of the faith of Jesus are the ones to be justified.
G.W.W. The second of Galatians has been spoken of
{86}
already this morning. "While we seek to be justified by Christ", @Galatians 2: 17. You have the same thought there. Our identity is in another Man.
J.T. Quite. @Romans 3: 4 suggests, I believe, *character*; the verse in Galatians *position* or status.
G.W.W. There seems to be that foreshadowed in the clothing afforded Adam and Eve. It has come out of death and, however obscurely Abel laid hold of that fact, he apprehended that on that ground only could he approach God. He saw there was acceptance with God through death. In that way he was looking on to what God had before Him as the basis for all His works.
J.T. In him the relationship of brother appears, and is emphasized. Seven times in @Genesis 4 is Abel referred to as Cain's brother. The righteous man is the brother. How are you going to treat him? To be in relation with a righteous man tests us.
A.N.W. I think your reference to these two men is very remarkable -- that Abel was a brother. I notice that, grievous as Adam's sin was, the curse of God is not said to be upon him, but the curse of God did come upon Cain. It is the seriousness of destroying a righteous man.
J.T. Cain was cursed on account of his treatment of his brother; Canaan was cursed on account of his treatment of his father.
J.S. Relationship appears to become the test.
J.T. Quite so. It is in John's epistle.
A.N.W. I was going to say Abel had a testimony to which he answered; Cain had a further testimony in the fact that he saw Abel accepted, but he slew him.
G.W.W. Cain's "way" marks apostasy. The warning comes before us in Jude as to him. "Woe unto them! for they have gone in the way of Cain, and ran greedily after the error of Balaam for reward, and perished in the gainsaying of Core". Rejection of the testimony was fatal.
J.D-s. Do you connect the children of God in the first verse of the third chapter with the twenty-ninth verse of the second chapter?
J.T. Yes; the twenty-ninth verse of chapter 2 introduces
{87}
the subject in chapter 3. Righteousness is one of the marks of the children of God.
J.D-s. We are children of God as begotten of Him, and therefore righteousness should mark us, inasmuch as it marks God; our dealings with our brethren -- indeed with all -- should be on that line. Anything less than that is unsuited and is a contradiction really, and a denial of the fact that we are begotten of God and, therefore, His children. We see the great love conferred upon us in being called the children of God. It seems to me it is in connection with what we have in the twenty-ninth verse -- the practice of righteousness.
J.T. Then the righteousness practised by the children of God is not simply one that conforms with legal requirements; the world, we may say, could take account of that, but what it says here is "Therefore the world knoweth us not". The world does not know the children of God nor the righteousness they practise; a righteous man, as seen in Abel here, is not taken account of by the world except as one to be persecuted.
J.D-s. The Father and the world, according to John's epistle, are put in contradistinction. Therefore, if we are begotten of God, in that way children of God, and have to do with the Father, of necessity what will mark us will not be appreciated or valued by the world. The world and the Father are diametrically opposed.
W.L.P. Righteousness condemns the world.
W.H.F. The children of God are of divine origin and therefore the practice of righteousness is natural to them. J. S. To love your brother is righteousness. It is a right thing to love your brother.
J.T. Yes, quite. There is to be a retention here of an order of man that is according to Jesus. That is the point one has to have before one's soul in all one's walk and ways. It is what is according to Jesus, because He is the righteous Man.
A.N.W. It is striking that righteousness should be connected with the forgiveness of sins, because men in the world view forgiveness -- if they view it at all -- as though
{88}
God would say sin is not sin. It seems striking that mercy and forgiveness should be connected with the righteousness of God. Men in the world will look for forgiveness as though God would say they are not so sinful after all, whereas that is not the idea at all.
J.T. No, I think righteousness always judges sin with authority. That is, holiness *repels*. It is something intolerable; but righteousness deals with it with authority.
J.D-s. You might say a little more about what makes a righteous man according to God unpopular in the world. I think it would be very useful to us if you did.
J.T. I think it is worked out in this chapter. It says of the Lord that He loved righteousness and hated lawlessness; His whole course was marked by this, and it brought Him into suffering, as we see typified in Abel. So I think as you aim at being like Jesus in your relations here that you are not popular. You are different from the world. Your spirit is different and in the discharge of legal obligations you do it in His spirit. You do it as He did it. So I think it is that which brings us into reproach and suffering.
G.W.W. In that blessed Man we see One wholly actuated by love in the midst of a scene actuated by hatred and evil. There could be no moral affinity between the world and Christ. God is going to set aside evil in this world and love is to be the prevailing influence of the world when that blessed Man comes to fill the universe with love under the eye of God. If actuated by that at the present time you must receive at the hands of the world what He received -- hatred. Man does not want the principle of love to his neighbour, being wholly actuated by himself by feelings of hatred.
J.D-s. In this epistle righteousness is the opposite of lawlessness. If born of God and therefore belonging to the family who are regarded as the children of God, and practising righteousness, one should of necessity come into conflict with the lawlessness that marks the present scene. It is worthy of note that righteousness is dealt with so extensively in the epistle to the Romans, which is the foundation epistle. There the first feature of the kingdom
{89}
of God is said to be righteousness: "Righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit", @Romans 14: 17. And so in @2 Timothy 2 those separated under the gracious hand of God are marked first of all by righteousness. I think that is of moment as showing the importance of righteousness in the mind of God.
A.N.W. Might I ask why it does not come first in Corinthians where the apostle says "Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption"?
J.T. I think wisdom was important in that letter on account of the conditions at Corinth; on account of Greek pretensions wisdom stands in the forefront.
W.H.F. I do not think the world understands anything about righteousness.
G.W.W. But when the world sees the representation of what God is in His children, it is keen enough to hate it. The world does not intend to allow principles according to God to rule down here.
A.A.T. I suppose we see that coming out in connection with our young brothers who cannot undertake to take human life in war.
Rem. They suggest a generation like Jesus.
J.T. Yes; He grew up as a tender plant before Jehovah and in favour of men as a Man; but directly the Holy Spirit comes upon Him and He stands up in the synagogue at Nazareth to preach, it says they marvelled at the gracious words proceeding from His mouth. So far, so good; but the citizens of Nazareth would have Him to do something that would distinguish them. He was brought up there, and so they would only too gladly have their town helped and distinguished. And then the Lord brings in the great fact that God had gone outside the limits of Israel in the exercise of His grace. In the Old Testament times He, through the prophet, had gone to the widow and had also cured Naaman. They would not have that. They "rose up, and thrust him out of the city, and led him unto the brow of the hill whereon their city was built, that they might cast him down headlong", @Luke 4: 29. Thus we see how
{90}
the world hates the righteousness of God. I think that what the righteousness of faith says is of great import. It speaks. "But the righteousness of faith speaks thus: Do not say in thine heart, Who shall ascend to the heavens? that is, to bring Christ down; or, Who shall descend into the abyss? that is, to bring up Christ from among the dead. But what says it? The word is near thee, in thy mouth and in thy heart: that is, the word of faith, which we preach: that if thou shalt confess with thy mouth Jesus as Lord, and shalt believe in thine heart that God has raised him from among the dead, thou shalt be saved. For with the heart is believed to righteousness; and with the mouth confession made to salvation", @Romans 10: 6 - 10, New Trans. We have been dwelling on the effect of the Lord's testimony in the synagogue and how it brought persecution, but here the apostle alludes to a time when Israel should be scattered (@Deuteronomy 30). The righteousness of faith in that day would say to them that it was a question of the state of their hearts as to what God is. "If thou ... shalt believe in thine heart that God has raised him from among the dead, thou shalt be saved. For with the heart is believed to righteousness".
Ques. You have been speaking about righteousness in relation to our brother; but in relation to the world, how do we practise righteousness otherwise than by discharging our legal obligations?
J.T. Certainly you do that, but that would not bring you into reproach. What brings you into reproach is the character of God, as seen in Christ, coming out; and maintaining in you, towards all, an attitude such as marked Christ. This does violence to social distinctions, national feelings, and even family claims (although these latter have their place). The pride of the world is bound up in its own principles and distinctions.
A.R. S. If you stand for the rights of God?
J.T. That brings you into reproach.
G.W.W. The world is stirred up and you have to suffer; but if we do not present what is morally according to God we may slip through this world pretty quietly; but
{91}
the moment what is according to God comes out in our life the opposition of the world is tremendously stirred up at once.
A.R.S. It seems to me, as our brother said, if you simply meet your ordinary obligations in business and the like, the world will respect you, indeed, honour you, for you are of value to the community among whom you may be, but the moment you stand for the rights of God, which have been violated here, they will not have it at all.
A.F.M. When called to war now a non-combatant experiences the hatred of the world very largely.
J.T. You see how it was wrought out with the Lord. "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me". He was brought up in Nazareth and was in favour with God and man there (@Luke 2: 52), but He stands up and says, "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor", and then when He asserts the full bearing of that they will not have it. They were filled with wrath, and would have killed the Lord. It was a question of the rights of God.
A.N.W. Do we not occasionally get into trouble through a faulty maintenance of the rights of God? We think we maintain His rights when we do not. Is there a standard of righteousness, or is it controlled by my individual conscience?
J.T. The standard is what God is in Christ.
G.W.W. We feel a good deal of suffering perhaps through hardly a right stand sometimes.
J.T. The thing is so wide it would be difficult to cover the different phases of righteousness, but take one point. God is not a national God. He is not God of any nation now specifically. He is God of the nations as He is of the Jew, so that He has no preference as regards nations. He set up Christ as head of every man, whoever he may be. Well now, you have to hold to that.
G.W.W. Yes, but if you stand up for that at the present time, you are going to get into trouble.
J.T. But it is in keeping with the dispensation in which we are. God has set up Christ as head of every man. Well, I must regard every man.
{92}
G.W.W. The principles of the kingdom that are set forth in the opening chapters of Matthew are to govern us at the present time as people in whose midst the kingdom of God has been established morally, and we are to act on them towards one another. They must govern and actuate us as those in the kingdom.
If we are controlled by those principles in our relations with one another, we are to a certain extent coloured by them; we are waiting for the time when those principles will be universal. That is what we are looking out for, but those principles will bring us into antagonism with the scene around us at the present time because that scene has to go out before God's kingdom is established. Man's world must disappear before God brings in His own.
J.T. I think that is what brings about the conflict. Men may not be able to give an account of why it is they oppose, but there is an intelligent spirit behind them.
J.D-s. The world to come is to be established on the basis of righteousness, and everything is established for us now on that basis. So if we know righteousness as it is presented in this epistle, our righteousness will not be accepted by men in the present age.
J.T. As the Lord says: "Except your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven", @Matthew 5 : 20.
{93}
PRIVILEGES OF THE HOUSE OF GOD
@Ezra 3: 1 - 13
J.T. There has been some concern that entrance into, and even participation by christians in, the evil that has come to be prevalent, might exclude the application at the present time of the principles that governed the house of God in the beginning, and I felt the consideration of this chapter would show that we must abide by the principles given at the beginning which govern the things that remain and are used for us; only we have to rightly divide the word of truth. The failure of the church has necessitated certain limitations which we have to come to accept. For instance, to refer to Ezra, their return was not by any commandment given either through Moses or through David. It was by the word of the Lord through Cyrus, the gentile king. That in itself was a very humiliating circumstance for the people of God, but, acting on that word and bowing to the word of God in their circumstances, as having come to Jerusalem, they revert both to Moses and to David.
G.W.W. They had nothing else to guide them.
J.T. Not in regard to the house.
Ques. What had you on your mind in regard to limitations?
J.T. Well, there are certain limitations, and very serious limitations. For instance, we cannot assume to be the assembly of God, as we have often remarked. That is a very great limitation. Therefore we cannot act on a scripture in the full literal sense that applied to the house of God when it was intact.
Rem. The limitations are all on our side, none on God's side.
J.T. No, but they exist as a fact. It is a fact that no company of christians, however large, in a locality today would claim to be the house of God, because they do not include all the christians in that locality.
Rem. I would suggest that when the ark was in place in
{94}
Israel there could be no possible question as to where the centre of gathering should be. When the ark was removed and it disappeared there resulted a great limitation, and great exercise as to where God might remove it to; those who were exercised were involved in a totally different line of things, like this that is in evidence here. There was no ark, and I suppose in the present time there is no visible centre in that sense; therefore we are thrown upon a line of spiritual exercise as to how far we can discern the leading of the Holy Spirit back to original divine principles. There is nothing visible. Is that at all what you had in mind as to limitation?
J.T. Yes. Moses began with the ark. They begin here with the altar. That is on account of the condition. They began with the altar "for fear"; it says, "was upon them".
A.F.M. Is that a good beginning?
J.T. I think it was righteous. They were following righteousness.
Ques. Was one of the signs that they put themselves under the protection of the Lord?
J.T. I think God will protect us if we sacrifice. That is, protection here is put on moral ground. God protects those who sacrifice.
B.T.F. Would you say what the altar represents now?
J.T. It is a question of sacrifice. The chapter brings out the reason for it. It was the fear of the enemy. They set the altar on its bases and they kept the feast of tabernacles, and offered the offerings that were enjoined by Moses, every day according to its requirement, referring, I suppose, to @Numbers 29. That chapter gives us the offerings for each day and the fifteenth day of the seventh month, which was the day for the feast of tabernacles. They remember that and offer the offerings that were required for each day of the seven days -- of the eight days really -- which I think is recovery. Recovery of the truth is marked by sacrifice.
A.F.M. What do you mean by sacrifice?
J.T. The surrender of all that which one may be and one may have.
{95}
R.M.L. Buy the truth, is that it?
J.T. Well, it is. It amounts to that, but here there is the positive presentation of Christ in the offerings.
G.A.T. Have we here the thought of recovery and in chapter four the thought of maintaining the truth; when our adversaries come up we absolutely refuse to have anything to do with what is being built up on the world?
J.T. I think the principle of the altar precedes the building. Before we can come together and be built up we must have this principle of the altar. We cannot be together except on the ground of sacrifice.
Rem. At the outset there is a remarkable presentation of the person of Christ, and of Christ in sacrifice, and to appropriate that involves the consequences of His death and the cost to us of His death, so that the altar is immediately put to very rich use, but the rich use to which it is put is, as it were, the acceptance of the full consequences of the death of Christ, and that is sacrifice, but it is presented especially on the side of God's appreciation of it. What is emphasized is not the sin offering. It is very remarkable that though this was the time of the day of atonement, the sacrifice and the day of atonement are not mentioned, but it starts out with the rich appreciation of God in the sacrifice of Christ, and that is appropriated, but then it is sacrifice. Would you go with that?
J.T. Yes, quite, inasmuch as it is sacrifice, but the question is whether it is acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.
G.W.W. I think (if I might suggest it) that you are using the word "sacrifice" in two different connections. It seems to me you look upon it as our sacrifice, that we are sacrificing. Is that right?
J.T. Yes, quite. Surrender.
G.W.W. Laying down the first principle of this (not new establishment exactly) new condition of things, is in surrender. That is not what was in your mind?
Rem. Yes, it was, but the presentation of it that comes in is of Christ in death, according to God's appreciation. Now if I am going to accept that it leads to a subjective work in connection with myself that involves the highest
{96}
order of surrender. I cannot touch that without surrender of everything that involves my position, and place, and person, and delight. Otherwise I cannot enter into what is in the divine thought in the burnt offering. I think it is the same idea. It may be my clumsy way of expressing it.
B.T.F. Is your thought that before the truth of the house can be reached the altar must be understood?
J.T. I think that is important here. Moses began with the ark in the instructions referring to the tabernacle. The altar came in after. Instructions were given in regard of the ark, the table, the curtains, the boards, the altar of burnt offering, and then we have the altar of incense. Here they began with the altar of burnt offering, and yet it says the foundation of the house was not yet laid, because "the foundation of the house" had reference to what we are built up in. It has reference to the work of the Spirit in us, but in a day of recovery it seems to me we must begin with sacrifice, and it showed their intelligence as to God that they reared up the altar in view of the enemy outside, as we get in Nehemiah in the building of the wall, for protection. They put things on moral grounds. That is, they understood God would defend that, and He does.
G.A.T. What is the altar for us?
J.T. Well, it is Christ. Christ is the altar.
G.A.T. How would you apply that?
J.T. It refers, I think, to what He was as having to do with evil. The dimensions given to us in Exodus suggest the strength of the manhood of Christ. That is to say, not in the sense that He raised the dead (He is declared to be the Son of God with power by resurrection from the dead) but the idea is endurance in dealing with evil, moral strength.
A.F.M. It was brazen.
J.T. It is the judgment of sin in the principle of it with authority.
A.F.M. There were horns on it.
J.T. These denote the strength, I think.
A.F.M. Now in the way the truth was recovered to us of late years, it seems to have been in that order. The altar preceded light as to the house.
{97}
J.T. I have understood from those contemporary with the recovery of the truth that that was what marked the people of God -- they began with sacrifice. It cost them something, because the sacrifice is not of any moral value unless it costs one something. David said in regard to the foundation of the house that he would not have it unless it cost him something.
W.H.F. I suppose the altar indicated the people's relations with God, and when they got back the first thing they did was to set up the altar.
J.T. It is the only ground upon which we can have to say to God.
G.W.W. But if relations are to be re-established with God it must involve complete judgment of all that which caused suspension of those relations. That has to be recognized, does it not? You cannot just simply pick it up again as if nothing had happened. Sin that brought about a suspension of the relations must be recognized, and then a fresh sense is communicated to the soul of how the relations must be established in another Man. I suppose that is in the burnt offering, is it not? Now that must involve my laying aside everything that in any way partook of the character of evil, which brought about the suspension. I do not know whether you see what I mean?
J.T. Yes, I quite see it.
G.W.W. What I mean is this, you cannot simply say, 'O, well, we will revert to what we had before this came in'. It would seem to me that in the setting up of the altar there was the definite recognition of the breakdown of relations with God and His people, and if a little remnant is coming back and there is to be the re-establishment of anything there has to be the due recognition of that. God must be given His place and I must take my place.
J.T. So it becomes in that way the pursuit of righteousness.
G.W.W. Yes.
J.T. The seventh month ought to be the threshold of the millennium for them. It is in the types. It is the reawakening of Israel and the setting up of the millennium, of the
{98}
world of blessing. That is the month they had arrived at, but, instead of going into the millennium, they must bow to the conditions in which they are. The nation had completely broken down and had to return to the land of Canaan, and come into Jerusalem under the direction of a gentile monarch. A very humiliating thing! And they had been so under the influence of things in the world that provision had to be made to establish the genealogy of each one, as to whether they were of the true line of Israel. It was really for unrighteousness that they had to set up the altar at the very outset.
B.T.F. Do you speak of the altar in the same way that you would speak of the sacrifice that we find in the early days of the church's history? That is, they sold their lands in one instance and brought down their books and burned them in another instance. Do you speak of it in that aspect?
J.T. It is the sacrifice in that aspect in view, only it rises to the requirements of God, you see. They offered according to the instructions given for each day of the feast of tabernacles, beginning with the fifteenth day of the seventh month, so that they arose to the divine requirement.
J. S. Would that indicate moral condition?
J.T. I think it shows how they were progressing, as having returned. We began with this, they had come back to Jerusalem. That is a point to be noted because it shows that, bowing to the will of God, we come back to the divine centre and we are then in position to apply Scripture, and these points may be applied.
G.W.W. What does the feast of tabernacles represent to us?
J.T. I think it is the Lord coming to us. It says in Deuteronomy, chapter 16, verses 13 - 16, "Thou shalt observe the feast of tabernacles seven days, after that thou hast gathered in thy corn and thy wine: and thou shalt rejoice in thy feast, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy manservant, and thy maidservant, and the Levite, the stranger, and the fatherless, and the widow, that are within thy gates. Seven days shalt thou keep a solemn feast
{99}
unto the Lord thy God in the place which the Lord shall choose: because the Lord thy God shall bless thee in all thine increase, and in all the works of thine hands, therefore thou shalt surely rejoice. Three times in a year shall all thy males appear before the Lord thy God in the place which he shall choose; in the feast of unleavened bread, and in the feast of weeks, and in the feast of tabernacles". If you look at the feast of weeks you will observe that there is no time limit to it. It says, "Seven weeks shalt thou number unto thee: begin to number the seven weeks from such time as thou beginnest to put the sickle to the corn. And thou shalt keep the feast of weeks unto the Lord thy God with a tribute of a freewill offering of thine hand, which thou shalt give unto the Lord thy God, according as the Lord thy God hath blessed thee: and thou shalt rejoice before the Lord thy God, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy manservant, and thy maidservant, and the Levite that is within thy gates, and the stranger, and the fatherless, and the widow, that are among you, in the place which the Lord thy God hath chosen to place his name there", @Deuteronomy 16: 9 - 11.
You see he gives them no limit of time for the feast of weeks, which refers to the Spirit; that is, the enjoyment one has in the Spirit is not connected with nor bounded by time at all. It is bounded by eternity. We are connected with heaven and eternity as having the Spirit of God; but the feast of unleavened bread, as also the feast of tabernacles, are bounded by time. The first, the feast of unleavened bread, has reference to the judgment of sin in the world, which goes on all through the time that we are down here, and the second, the feast of tabernacles, refers to the positive thing that we have got, within the same period of time. I think the feast of tabernacles has reference especially to the Lord making Himself known to us.
A.F.M. You mean in the assembly?
J.T. Yes, as we are dwelling in booths. It says they dwelt in booths. There would be families, localities, suggested, I think, and the introduction of it here in Ezra has reference to the place the Lord had in the hearts of the
{100}
saints at the outset of recovery. They had come to Jerusalem and they were of one mind. It says they were together as one man in Jerusalem, so that if we are walking, following righteousness with those that call on the Lord out of a pure heart, we are now free to enjoy unity.
W.H.F. Is there any place where the Lord says if they call on His name He would come to them? Is this good to us now?
J.T. Quite. It shows that the very highest blessing accorded to the saints is available to us.
G.W.W. So, in connection with the recovery of the truth the very first thing that really happened was that Christ got His right and proper place before the souls you speak of. That is, the recovery of the sense, which had largely been lost, of His being the living, glorified Man at the right hand of God, the One capable of bringing to pass everything for God's pleasure in spite of the failure that had come in. That was the initial step of the recovery, and what led Mr. Darby to see the truth as to the church was that there was recovered to his soul the sense of a glorified Man at the right hand of God.
J.T. Now you are coming to the point, because Jerusalem is not Moses¬ ministry. It does not represent Moses¬ ministry. It represents David's ministry.
G.W.W. Yes.
J.T. And so for us it is Paul's ministry. We are recovered with Paul's ministry or we are not recovered at all.
G.W.W. And so what was really filling the soul of Paul in his ministry was a living, glorified Man at the right hand of God.
J.T. That is the substance of his ministry.
G.W.W. Now that had been lost and the consequence was things had been set up in that which professed the name of Christ on earth without any real reference to Him, but the first thing the Spirit did when He began to work recovery was to establish the real place in which Christ was in the hearts of His people, and then everything began to fall into place.
J.T. There is nothing right without that.
{101}
G.W.W. No. As one has been listening this afternoon one has been wondering in one's own soul whether the keeping of the feast of tabernacles does not somehow indicate the truth of Christ having His right and proper place in connection with His people.
J.T. I think it does. I think that this chapter is like @John 14:21, "He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me". Now they had come to the point -- they had come to Jerusalem, which spiritually is heaven.
G.W.W. They were to come out of all those circles which might give them any position or prominence, and were all to become dwellers in booths. It seems to indicate the setting aside of all those social distinctions which have to be recognized in a sort of way in our responsible life, but which nevertheless tend to keep the people of God apart from one another, so that they are all found on common ground. I do not know whether I am right.
J.T. I think so, and the Lord comes in where His commandments are kept. There may not be much in the way of building yet, but directly you come to Jerusalem and adhere to the commandments then you have the principle of manifestation. "He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me: and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest myself to him", @John 14:21. There is the manifestation, and then the Lord goes on to say that He will love one who loves Him and keeps His words and such will be loved of the Father, and that the Lord and the Father will come and make their abode with him. So it seems to me that the feast of tabernacles suggested that the Lord was with them.
B.T.F. In what way would you apply the thought of building now? For instance you might say the house was built, God had formed the house. Now in what way would you speak of the building now?
J.T. We have to take up the house in an abstract way, because they are said here to come to the house before it was rebuilt. We return to it in an abstract way, and the
{102}
building, I. believe, is when we are together. Edification goes on as together. I am especially concerned that we might see how the Lord draws near and is with us as we return to Jerusalem and adhere to the commandments.
G.W.W. There is certainly some moral importance, that it would be greatly to our profit to get hold of, in the keeping of the feast of tabernacles at this juncture, as indicating moral preparation for what was coming in. One questions whether or not the failure all around us has caused a good deal of the weakness and failure that has come in together with an attempt to bolster up something ecclesiastical, without being satisfied with what is entirely moral; there appears to me therefore to be something in the dwelling in booths. I wish we could get a real sense of what it means that every man has to leave his house and go and dwell in a booth. There seems to be some moral preparation there for what was coming in.
J.T. What is it?
G.W.W. Well, I do not know, but I am very anxious we should get at it.
Rem. I would like to revert to what has been said as to the burnt offering, which was evident in the early days and the light that came in as to the glorified Man, which put such a wonderful impress upon those who were first recovered and able to give us the light. I think the appreciation they had was very largely that the glorified Man was the One who gave pleasure to God in the sacrifice in the burnt offering. Now in these first six verses no less than seven times is reference made to the burnt offering. The recovery in the souls of the people was God's appreciation of the value of the person of Christ and the work of Christ when He devoted Himself to the pleasure of God. Now the one who is glorified is the One who suffers that way, and He is the burnt offering; that is seen outstandingly here, it is seven times over referred to, and I think the point of recovery eighty or ninety years ago was the appreciation of Christ in that light.
G.W.W. Yes, the appreciation of the burnt offering leads the people to the feast of tabernacles. I am not
{103}
prepared to go and dwell in my booth unless I am in the appreciation of the new position into which the burnt offering aspect of the death of Christ has introduced me before God. I am in the appreciation of that new position so that I think very little of that which will give me a certain position here, and I am delighted to take common ground with all the people of God as those who all alike have been the subjects of divine grace, and to enjoy with them the things concerning Christ. I am rather looking at the burnt offering as giving me the moral preparation.
Rem. I think that is entirely so. If you take the history of the people of God, there has always been light as to the forgiveness of sins -- that is that Christ died for our sins -- but when the offering of Christ devoted to the pleasure of God, as we get it in the burnt offering, was understood and when it found place in their souls there was a new point of departure which led into all the faithfulness and meekness of the Philadelphian state, and I think it is that that we get indicated here, and that leads on to the feast of tabernacles.
W.B. I have a difficulty in that you were speaking about how light as to the Lord in glory recovered the Lord's people in days gone by. Does not the altar set forth Christ here upon earth as a man? Is it not the strength of that Man that is able to meet everything, and is He not strong enough in His own Person to maintain everything for God, to stand against evil, to give up all, and to surrender and sacrifice as a Man? Is it not all down here upon the earth?
G.W.W. Yes, but is it not all done in view of the place of acceptance for His people, all going up to God surely, but in that burnt offering the foundation is laid, not for the putting away of sins, but for the place of acceptance in which a redeemed people are set with their God. Is that not what comes out?
W.B. Yes, that is true, but my point is that it was all accomplished on the earth, not in the glory.
G.W.W. But what has it in view?
W.B. It is for the glory, but I learn it now upon earth.
G.W.W. Surely.
{104}
J.T. The point is that they came back to Jerusalem, which it has been remarked is spiritually the heavenlies, the centre of rule and blessing where Christ is, but then, as was remarked, the altar has reference to what Christ was here as Man, but the burnt offerings bring in the thought of acceptance. It is reconciliation. That company is before God according to that, so the people know in what they offer there (conforming with the requirements of God) they are before Him typically in all the acceptance of Christ, and in that way they are qualified for the booths, I apprehend, and the presence of the Lord, the dwelling with us of the Lord.
Rem. That is of tremendous value, because if you look through genealogical writings there runs through a general idea of the forgiveness of sins, but acceptance and reconciliation was light which led on to recovery and which is in the savour of Christ's preciousness to God in that sacrifice.
G.W.W. That is the initial step and we are not going to get along on the line of recovery, or light that was given as to the house or anything else, until the soul is established in that point. That is going to help us to seek identification with the movement.
J.T. Quite right.
G.W.W. We not only come to the burnt offering and appropriate the new position that has been established in Christ (and we have got a sense of it in our souls consequent upon receiving the Spirit), but we are prepared to dwell in booths. We move on.
J.T. In bringing all this back to what is practical, in the second epistle to Timothy you have a company of people, or a number of persons, who call on the Lord out of a pure heart, with whom you can follow, and it may be wondered what these people are going to do. And so, "All scripture", we are told in that same scripture, "is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness", @2 Timothy 3: 16. Well, I turn to Ezra, which has its place in "all scripture" and I get instruction as to how people similarly situated acted, and I get light, I get confirmation, and what I find is that they returned to Jerusalem. What
{105}
would exercise those that have got a pure heart and are calling on the Lord would be to return to Jerusalem too. That is, they have returned to Christ as He is at the right hand of God. Scripture abounds with instruction for the people of God and I want to find what application it has to me, or, rather, to us. How am I going to apply Scripture? Well, Paul says, 'Now, Timothy, you must remember this that the scripture has to be rightly divided'. It is complete in itself but it has to be divided, and you must remember that great limitations are involved in the breakdown that has come in. In the midst of what is formally called "a great house" it is quite clear that one has to be very careful as to how one is going to apply Scripture. You have got to use discernment and discrimination, otherwise you will find yourself in a false position in the use of it. So that the saints look into the Scriptures. It is very remarkable, in Ezra and Nehemiah, how much they made of the Scriptures. Presently a man arrives who understands the thing, even Ezra. He was instructed in the law of God and returned with that qualification -- a man raised up of the Lord expressly to help the people of God under those circumstances. So the people gather together on a certain day, in the open space before the water gate, in order to hear the law read, and, as Ezra read it, standing upon a pulpit of wood, all the people stood and listened. Then after he reads it, he and the other priests instruct the people as to the meaning of what he had read (@Nehemiah 8: 1 - 12). Now it seems to me that in that way you have a mode of procedure, and, following it, as I said, all the land is before us. There is nothing we may not touch in the way of blessing and privilege.
Rem. It is a very helpful suggestion. You mean they returned to the house of God. The house of the Lord was not in visible evidence; there was no house there at all, yet morally they returned to it, and therefore to the principles of it, and to the things in the mind of God connected with it.
W.L.P. The laying of the foundation and building of the house is entirely moral now, is it not?
{106}
J.T. Quite. That is a further development. We begin with the altar, we begin with the sacrifice. That is, I have to sacrifice for you and you for me if we are to walk together, but, mark you, they were together as one man in Jerusalem. It was not a place of their own choosing. They might have selected another place in the kingdom of Persia to set up a temple to Jehovah, but Jerusalem was the spot and they assembled there as one man, so it seems to me that the great error that has been made in christendom is that Jerusalem has been overlooked. In all their efforts to set up the worship of God, the service of God, this one great principle has been overlooked, namely Jerusalem.
B.T.F. The Lord being with His people, to what do you actually refer then?
J.T. It is the feast of tabernacles that succeeded it. The dwelling in booths would mean they were dwelling closely, and He would be with them.
B.T.F. I was thinking of the present application.
J.T. "He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me: and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest myself to him" (@John 14: 21) and then, "If a man love me, he will keep my words: and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him", @John 14: 23. That is the encouragement one has in keeping His word.
G.W.W. The thought of the house of God in any spiritual way was entirely lost in christendom, and the thought of God's house was limited entirely to a building over whose doors was inscribed, "This is none other but the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven". It shows how completely the moral and spiritual idea had been lost. Now what is to be recovered, and established in the souls of the saints, is the true appreciation of the house of God.
J.T. That is it.
G.W.W. But that has got to be done in your soul. It has got to be done in men.
J.T. As we are together as one man then we can apply the truth of the house.
{107}
G.W.W. Yes, but the sense of it has been re-established in each one of our souls. It is not anything outward or visible, but it is recovery to the true moral sense of the: house. The rule of that house is holiness.
J.T. That leads to another thought, namely, the house is universal.
G.W.W. Eventually.
J.T. It is a universal thought. It brings in all saints in all lands, in all nations, so that it saves one from national or local ideas. They came to it before it was rebuilt, but you see this, that it is a question of the light of the thing.
W.B. What is the point of the seventh verse?
J.T. Shall I read it? "They gave money also unto the masons, and to the carpenters; and meat, and drink, and oil, unto them of Zidon, and to them of Tyre, to bring cedar trees from Lebanon to the sea of Joppa, according to the grant that they had of Cyrus king of Persia". Well, you see what they are giving now is not for sacrifice on the altar. They are now thinking of the requirements of the house, the necessary elements for the house.
G.W.W. Might we say the moral constituents of the house? That is what is brought there. That is what our souls need to have a sense of.
J.T. These things are not put on the altar. We began with what is due to God, and that is what I had specially before me in this passage. That is a question of following righteousness. It is the assertion of what is due to God first of all, and then you bring in, as you said, the constituent elements of the house. We must have these.
A.N.W. Is it not sacrifice also?
J.T. Well, it may be, but you see sacrifice is for the altar.
A.N.W. Always?
J.T. I think so.
A.N.W. What about the praise later?
J.T. The reference there is to the altar. I think sacrifice usually involves the altar. It is a question of what you present to God, as to whether it conforms to His requirement, and His requirement is Christ. But then you think of the necessities of the house, the requirements of the house.
{108}
A.F.M. Would you say the truth of the house has been recovered to us during the last years, and the point now is that our souls should be in the moral good of that? That is the position now.
J.T. You see they came to it before the foundation was laid even, showing you have the idea in your soul.
Rem. And do we not see that when they appreciate the light of that, two very important elements at once come into view -- that is, headship and priesthood. That is Zerubbabel and Jeshua. As soon as they return to the house and have the mind of God concerning that, there comes into view at once headship and priesthood.
J.T. Quite right.
A.F.M. Would you say the particular point of recovery lies in the fact that God is here by the Spirit? Was not the presence of the Spirit neglected and misunderstood?
J.T. Quite right, and then what has been said should be well noted, that, as coming back to the house we have the apostle and high priest. We have authority. Christ is Son over it. That remains true. He is Son over it, He knows every stone in the house and where it is, although I may not know, nor do we claim to be it.
Rem. We are of it.
J.T. Quite, we are of it, but then we have access to Christ and He has access to us, so that in the late great issue that arose the point was that Christ is Son over the house. He is over it as Son of God. That is, He is Ruler of it.
G.W.W. Not a mere figurehead.
J.T. No, the real ruler of the house of God. So that they have Zerubbabel here, and Jeshua the high priest. Thus we are wonderfully provided for. We have all that they had at the beginning in that sense, so the epistle to the Hebrews becomes so important in our day, because it emphasizes what we have.
Rem. What we have come to.
J.T. Yes, quite, what we have come to in chapter 3. But we have access, it says, into the holiest, and we have a great High Priest over the house of God, so let us draw near. Therefore I say there are no limitations as regards
{109}
God, or as regards our spiritual enjoyment and intelligence. All is perfectly clear in regard of God.
G.W.W. I think if you will follow it through what you find is that every trouble that ever arose among us was in some way an attempt of the enemy to obscure those original recovered principles. Some time ago an attempt was made among us to lay down the ground that all being children in the presence of one God was the original ground on which brethren were found gathered together. I asked the only brother living who could tell me anything about it and he said that was so. Mr. Darby came along and found them there, and then brought these thoughts in connection with the glorified Man in heaven to them. They saw at once that the idea as to children of God would not hold and the great majority accepted the light and moved on in their souls. Those who did not became leaders in the Bethesda division.
J.T. They began with this chapter, but the point of gathering is not some family. Jerusalem is the centre of gathering.
G.W.W. Yes, we must come to something beyond the basis of some family, which is a ground that will not hold. I think that headship and priesthood and moral condition have been ceaselessly assailed -- never perhaps more so than in the last difficulty we had. I am perfectly persuaded it was an attempt upon the headship of Christ.
J.T. And His governorship in the house of God. He is Ruler in the house of God, and as Son. It is serious to have anything appear to interfere.
J.D-s. I am very glad to hear it. If I understand it, a Timothy a is the way into all this morally. It is a very great relief to find it is so. It is an immense thing when we come to Jerusalem. We find the structure there. It is all there. Then as we have not built it it has to be reached morally; but then we find there is the Head and Priest present.
J.T. So what you see is this, if you are in a locality and there are some brethren calling on the Lord out of a pure heart, you say obviously we belong to the house of God,
{110}
Christ is over it, and you suggest that we should act on those principles, and *we* find the Lord does help us in the government of the saints.
J.D-s. Yes. Manifestly there must be limitations, the church having failed and become in the condition in which we find it today. There must be limitations from our side. It would be mere pretension for us to assume otherwise. To shut our eyes to it would be folly.
Rem. One is impressed with the tremendous value of this, that we have everything that was established in a material way. The kingdom, the throne, the temple, the city, the house, have all been swept away, but we come back here to Ezra and we find everything without exception that was of moral and spiritual value is preserved in its associations and is workable, and absolutely maintains for the returned remnant the intercourse with God that was enjoyed before, and in a deeper way in a sense, so the thing becomes of immense encouragement as we see it in that way, I think.
J.D-s. It might help if you would tell us why you said this is all laid on the pattern of David, not Moses.
J.T. Well, I think it was David that brought in Jerusalem. He captured Jerusalem and he received the pattern of the temple by the Spirit, it says. As a matter of fact, David is the head. I do not think that Moses is head in Exodus, Leviticus or Numbers, but he is head in Deuteronomy, because in Deuteronomy he speaks, not as it says "The Lord spake unto Moses, saying". He speaks more as one who has the mind of God in Deuteronomy. You understand what I mean?
J.D-s. I do.
J.T. You will not find the continual repetition "The Lord spake unto Moses, saying". It is what Moses says, showing that in Deuteronomy he is more head, preparing the people to enter into Canaan. Now when you come to David you find nothing of that either. You find nothing of 'The Lord spake unto David, saying'. What you do find is what David said, and what David did -- especially what he did, and in what he did in preparing of a service for the
{111}
house of God you have the great principle of the headship of Christ in providing the service and the song, or songs, for the house of God, so that David brings in the Levites and constitutes them singers and then delivers the songs to them to sing. Now we find that alluded to here (verse 10), "And when the builders laid the foundation of the temple of the Lord, they set the priests in their apparel with trumpets, and the Levites the sons of Asaph with cymbals, to praise the Lord, after the ordinance of David king of Israel". So that they are now at the full height of the thoughts of God in regard to the house.
A.A.T. In christianity if Paul answers to David, what answers to Moses?
J.T. The instructions given by the twelve, I suppose. The twelve represented the authority of Christ and in the inauguration of christianity in the world they are typified in Moses.
B.T.F. You have been speaking much of the house in order to fix it on our minds. Would you just name some of the prominent features connected with the house in a practical way?
J.T. David helps us there. First of all he discerned what the foundation was by the sword being sheathed by the angel on the threshing floor of Ornan the Jebusite. He says, "This is the house of the Lord God, and this is the altar of the burnt offering for Israel", @1 Chronicles 22: 1. He discovered it in that way. It was not pointed out to him, and that only confirms what I was remarking, that headship comes in on moral grounds. He discerned that that was the foundation. From that point onward David is occupied with nothing else than preparation for the house of God. That fills his soul and he hands over the pattern and the material to Solomon, and Solomon puts it together.
A.P. Why do the elder brethren weep here?
J.T. I suppose it was a right feeling, that they remembered the former glory of the house.
A.P. As has been pointed out recovery brought them into a deeper knowledge of it.
J.T. So it does, because it leads us on. As we read in
{112}
@Haggai 2: 9, "the latter glory of the house shall be greater than the former". But I think it is quite right to have a right judgment of the failure that has brought in the ruin of the first.
G.W.W. If we think of the different things brought to pass by the unfaithfulness of saints, we can but mourn; it can but fill us with sorrow; and perhaps one is not really ready to take up the position until one recognizes with sorrow that consequent upon failure the church has been shorn of a great many things previously attached to her. At the same time one can understand the shout of joy. We see the gate is being opened that we might go in to enjoy all those things, vital and moral and of such importance. It is not merely mourning over the departed glory of the thing. We have this wonderful promise and rejoice in it, that the glory that is going to come in yet shall be greater than anything we mourn over; the latter glory shall be the greatest of all.
J. S. Is that an evidence of the spiritual state? While the foundation is simply being laid they sing. They do not wait until the house is completed to start singing.
J.T. It shows the great place the Lord had in their hearts.
{113}
EDUCATION FOR HEAVEN
@Luke 9: 28 - 36; @Matthew 17: 1 - 8; @Mark 9: 2 - 8
I wish to speak of these verses but wish also to read Matthew's account and Mark's account of the same occurrence. Matthew's account is in chapter 17, verses 1 to 8, and Mark's in chapter 9, verses 2 to 8.
In connection with the gospels the word to Timothy by Paul has a special significance, namely, that we should rightly divide the word of truth. The gospels afford a wide range, I need not remind you. They are on a much wider platform than the epistles. The bearing of the gospels goes beyond the church, I need not say, and goes into the millennium, so we need to bear that injunction in mind in reading them, namely, to rightly divide the word of truth.
I want to speak a word about the educational feature of the gospels, so I have selected these passages; especially the one in Luke, for they present to us what is highly educational. Immediately the disciples were in view, but at the time these narratives were written the disciples had undoubtedly learned their lessons, so that they were not written for them. They were written for those who should follow after them, those who had been converted through them; they were written for us so that we should profit by their education. We are to be educated divinely, beloved friends, if we are to be educated at all. I need not remind you that the gospels do not educate us for a place in this world. The education that the gospels afford is to qualify us for that world, the one that is to come. For ourselves immediately the education is for the heavenly part of it. A very blessed suggestion that, that we are to fulfil a function in the heavenly part of that wonderful world that God has before Him.
These three men -- Peter, James and John -- were taken by the Lord to receive this special educational experience (for such it was) and the record is left for us as followers
{114}
of theirs in the path of faith, so that we should partake of the education that is available in it. So I will dwell upon the thoughts in Matthew, and say a few words as to Mark; finally I would desire to go into Luke more fully.
Matthew tells us that the Lord's countenance shone as the sun, and His raiment was white as the light. That is what the Spirit of God introduces through Matthew for us. Neither Mark nor Luke refer to the sun in their narratives, and for the reason that I have stated, that Matthew is the educational gospel for administration. We are to be administrators; we are to have part in the rule of the world to come. Now these are not mere theories. I do not wish you to think that I am putting out accepted theories among the saints. I wish you to understand that what I am saying, I am speaking from conviction in my own soul as to the significance of the passage.
However insignificant we may regard ourselves, the mind of God is that we shall have part in the administration of that wonderful system of things He has before Him. He has His mind about it and He does not want you to come short. Hence the importance of looking at the sun. In some parts of the earth it is regarded (at least at certain times) as an enemy, but I am sure the whole human race would conclude that the sun is the greatest of all factors in the material system, especially in the wonderful regularity in which it revolves (as we speak), regulating everything in our system.
A wonderful piece of education, beloved friends, to look at Christ in that light! What a countenance was that! John sees Him later in the vision in Patmos. It was as the sun shines in his power, it says. We as christians have come to see that our politics are not connected with this world. We have come (at least some of us have -- all christians have not) to see, with Paul, that our citizenship is in heaven. We have come to see that in connection with Christ there, there is a system of politics, or citizenship, in which we, as believers, have part. It is not only that I am to be with Jesus -- wonderful as that is. Every believer is to be there. The Lord will have us. He loves us and
{115}
hence He comes in order to receive us to Himself. We are told that. As He says, "That where I am, there ye may be also", @John 14: 3. Most precious truth for those who love the Lord, but that is to be in the Father's house, in which there are many valued things, but there is a wider idea than the Father's house. There is the city of the, living God, to *which* we have come. Out of it is all government. The government is to be on the shoulder of Christ. Would to God He were here now to take it up! Every nation cries out for a governor, for one who can face things and solve them. The government shall be upon His shoulder, His name shall be Everlasting Father. Think of the care, the parental care, the interest of Christ in the whole realm of God. The government of the universe is sustained on His shoulder. And then He is the Prince of Peace. All these great ideas shall enter into the city of the living God, whence shall issue all rule and all light for the whole realm of creation. What a wonderful thing, beloved friends, that God has destined that we are to have part in that. We are to have our part in that wonderful scheme. How important, therefore, to study Matthew.
Matthew is what I might call the legislative gospel, and also the administrative gospel, for in order to have administration you must have legislation. Now chapter 5 gives us the legislation of the kingdom. That is also upon the mount, but in chapter 17 it is the Administrator that is presented to us, the Ruler. So His countenance is like the sun. What brilliancy! As you think of the countenances of the nations, who knows anything about them? Things are all done in the dark. Whereas here you have the countenance of the Ruler as the sun in brilliance, and then all His circumstances, His clothing, are white as the light -- not a spot or shade either on His person or His circumstances. Who can rule in the house of God? Who is qualified to rule in the house of God save one whose countenance is as the sun in clearness and brilliance with no dark part, and whose circumstances and whose relationships (domestic and otherwise) are as white as the light? 1 Timothy makes it plain as to who is to rule in the house of God.
{116}
Now Matthew, as I understand, is the gospel that instructs us in regard of rule. When you come to Mark what you will note is the word "themselves" appears as exclusive, as I apprehend. It says He took them to a high mountain apart by themselves. Now that is Mark. Mark is, as we know, the evangelist who presents to us Christ as the servant of God. You have no reference to His birth, or to His boyhood in Mark. It is the beginning of the glad tidings of Jesus Christ, Son of God. That is how Mark introduces his subject. Very abrupt -- no reference to His parentage or to His locality. It is Jesus Christ, Son of God, at the beginning of His service, and so the Lord takes them with Him. They go up into the mountain.
The Lord is selective and exclusive. We must not be afraid of the word 'exclusive'. It is a very good word provided it is preceded by selection, by divine selection. Now according to Mark they are taken aside by themselves. How lovely that is! It is as if to say, 'Now, Peter, James and John, only you three'. The Lord evidently had no compunction in regard of hurt feelings. Only Peter, James and John, only you three. You say, a very small company. Ah, but a very select company. That is the point. It is not a question of the number. Not that we shall not have numbers, but I prefer selection first, the selection of the Lord Jesus Christ. It is a wonderful thing to be selected. "*Ye* have not chosen me", says the Lord, @John 15: 16. Had we been left to ourselves not one of us would have chosen Him. A very solemn thing to have to admit -- not one of us would have chosen Him. He says, you did not choose me. Had they been left to themselves they would have been with the multitude, with the majority, who rejected Him. "When we shall see him there is no beauty that we should desire him", @Isaiah 53: a. He is not our selection, but He says, "I have chosen you, and ordained you", @John 15: 16.
The Lord selects and He ordains. A wonderful thing to be in that select company! Now it says, He took them apart by themselves, and all that happens happens for them. Wonderful consideration in divine education! If you will
{117}
notice, He was transfigured *before* them -- not simply transfigured. It is not simply the fact of the transfiguration. That is there, but it happened *before* them. How much happens before us? Think of His consideration for us -- how things happen before us. They do not happen before the world. The world does not know what we enjoy. Did they know it, their attitude would be different. As Paul says, speaking of the Lord in another connection, "the hidden wisdom ... which none of the princes of this world knew: for had they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory". The wisdom of the Greeks is public, and all the sages that have followed (many of whom live now) you can attain to by getting their books and reading them, and listening to their lectures, but the hidden wisdom, beloved friends, which none of the princes knew (the word "princes" here does not mean simply the rulers of the world, but the learned men of the world). Not one of them knew it, he says, "for had they known, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory", @1 Corinthians 2: 8. And so, beloved friends, the world does not know the things that come before us. Hidden away in obscure places and rooms (for the meeting rooms we have are not built for us; none of the cities of the world provide for the saints of God; we have to take what we can find usually) we find things that the world knows nothing about. They happen before us -- not before the world.
The Lord in going away, before He went up to heaven, prayed, and He deliberately excluded the world. A very serious thing! "I pray not for the world", He says, "but for them which thou hast given me". That is our position. He prays for us and He manifests Himself to us. Judas says, How is that Lord? How can you manifest yourself to us and not to the world? "If any one love me he will keep my word". The secret is, if you love Christ you will understand how it is that you are one of the exclusives, one of the select ones to whom He makes manifestations. Is that not enough for you? There are those who look for companies and are glad to see a lot of brethren. Of course we are thankful to see large companies,
{118}
but then, beloved friends, it is a question of the countenances of those of the company. What kind of countenances have they? Gideon says to the kings of the Midianites, "What sort of men were they that ye slew at Tabor?" What were they like? That is the point. What do they look like? Well, they say, every one was like you. Each one of them is the child of a king. That is the company. There is no difficulty in regard of numbers, if you are after them. It only requires a bit of talent, and a bit of energy, and a bit of strife, the strife of Herod, the leaven of Herod, and you will get a company. There is no difficulty about getting a crowd. They are easily secured. It is a question of the quality. What kind of countenances have they? What kind of spirits have they? What kind of hearts have they? Ye have come, says the apostle, to the spirits of just men made perfect, and we want men, as we had it here today and yesterday, calling on the Lord out of a pure heart. These are the people.
Well, now, I think Mark calls attention to this, they are exclusive, they are a select class. Oh, you say, you are shut up to yourselves, you christians, you brethren. You are too narrow. I am not defending the narrowness of the flesh, because the flesh is exclusive too in its own way, carnally so. I am speaking of the exclusiveness that is based on the selection of the Lord Jesus Christ -- His selection. You say, you are shut up to yourselves. But then, beloved friends, look what we are shut up to. Suppose we admit your contention, look what we are shut up to. What do you know about what we see? About what we enjoy? You have no part or lot in it. Look at the countenances of God's people. Look at their ways. See if they are not happier than you are. How do you account for it? The secret of it is, beloved friends, that we are shut up to Christ. That is the secret of it. But then shut up to Christ is shut up to what? Shut up to all there is in heaven and eternity. Think of the vastness of it. We have spoken here today about the feast of weeks and the feast of Pentecost, that in the New Testament there is no time limit. It is not regulated by the laws of time or of nature. As christians we are shut up to that,
{119}
the vastness of what God is in Christ, made good to us by the Spirit. As Paul says, If the outer man perisheth (and he does) yet the inner is renewed day by day. You do not see the inner man. You only see the outer. He says further, We look not at things that are seen. We are the filth and off scouring of all things, nevertheless, we look at the things that are not seen, and in the light of all that, our light affliction, which is but for a moment, worketh for us an eternal weight of glory. That is the christian's part.
Mark, I apprehend, is on that line, so he tells us that the Lord took them apart to a high mountain by themselves, and was transfigured before them, and after the transfiguration, in Mark it says they looked around and they saw no one but Jesus only with themselves. I only refer to that and I leave it with you, but, I say, what a wonderful thing to see Jesus only and themselves!
Do not say in your heart, I am nothing. Are we nothing? Place the saints with Jesus and see what they are. They are *jewels*. Really you might say that expression "Jesus only with themselves" is the essence of the epistle to the Colossians. That is what it is. The Father speaks out of the cloud, and He says, "This is my beloved Son: hear him". And they look around and they see no one but Jesus only. Jesus only with them. He was with them. Well now, that, as I apprehend, is how Mark presents the thing. He occupies our minds with this beautiful picture -- a glorified Jesus announced from heaven as the Son, who alone is to be heard, and He is there with the three men who are selected. He is with them and they do not see anything else but Him. As I said, it seems to me to be the substance of the letter to the Colossians.
In turning to Luke what I wish to enlarge on is the Man, and what you will see is that the transfiguration occurred while He was praying. It does not say that it occurred before them. I think that in a way the Father would say, 'I am not going to leave it all with you. It is not all for you now'. That lovely picture of a Man praying, lifting up His face to God in prayer, is for God. "And as He prayed, the fashion of his countenance was altered, and his raiment
{120}
was white and glistering" and Moses and Elias appear and they are talking with Him. What are they talking about? All these things are educational. They are talking about His decease. I suppose if we were to meet Moses, with our natural sentiments, we should like to ask him several questions about the Egyptians, or about Pharaoh as the warrior that ruled in his time. He could tell us. He could solve that problem. He could tell us, if we were disposed to ask him, certain things about the Red Sea and Mount Sinai. But there was nothing said here about those things at all. He was in the presence of the Lord of glory, he and Elias, these two wonderful men. Elias could have told us about Ahab and Jezebel, but not a word about these things. They are speaking to the Lord about His decease which He should accomplish at Jerusalem. That is the theme of their conversation on the mount.
Well, now, Peter was afraid, and John was afraid, and James was afraid; not only were they afraid, but they fell asleep. It says "Peter and they that were with him were heavy with sleep". It seems Peter is the foreleader in the sleeping here. There is usually a leader in these things. There is not time to enlarge upon the leadership in which Peter figures; we have to be on our guard as to leadership of the saints which results in disaster for them, and as to whether we are influencing anybody wrongly. If you want to go to sleep go to sleep by yourself. "Peter and they that were with him", it says. It seems as if they were together as a trio, in spite of the vision before them. It is a terrible thing to have partisan feeling. You may say I am forcing the passage, but the Spirit of God puts it just that way. "Peter and those with him" it should be (New Trans.). They were with Jesus on the holy mount. It was a question of being with Jesus and that is the question, beloved friends, for us. It is not what man you are with, what company you are with. It is a question of being with the Lord, with Jesus. It is a question for the secret of your soul to determine whether you are with Him, or whether you are with Peter or somebody else.
They were oppressed with sleep, it says, and then it
{121}
further says that when they were "fully awoke up they saw his glory, and the two men who stood with him". That was what they woke up to and that is what we all wake up to. Now that is what is available -- that is the light, the light of Christ's glory. But now see how it is with them: Peter is spokesman again, and he says to the Lord, "Master, it is good for us to be here". *For us*. "And let us make three tabernacles; one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias". Now, Luke says he did not know what he said; Mark says he did not know what to say. How like the conditions around us, men waking up and now making their proposals -- three tabernacles. I wonder how many there are, how many tabernacles today in what we call christendom? How many? In Paul's time even, at Corinth, he says, "*every one* of you saith" (mark, there was nobody exempt). "Every one of you saith I am of Paul; and I of Apollos; and I of Cephas, and I of Christ", @1 Corinthians 1: 12. They were all guilty. There was none exempt. "Every one of you". That is how it is in christendom. Each one of you says, I am of this, I am that, and I am the other, and someone says, "I am of Christ", another sect called christians, as distinguished from others. The apostle says, "Is Christ divided? was Paul crucified for you? or were ye baptized in the name of Paul?" Away with your sects! Away with your leaders! Return to christianity.
Peter, it says, did not know what he was saying. Well, it is not only that they do not know what they are saying, it is far worse than that. The divisions of christendom are an attack on the Lord Jesus Christ. It is an attack on the truth of the church. It is Satan's way of nullifying the truth. That is what it is.
A cloud comes and the Father's voice is heard. It says that a cloud overshadowed them. Ah! God is going to have to say. Today, beloved friends, His voice speaks amid the din of the different voices of leaders. God speaks. It is a question of righteousness, the rights of God are involved in it. "This is my beloved Son: hear him". There is only one tabernacle. There are not to be three tabernacles. Three would be a denial of the truth of the Deity, for God
{122}
is one. So in Exodus it was asserted there should be one tabernacle, and Christ is that. At least He stands for it here. So the passage further reads, "While he thus spake, there carne a cloud, and overshadowed them: and they feared as they entered into the cloud". That is to say, God brings Peter's wicked speech to an end. Would to God He would put an end to it now, at least in the hearts of His own. The greatest comfort one has in a way is that the Lord knoweth those that are His, and if you have any such device in your heart, or any such speech as this, would to God the cloud would come and put an end to it forever.
The cloud came as a rebuke to Peter while he was speaking. There is no such thing as what he was saying. If you are holding any such thing as that it is not from Heaven. That is from the devil, that voice that suggested putting the Son of God on a level with Elias and Moses. God will not have it. That is what heaven says. But God has His mind about things and He is going to deal with them. God is a righteous judge. He is judge of all the earth, as if Elias says: "The just Lord is in the midst thereof; he will not do iniquity: every morning doth he bring his judgment to light, he faileth not", @Zephaniah 3:5. God has His own mind about everything and is going to bring His own judgment to light, so He hushes this wretched speech of Peter's. You say it was not so bad? Just so, it shows where you are. What does heaven think of it? It was an attack on the Son of God. That is what it was, putting Him on the level of Moses and Elias, so "while he thus spake" it says, "there came a cloud, and overshadowed them: and they feared". Thank God for that, they were afraid. They had good reason to be afraid with such sentiments in their hearts, for thus God was educating them. Thank God for that. They were to learn and judge. Thank God they were disposed to learn.
And so the passage goes on to say, "There came a voice out of the cloud, saying, This is my beloved Son: hear him". That is God's voice, as if He would say, 'Just give up all those wretched ideas about numbers, about leaders, and look at My Son, listen to Him, let Him speak to you.
{123}
Hear Him!' And so it says, "When the voice was past"; that is, the voice in its own time has passed and now you are to be tested by it. The voice is past. When it is past Jesus is found there. It does not say He was found with them. "Jesus was found alone".
Now, are we prepared for that, to be with that blessed Man whose life was taken from the earth, who was received up into heaven and who is at the right hand of God? When Stephen saw Jesus standing on the right hand of God, he said, "I see the heavens opened, and the Son of man standing on the right hand of God". Standing ready to serve, ready to speak, ready to teach; are we prepared, beloved brethren, to listen to Jesus the Son of God?
"And they kept it close, and told no man in those days any of those things which they had seen". I do not think you go and tell out these things. The thing is wonderful. Think of this wonderful treasure they had. You treasure it in your heart, it will work out. They did not tell anybody in those days, but Peter does tell us about it. He uses the expression "holy mount". "When we were with him", he says, "in the holy mount", @2 Peter 1: 18. But whom did he tell it to? To whom does he tell this? He tells it to the Jews of the dispersion, in view of the fact that he was about to put off his tabernacle. He says, 'I want to stir up your pure minds by way of remembrance'. We do not tell such things to impure people. It is not fit that they should hear about it. These things are priestly things and are for pure minded people. You say, why are you telling them to us? Just because I believe you are pure minded. I believe that.
We were remarking today about Jehu, the one who executed the judgment of God; he met with Jehonadab, and said, "Is thine heart right, as my heart is with thy heart?" Jehonadab said, "It is", @2 Kings 10: 15. Well now, I believe that about you, that your hearts are right, because fellowship is not simply that we have agreed in regard of doctrine. It is really a question of heart. Is your heart right with my heart, and is my heart right with your heart, and both our hearts right with the Lord's heart That is the circle of fellowship. Jehonadab says, 'My
{124}
heart is right with your heart. I am with you'. So Jehu gave him his hand and took him up to him in his chariot. I apprehend that is our position, in this sense, we are together with pure hearts, with hearts that are true to each other as they are to Christ. And so, beloved friends, Peter took account of those to whom he wrote as having pure minds. We should stir up pure minds. I would not like to stir up an impure mind. An impure mind had better be left dormant. The reading of a novel will stir up an impure mind; they are intended to stir up the flesh in the human heart and human mind. But Peter, as a true priest of God, is recognizing purity in the minds and in the hearts of God's people, and says, I want to stir up that. That is what is to be stirred up. It is to be stirred up by way of remembrance. Remembrance of what? Remembrance of this wonderful vision on the mount of transfiguration. He says, "We have not followed cunningly devised fables, when we made known unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were eyewitnesses of his majesty". 'We were eyewitnesses when we were with Him on the holy mount'. He does not say, 'When James, and John, and myself were on the holy mount'. It is Christ he is bringing before them, not James, John and himself. We "were eyewitnesses of his majesty". So he leaves that as a remembrance in the pure minds of the people of God, and so what I seek to do tonight is to stir up your pure minds that we might be educated and especially that this wonderful Man should be before us. They saw only the Lord -- "Jesus alone". He it is that is to fill the vision of the people of God, and, in these last days, to keep us from the antichrist; for Jesus is the Christ, and as we have Him in our hearts we are invulnerable to the influences of the antichrist. May the Lord bless the word before us tonight.
{125}
THE END IN KEEPING WITH THE BEGINNING
@Haggai 2: 10 - 23
I have selected this passage because it, I hope, will serve as a development of what we were engaged with on the previous occasion.
I desire to show that at the end of the days the divine thought is to bring about what is in keeping with the beginning of the days, that there should be a correspondence between those who are found at the end and those at the beginning; when I speak of the beginning I mean Christ, according to the principle of service which is found in Him: "Behold my servant whom I uphold, mine elect in whom my soul delighteth!", @Isaiah 42: 1. God began with that, and He intends to end with that, and so I selected this passage to seek to develop how God will bring about at the end that which corresponds to what He began with.
I need not remind you that there was no need for development in Christ. What He was as Man He brought into nature in manhood. Natural claims are fully admitted in their place, but when there was any attempt to establish these claims it was at once disallowed, even in His own mother. Indeed, from the outset when Simeon comes into the temple he enunciates this principle. You can only get spiritual thoughts from spiritual men. Simeon came in by the Spirit. It was a very great prospect in Simeon's soul that he should see the Lord's Christ, and he had not forgotten it.
In the temple he takes the Child into his arms. Now, beloved friends, I take that to be a sort of picture of those of this dispensation, who have to do with Christ, those who will be priests. This must be by the Spirit, for the flesh profits nothing. So Simeon takes the Child, and he blesses God; he was truly more consecrated at that moment than ever Aaron was, for he had the fulfilment of all the types there in his arms, and he was a worshipper. By the same Spirit he speaks of the Babe and says to Jehovah,
{126}
"Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace ... . for mine eyes have seen thy salvation". His service was over; the true Servant had come -- "Mine elect in whom my soul delighteth". But Mary and Joseph were there and they marvelled. One can understand how the flesh in them may have suggested 'This means honour for us', but there is no honour for the flesh. Joseph is ignored by the man who has the Spirit, and he addresses himself to Mary, not indeed in such terms as modern language uses -- 'Holy Mary, mother of God' -- no, Simeon says, "A sword shall pierce through thy own soul also". This would certainly be in the death of the Lord, and there should be no recognition of the claims of the flesh. When Jesus is there, on the cross, having accomplished everything for the will of God, and Mary is there, He, as the Son of God, directs her to John, "Woman, behold thy son". He stands alone in all His dignity as Son of God, and so, beloved friends, the flesh is utterly refused when you come to Christ in His manhood. "Lo, I come (in the volume of the book it is written of me,) to do thy will, O God", @Hebrews 10: 7. That was the obedience of a Son, One here to do the will of God.
According to Matthew's record, He comes to John. I just dwell on this for a moment; John is baptizing. I might remark that he represents the moral features of the last days, one who refuses any moral place. Let us not talk of rivalry or leaders. John was but a voice. Jesus came to John; what an honour for a mere mortal! Mark you; He came to John, He knew him.
Would that we could take into our souls what it is to be with God. No one has any power unless he has been there. John had been there and hence his power. John said, "I have need to be baptized of thee, and comest thou to me?" Jesus said, "Suffer it to be so now: for thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness". The righteous One must have things just right. He was baptized and as He comes up the Holy Spirit comes upon Him -- God honouring His servant whom He had chosen. How little we take in what Christ was, in Manhood, for the Father! In the light of it we can well understand why the blood is mentioned
{127}
so much in the Old Testament. Jesus was God's only One. He found His all in Him, in this desert of humanity. "He shall grow up before him as a tender plant, and as a root out of a dry ground", @Isaiah 53: 2. The ground yielded nothing; all lay in what He was in Himself and so, beloved friends, we have this voice saying, "This is My beloved Son". And the Holy Spirit comes and abides upon Him, so He is now formally and publicly taken account of by God, and anointed for His service, and as anointed He went about. I do not understand a gifted servant being local, a gift is for the assembly. So the Lord went about, He acknowledged no local claim as a Servant, "I must preach ... to other cities", @Luke 4:43, so the servant goes about, but doing good. This is what marked the Lord.
Now I want to show how the end corresponds with this. I do not mean that there can be a Pentecost again. I know that everyone that belongs to Christ will shine presently with Him but it is a great thing to see to it that there are the features of it in these last days.
"His wife has made herself ready", @Revelation 19: 7. She thinks of the Bridegroom and what is suitable to Him -- fine linen bright and pure, not merely white, but bright, it shines. The fine linen is the righteousnesses of the saints. Although we may have things in the bud there may not be any fruit.
In this chapter in Haggai things were lethargic, people were concerned with their own affairs, and the house of God was neglected.
In @Zechariah 1: 20, 21, we get carpenters mentioned, as being employed to overthrow the horns, descriptive of the gentile monarchies that scattered the people of God. The angel, seated on the stone rolled away from the tomb of Jesus, was there as if in gigantic irony, showing that the power of the gentile monarchies was overthrown. God is not going to be diverted from what He began with. He will go on until there is a complete answer to Christ.
Angels are ministering spirits for those who shall be heirs of salvation. Every Christian should be a builder, a constructor. The seed royal is preserved in the hearts of His people and soon will come out.
{128}
Recovery takes place very rapidly in Haggai, the people had not wandered far. So there are two messages in one day. Not many of us could stand this. One message a day, or even a week, is often enough for us. The first message calls attention to the work in their souls, verse 12. Ceremonialism is powerless for sanctification. God was against the people, the principle of construction was neglected but the foundation is very important. "Let each see how he builds", @1 Corinthians 3: 10. But then, are you building at all? You mark the day in which you begin to build, and you get prosperity. I put it to your souls to mark the day. Have you begun? Now he mentioned four trees, as symbols. We are called upon to consider ourselves. Have divine things come to a bud in me? I think of the possibilities of one who desires to build. God waits for the full fruition of the seed in us. Let us take heed not to hinder the development, verse 18. What I expect is the development of these four things, through God's grace, in His people. The seed is sown, but He wants increase. I can picture one of those Israelites going to his garden and looking for the promise.
The vine is the fruit of the Spirit. As regards exercise you must take account of yourselves, but must look to the Lord, there is no good in ourselves. The vine is for joy. How lovely that a christian through self-judgment can bring joy to the Lord.
The fig tree typifies goodness, divine goodness. Barnabas is spoken of as a good man.
The pomegranate. A type of unity among the people of God. These things God will bring about for His glory. Let brotherly love continue, and increase. In the eye of God it is lovely. Unity precedes testimony.
The olive typifies the Spirit in the way of dignity. The oil makes a man's face to shine. It is the bringing in of Christ. These things may be in the bud, but in the development we have what answers to Christ and God's purpose with regard to us. In the second message the mind is turned to Christ. You can only get it among the saints. The Spirit directs our hearts to One who sets His seal upon us.
{129}
THE HOLY SPIRIT AS THE COMFORTER
@John 16: 11 - 33
J.T. The point of the chapter seems to be the office of the Holy Spirit as the Comforter in relation to the world. The world would be exposed in all its true character by the demonstration -- the public demonstration -- of the Holy Spirit in the saints. His presence would demonstrate that the Jews and the world were guilty; firstly, that there was sin with them, "because they believe not on me", secondly, "of righteousness because I go to my Father", thirdly, "of judgment, because the prince of this world is judged". Thus the disciples were at a great advantage when He came, in the fact that He would bring all this about in a public way. Instead of the Jews having the advantage, they would be in the position of the condemned, and Christ would be vindicated.
The chapter suggests the vindication of suffering ones, those who suffer for God. The apprehension of these things would mean an immense advantage for the Lord's people suffering in this world. He would justify their position to them.
P.L. I suppose chapter 17 would give us the priestly service of Christ, and chapter 16 the Comforter's mission.
J.T. Yes; we have Christ on the one hand, and the Holy Spirit on the other, and we have every reason to be confident of victory. @Acts 2 shows that the world was condemned.
Ques. How would it be a public demonstration?
J.T. The coming of the Holy Spirit at Pentecost was an evidence that God had accepted Christ. The Jews had professed to believe in God, but they refused to accept Christ. The Lord was rejected in that way, and went down into death without God interfering for Him. They said, "He calls for Elias", but Elias did not come to help Him. The inference was, He was not of God, or God would have saved Him. The question was whether God would come in and approve Christ by raising Him from the dead.
{130}
Well, the resurrection took place before the eyes of men; the empty sepulchre was a testimony that He had been raised. They told lies about that to cover up the great defeat that they had suffered. The Roman watch was at the tomb, but they became as dead men when the angel appeared. They gave bribes to cover up their defeat, but no one could cover up Christ's victory when the Holy Spirit came in. We hear "every man in our own tongue, wherein we were born". Everybody at Jerusalem heard what was said. Again they sought to obscure their defeat by saying, "These men are full of new wine". But Peter stands up, and denies it. The enemy's defeat was final. Then he proceeds to explain the resurrection of Christ, and His ascension. "Being by the right hand of God exalted". God had exalted Him; the presence of the Holy Spirit was proof conclusive of it.
P.L. In joy, they bring a man into the world, so to speak. They have travail in anguish, but Christ is reproduced in them.
J.T. These passages have reference to the people of God who are in the world, but apart from it in their souls in the power of the Spirit. And you notice it is not a babe, but a man.
The Holy Spirit is the testimony to victory. The saints may overcome the world, and know it. The world may not accept the judgment. It makes no difference whether or not the criminal accepts the sentence passed against him; he is guilty. On their part, the saints have the Spirit of glory and of God resting upon them.
The apostles did not seek to evade suffering. They suffered, but then they suffered as justified persons and as victors. Thus there was great moral power in their souls.
Ques. "Of righteousness because I go to my Father?" Why is it the "Father"?
J.T. The thought of God revealed as Father stands in relation to God known in grace, "He that hath seen me hath seen the Father"; "The world hath not known thee". In spite of the fact that He was to be seen here in grace, the world failed to respond, and thus the world is marked
{131}
off as unrighteous. Jesus is with the Father; that is the testimony of righteousness, and the vindication of what Jesus had been on earth. What He was as Man merited that He should go to the Father, and the world not believing on Him is proved unrighteous.
Rem. "Thou hast loved righteousness and hast hated lawlessness".
J.T. As with the Father, Christ is invested with all administrative authority. The world leaves God out; it is marked by disregard of the Father. The Holy Spirit coming in has brought in demonstration of that. Righteousness is now with the Father; no one would seek it in the world. But He is righteous, taking note of every little thought or act for Him. The Father's discriminations are infinitely accurate (see @Hebrews 6: 10). This helps you to suffer here. Christ has been here, was refused, and is now with the Father, so that the pathway in the world is one of suffering. But it is the path of those who are proven to be victors. That is an immense thing. I was thinking of Paul and Silas as a very remarkable illustration of that. "At midnight Paul and Silas prayed, and sang praises unto God". They knew there was no righteousness with the jailer, nor in the imperial system, but there was righteousness with God. Jesus, who had been here, and proved what righteousness is, was with the Father.
Ques. Was it on account of the apostle's following a course of righteousness that he was brought into reproach and suffering?
J.T. Yes, surely. It was also the occasion of God's approach to Europe with the glad tidings. But they had a sense that righteousness was with God. Their prayers are interspersed with praise. Then God acts in power. The prison is shaken, and the jailer is about to commit suicide, all disclosing what the world really is. But then God was there, and the jail was turned into a temple. There was priestly service and praise there. The point with the apostle was to get at this "man of Macedonia". The earth quaking seems to have terrorized the jailer, but Paul's voice allayed his fear. Paul says, "Do thyself no harm"; that is not the
{132}
voice of the world. There is sympathy and consideration, and the man is moved by it. He dresses the stripes of the suffering men himself and bestows respect upon them which he never exercised before in dealing with prisoners. It shows the man had changed; it shows the effect of righteousness. Grace in the apostle had affected him.
Ques. Is your thought that the demonstration is carried on through the people of God in the power of the Spirit?
J.T. Yes. Peter's epistle, when speaking of the government of God says, "If any man suffer as a christian" there is evidence that Christ is with them in it. And the sufferers are victors. Paul was set for destruction, but the Lord says, "I will show him how great things he must suffer for my name's sake".
Ques. Why is it we are so slow to walk here for the Lord in that way? We do not find saints suffering much.
J.T. That is a good question. We are more or less disposed to look for an easy path. Christianity is set up in victorious persons, appointed to suffer for it. He has ordained it thus in His government, and it works out for the saints¬ blessing, and enhancement of the testimony. We must be near the Lord Jesus Christ to bear suffering. He has led the way.
Rem. Perhaps if we had the sense of His love, and the position we have been set in in the world, we should be more ready to walk in accord with the Lord's mind.
J.T. God has many ways in the world, but suffering is a mark of royalty. The purple in the tabernacle is a royal colour. "If we suffer, we shall also reign with Him". The apostle Paul speaks of his as a light affliction, which was but for a moment, and yet what suffering he had to bear! Many of the Old Testament saints had to suffer severely before they were allowed to hold a very exalted position. David is one and Joseph is another example. The great thing to begin with is victory. There is no question of want of power. The Lord has endowed us with that in the gift of the Holy Spirit.
It says the prisoners were listening to them in the prison. They would be struck with their sense of triumph. It was
{133}
all working out the will of God. Paul had the sense of that. We must never allow the least suggestion in our hearts of weakness on the part of God. It is a question of His will. Peter tells us that it is His government towards us. If we are only submissive, it is wonderful what He can do for us. "Our light affliction ... worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory; while we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen". Yes, that is it. It is said of the faithful Moses, "He endured, as seeing Him who is invisible".
This chapter is full of victory. And what a blessed thing it is that the Lord would have us victors too according to our measure.
Rem. If we accept the path, we shall get the benefit of the Spirit?
J.T. Yes, He will support us, and as being with us, He will take of the things of Christ and show them to us, and glorify Christ in us. Christianity begins with victory. What we endure is simply the appointment of His will, not an evidence of His weakness. We shall find His power in the path.
Rem. "The time cometh" it says in the second verse. I suppose that is the present time.
J.T. Yes; after the Spirit came. So that He prepared them for it. "Unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake". First, it is God's appointment, then it is your privilege. We ought really to delight in it, to think that we are set in such a path.
Rem. Timothy is exhorted to take his share in suffering. Suffering is there, but we may want to shirk it. Are we going in for a path of ease, or the path that means suffering?
J.T. Suffering has a great purifying effect upon us. It becomes the furnace in which God develops in us the gold. "More precious than of gold that perisheth". If the soul is sustained in moral strength through the ministrations of the Spirit, it will not shirk the suffering. And it will not be a case of 'I shall have to put up with it'. They "prayed, and sang praises unto God". They rejoiced that they were
{134}
counted worthy. If we suffer we shall also reign with Him.
Ques. What puts you on that line of righteousness? To be "counted worthy to suffer". What enables you to take things up like that?
J.T. In suffering you enjoy things as you never have before. Nowadays, there is a little revival of the Spirit and power of Pentecost. I am sure it is so; as you realize the extent of the victory, you will be able to take up the path of suffering -- suffering for righteousness. And the more one progresses, the more one sees that it is only light affliction. It is "for a moment" and "not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed". The apostle says, "I count all things but loss". He was giving things up for Christ's sake.
There is no greater position morally than that of christianity. May we accept the suffering as the divine will and as a privilege. The apostle says, "Thou hast fully known my doctrine, manner of life, purpose, faith, ... persecutions, afflictions ... what persecutions I endured", not 'what came upon me', but which he endured. He went through them with God. There was a witness to Christ in going through them. "As it is written, for thy sake we are killed all the day long", but "we are more than conquerors". Not only one day in the week, but all the day long. "We are accounted as sheep for the slaughter". Just lined up in the market and branded for the slaughterhouse. That was the attitude of the apostle. And he never complained once, but was counting upon God all the time.
There is another feature, which comes out in @Acts 14 22, that "we must through much tribulation enter into the kingdom". God is not glorified in the actual pain or inconvenience you endure, but in the way you stand it. The suffering brought out the preciousness of the offering.
So in our chapter, the first thing is victory, and then the Holy Spirit to aid us in the position. Then the end of the chapter develops what Christ will be to us. "Your sorrow shall be turned into joy". The Lord is in the prospect of victory and of joy. Then how His gentleness and tenderness is marked in this chapter! What pains He takes too to
{135}
assure them of the position, that they might be prepared for suffering, and get the gain of the Spirit; that they had the Father's love and His love. No one could take their joy from them, because it was the joy of known relationships and divine love brought to them by the Spirit. "All things that the Father hath are mine: therefore said I, that he shall take of mine, and shall shew it unto you". What a range of things that is! "All things". That we might be here a victorious people. "The unsearchable riches of the Christ".
"The Father" brings in the thought of peculiar affection. The One who would provide the very best things, enrichment and glory -- all spiritual things; it does not need the Holy Spirit for material things. But He would open up spiritual relationships, spiritual blessings.
Ques. "Do ye now believe?"
J.T. That is a very testing question, as to how much we believe. "That thou camest forth from God". Then there is more than that; that He went back to God. What does that involve? It involves what He was as Man, and all that should be developed from that.
"Because I go to the Father", I think, relates to the brevity of our time here. It is but for a moment.
Ques. What about the verse that says "I will see you again"?
J.T. That would have an historical and also a present bearing. It is something we may look for now. As we are in the good of the Spirit, in how wonderfully real a way the Lord often comes before us, so that we instantly realize it is He. "I will not leave you orphans". So that I would not make it entirely future. It is a mark of christianity that the Lord comes to us, and our hearts rejoice.
Chapter 20 opens up the new order of things, the system and sphere of things in which the Lord sees His saints, according to chapter 16, verse 22, and in which they rejoice with Him. The soul passes through the daily suffering, but there is the joy of seeing Him. The church's history is one of weeks. The first day of the week begins a new chapter; it all centres around the Lord Himself. "He shall glorify me".
{136}
READING ON @ROMANS 4 AND 5
@Romans 4: 22 - 25; @Romans 5: 1 - 11
G.A.T. There are some who are not clear about the question raised at the close of our last reading. Would you mind me raising the question again about Christ not shedding His blood?
J.T. What is the difficulty about it?
G.A.T. Some think He did and some think He did not, as it was brought out in the reading.
J.T. Well, of course it is a question of how the words may be used. As a matter of literality, the blood was shed after He died. It could not therefore be an act of His own, but He laid down His life, which is equivalent to blood shedding in the sense that blood shedding is the giving up of the life to which sin was attached sacrificially. It is said that without shedding of blood there is no remission, so that great emphasis is laid in the Scriptures on the shedding, or on the pouring out of His blood. He speaks of it being poured out for us, and shed for the sins of many. In Matthew and Mark the reference is, I think to "many" in Luke it is to us, to christians.
A.L. In @Hebrews 9, from which you are quoting, as to the shedding of blood, He is looked on as both the offerer and the victim. It says, "Who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God". That would involve the shedding of His blood, would it not?
J.T. Yes, and the further statement that He entered by His own blood.
A.L. Yes, He has entered in by the power of His own blood, and I think it is very clear that it involves the shedding of His blood. @Hebrews 9 would have no importance if the blood of the victim was not presented to God.
J.T. Yes, if you bring the type into it in that way, He was not only the victim but the offerer. He was the priest as well.
A.L. Yes, and the priest never entered in without blood.
J.T. So the contrast is that Aaron entered in with
{137}
blood not his own, whereas Christ entered in by His own blood, having obtained an eternal redemption.
W.L.P. Is not this a technical point, and the fact of it being His blood is of great importance?
J.T. I think @Hebrews 9 makes it clear that He was not only the sacrifice, but the priest as well -- the offering priest, so that He entered by His own blood, yet historically He died before the blood was poured out. So that we must not be material nor literal in dealing with the matter. It is a question of the value of the blood as poured out, and obviously from @Hebrews 9 He entered, He is in the presence of God now representatively, by His own blood.
R.S.S. You said this morning that the termination of that condition of manhood, both for Christ and for us shows the moral necessity for the pouring out. It was necessary for us, because flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God. It was a moral necessity that it should be poured out, but as to the matter of fact there is no question it was after the Lord died that the spear pierced His side and His blood flowed forth.
J.T. And in truth the blood is presented in scripture as from God's side, as descriptive of what God is. It is the blood of the covenant. The covenant was on God's part, not on Christ's part. That is, Christ's life belonged to God -- the life belonged to God. His body, I apprehend, was His own, for God gave it to Him. "A body hast thou prepared me", but the life, according to the type, is in the blood, and God claimed that from the beginning, pointing on to the time when Christ should become man. God laid claim to that life, so that the pouring out of that life, or that blood, was a witness of what God is, what God is to us.
A.N.W. And there can be no question that, as John presents it, the very reference to it is to show that that life is given up. John is the only one that gives emphasis to the fact that He died.
J.T. He is the only one that gives the fact of the spear piercing His side, but the others, Matthew, Mark and Luke, refer to the shedding of His blood in the institution of the supper.
{138}
A.N.W. John brings to light the fact emphatically that He died on the cross. It seems to me his is the only gospel that records the fact that the soldiers came and found He was dead, and it emphasizes too that the soldier pierced His side, from which the blood and water flowed forth. They, John says, bear witness (@1 John 5: 8).
J.T. He evidently lays emphasis on a dead Christ; that is, the complete ending of that order of life. John lays emphasis on that again in his epistle. He says the blood is the witness, and that the Lord has come by water and by blood. He has come that way.
R. S. S. John is the apostle who takes up man's condition. "Except a man be born again", for instance. That is the way it begins. It is a question of the condition of man and the termination of that condition.
J.T. And so the Book of Revelation makes a good deal of the blood.
R.S.S. Why, do you think?
J.T. I think it is all on that same line, that that life had to be given up: that, the efficacy of Christ's sacrifice depended on that life being given up, terminated.
R.S.S. Of course (I speak reverently) in a way the Lord could scarcely have shed His own blood. It says, "Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed", @Genesis 9: 6. One might take his own life, but the Lord could not do that. In one sense it was taken from Him: in another He gave it up. I think we have to bear in mind those two aspects.
J.T. I think we do well to take note of the way faith is introduced and enlarged on in this section, beginning with chapter 3. We have there a law of faith. "Where then is boasting?" it says. "It has been excluded. By what law? Of works? Nay, but by law of faith", @Romans 3: 27.
R. S. S. Which means, of course, on what principle, does it not?
J.T. The exclusive power of it, as shutting out all human pretension in regard of God, and in regard of man's relation with God. This remarkable thing called "the law of faith" works for the exclusion, in christianity, of all
{139}
pretension to man having any part in the work of redemption, and this law must be in the saints. It is not a question of what is in God, nor in the mercy-seat, but of what is in man -- this law.
D.R. Is Abraham in that way taken up as a sample man?
J.T. I think Abraham and David are brought in to emphasize the working out of this law of faith, which excludes, in the very nature of it, human pretension.
W.C.R. So, God is just and the justifier of him that is of the faith of Jesus. Is that the thought?
J.T. Yes.
W.L.P. What would be the difference in faith and the law of faith?
J.T. The two things have to be apprehended separately. The use of the word "law" in this epistle is very striking. Faith existing, there is a certain law in it, and it is brought in here as exclusive of man's pretensions. That is, it: excludes all that which we have to do with in christendom today in the way of pretension in the things of God. That is what this law does, but obviously the law cannot exist without the faith, and the faith is not in God. It is in us, so it reads: "Nay, but by law of faith; for we reckon that a man is justified by faith, without works of law", @Romans 3:28. Then he says: "Do we then make void law by faith Far be the thought: no, but we establish law", @Romans 3: 31. What I have in my mind is the importance of seeing how faith is brought in as the mercy-seat is introduced; that it says through faith in His blood. The idea of the mercy-seat is linked up with faith in man, and, this faith existing, a law is in it which excludes boasting.
G.W.H. So it gives man no place.
J.T. It makes everything of God, what He has effected in Christ, and disallows man.
A.N.W. Would the thought of law suggest that it is perfectly logical? Faith seems illogical to men, but it has a system all its own that is perfectly workable. The point is to see the centre of that system, which I would suggest is the mercy-seat.
J.T. Yes, just as with electricity or anything in God's
{140}
creation, there is a certain law governing it, and the more it is worked out the more it will be found that the law is accurate in every particular. The more, therefore, you inquire into creation, the nearer you get to God as the Creator, and the more you will discover that everything is worked out on the principle of law. Everything in the creation is worked out on that principle, and the scientist is concerned about that law. That is what concerns him -- to discover that law and its workability. Well now, the same thing is obviously found in what is moral. That is, if God in the first chapter conies in as the Creator, in the third He comes in sacrificially. In coming in in that way, He is to be apprehended on the principle of faith. That is the thing to get hold of, and in that faith, which lays hold of what is presented on God's side, there is a law, and that law is workable, and faith is logical when the law is understood. There is no discrepancy. Things are found to work out logically, and, in proof, this epistle is a most logical epistle. It is the enforcement of what is of God on the mind through the conscience, so that things are worked out in a man's soul logically and you cannot shake a man who has entered into things in this way. That is, it is not simply that he is resting on the statements of Scripture. He is working on the principle of law.
A.N.W. As Mr. Darby said, infidelity is irrational. Is it not?
J.T. Quite, most irrational.
J.B. Does the law of faith not save from superstition?
J.T. Quite.
H.G. Do you mean there is a sort of established method of operation in that way? It is not a mere sentimental kind of thing, but you see that God is working on certain lines, along established lines. Is that the idea?
J.T. That is it. He has come out now in the working out of His scheme of redemption. It is in the light now. He brings forward in chapter 4 certain evidences from the Old Testament that He was already working on it before, only the thing was very obscure. He had already begun on these lines. Abraham and David are witnesses to the fact
{141}
that God had begun on these lines before. Abraham seized the idea and David seized it, and now he says, it was not written on his account alone, but on ours also. Things were written for us and they are understandable now in that the thing has worked out in Christ.
D.R. Would it be right to say that righteousness is only made practically good in us in proportion to our faith? As it is said of Abraham, that he "believed God, and it was reckoned to him as righteousness".
J.T. Yes, I think one only answers to God in the measure of his faith.
W.C.R. In the beginning of @Romans 8 we get the same thought you were speaking of, the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has set me free.
J.T. That is another reference.
W.C.R. It is law. It seems to be the power connected with the Spirit. The Spirit is one thing and the law of the Spirit another.
J.T. Many christians are just resting on the statements of Scripture, and of course the soul clings to the Scriptures, you know. I get the benefit of the light there, but I do not know the law that governs it. I know that I get the benefit of the light to that extent, but how different it is with a man who knows the law of it. I do not suppose anybody really knows the law of electricity, but there are those who know something about it and how different it is to such, and so in this epistle the intent is that we should be established. Not only God has said this and that, but how it works out morally.
H.G. Abraham and David were before their day in that sense. We often speak of men being before their days.
J.T. They were pioneers.
H.G. So, taking the question of circumcision, the act itself really recognizing man after the flesh, the men who had faith would see after all that God was working in view of another order of man, the setting aside of the man after the flesh, so that a man who had faith would see beyond the system he was engaged with. Is that the idea?
J.T. That is the idea, and what you find is that the
{142}
Spirit, in referring to these men in the New Testament, interprets what they did and said in the light of the New Testament.
A.N.W. Abel, for instance.
J.T. Just so, and Abraham. He "rejoiced to see my day" the Lord says, "and he saw it, and was glad". That is, He puts that interpretation on some event in Abraham's life.
G.W.H. And when it says that Abel by faith offered unto God, did he offer in the light of Christ?
J.T. Oh, yes, he did. He was ahead of his day. The faith period had not yet come in.
A.N.W. He must have understood something of the law of God's world morally.
W.C.R. And Moses esteemed the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt. He looked on.
J.T. Quite so.
A.N.W. Is it not true that men try to reach up to the laws of creation by the laws known to them? They never can reach the origin, but by faith we understand it.
J.T. So @Hebrews 11: 3 says, "By faith we apprehend that the worlds were framed by the word of God, so that that which is seen should not take its origin from things which appear". We apprehend that.
G.A.T. Would you explain what you said about faith being in us, not in a Person but in ourselves. Did you say that?
J.T. Faith, you see, must be in us. It is not in God. You cannot attribute faith to God. Immediately the mercy-seat is brought in, you get, "Through faith in his blood", @Romans 3: 25. That is, the idea of the mercy-seat assumes there is faith here. It would be inefficacious otherwise.
R.S.S. You are not now speaking of the object of faith, but of faith which is in us.
J.T. Yes, it says, "righteousness of God is revealed therein, on the principle of faith, to faith", @Romans 1: 17. That is, there must be the principle of faith in me to lay hold of it, so directly the mercy-seat is introduced you have
{143}
"through faith in His blood" brought in. Here God is working in man correspondingly with that which He presents in Christ. Otherwise it would not be efficacious. The thing would be a dead letter, and from that point onwards, throughout chapter 4 you have this great principle of faith developed after the mercy-seat is introduced, and Abraham and David were ahead of their day, because the day of faith is the present day strictly -- "God's dispensation, which is in faith", @1 Timothy 1: 4. That is the present time. These men were ahead of that.
D.R. And "without faith it is impossible to please him", is it not?
J.T. Quite.
J.B. Then those men belonged to this present dispensation in that sense?
J.T. They are brought into it here.
J.B. @Hebrews 11: 40 brings them into it, does it not?
R.S.S. I rather thought what characterized Old Testament saints was faith; what should characterize New Testament saints is love. How does that agree with what you are saying?
J.T. Oh, but it is faith working by love. This is pre-eminently the dispensation of faith, because there is nothing for sight now. Of old there was, especially in the previous dispensation. That is, the tabernacle and the cloud. It was a dispensation of sight.
R. S. S. Yes, but really the height of the thing lay in faith then.
J.T. Oh, that is it. That is, these men that had faith went beyond the day in which they lived. The day in which they lived was dispensationally a day of sight as far as God's outward ways went, but our day is not that, so that John's gospel makes much of faith. The Lord asks the question, "Do ye now believe?" @John 16: 31.
G.W.H. He was inquiring about the principle of faith within them, or if it were there. Is that the idea?
J.T. Yes, you see after He arose from the dead (and it is a very solemn thing) He found the disciples, the apostles to a man, acting in unbelief. He reproached them, it says,
{144}
with their unbelief and hardness of heart. It shows that, in spite of the greatest possible advantages, the flesh is essentially unbelieving; yet He goes to work and before He went to heaven He brings about in these very men a state of faith. He brought about in them a state of faith, so that during the ten days between His going to heaven and the coming of the Holy Spirit what they did was marked by faith. There is no evidence of unbelief.
If we do not have faith, we may have our meetings and all that we go on with, a system of meetings, local and general, but what is underlying it all? The twelve had the most wonderful time for three and a half years with Christ. No one ever had such an opportunity, but what was the result? The result was that He had to reproach them with their unbelief and hardness of heart after that. I mean these privileges, these advantages, in themselves may be a dead letter unless there is faith.
W.C.R. It speaks in another place about the word not being mixed with faith.
J.T. Quite so, that is a point. The word was not mixed with faith -- therefore it is ineffectual.
G.W.H. At new birth do you get faith as a principle?
J.T. I think so. I think the principle is there.
G.W.H. Otherwise we could not believe.
J.T. The effect of it is that one feels after God. What you are feeling after you do not see.
G.A.T. I can understand having faith in a person -- I have faith in God, that He can do so and so, but I cannot catch what it is to have faith in myself.
A.N.W. Does not that last remark help you?
G.A.T. I cannot get it.
A.N.W. In connection with new birth, that obviously is in yourself.
G.A.T. But what does faith rest on?
J.T. Faith has to have something to rest on. Something must be presented to us to believe.
J.B. Testimony, would you say?
J.T. Quite, the gospel. But then there is a capability that is not in the flesh.
{145}
G.A.T. Would you mind telling us how it works amongst us?
J.T. It works that way -- the truth is presented to you, you believe it. The woman Mary Magdalene that met the Lord first at the sepulchre came to the apostles and told them she had seen the Lord. Now Mary, of all the women amongst them, should have been accredited because she had had seven demons before she was converted; they were cast out of her by the Lord. She was a remarkable testimony of His power, to what He had effected in her, and yet when she brought this report to the apostles it says that what she said to them was as idle tales. Now that is a remarkable thing. I should believe any sister here in Detroit, or any brother; why should I regard something that he said to me, or she said to me, as an idle tale? What: does that prove? It proves what the flesh is in spite of the greatest possible advantages which they had. They had been in the company of the Lord for three and a half years and they had been companions of this godly woman too, and yet they could not believe in this remarkable testimony, this wonderful fact, the resurrection of Christ. They not only disbelieved the thing; they made the woman and others liars.
R.S.S. And in spite of the fact, that seems to be rather unaccountable to us, that the Lord Himself, as recorded for instance in Mark, probably four times, on His way to Jerusalem testified what would take place and then that He would rise again; in one place I know it says the third day. That always seems difficult to understand -- why it did not affect them.
J.T. And the other scriptures too -- the Old Testament.
G.W.H. Did I understand you to say that the principle of faith is to increase continually in the believer?
J.T. Well, the thing is to get that principle. Have I got it?
H.G. That is the point, I am sure, because, as you said, christianity does not consist in meetings or in congregations. Christianity is a faith system, and if we are going to be held here for God in any sort of reality we have to have a foundation of faith laid in our souls at the outset. Hence
{146}
the importance of a scripture of this kind. One feels a good many souls have never had to do with God on the faith principle; have never seen how God has secured in Christ a mercy-seat, a groundwork, and is free to come out in all the grace, and goodness, and mercy of His heart to man. Even that principle has not been laid in a great many souls. They may have had credit for a certain amount of light, but are dissatisfied and do not really have peace with God because the foundation of faith has not been laid in their souls. I do not know if you go with that?
J.T. Oh, that is it. You look back over fifty years -- some here have experienced that time -- what advantages places have had and men have had. Well, the time comes when the most precious light is presented and the thing is refused, you know, deliberately refused. Well, what is that? Where have we been? These twelve apostles had had the most wonderful advantages, and yet here is a thing brought to them that they ought to have already accepted, this light of the resurrection. The thing is an idle tale they say. It seemed to them as idle tales.
Ques. Then the measure of your faith is the evidence of your acquaintance with God?
J.T. And then you see faith working by love, and, as I was remarking, what a task the Lord had before Him on the morning of the resurrection. This is what He found, you see, and He goes about and works with these men with the result that after He goes to heaven, during the ten days that intervene between His going to heaven and the coming of the Spirit, they act in the most intelligent way. They are marked by faith. That is what He brought about.
A.N.W. Referring to your remark, which I think is very true, have we abused the Scriptures? Is it possible to say that? I hardly like to say it, but have we abused the Scriptures to bring about the charge you make against us? One has perhaps had faith in the Scriptures which has not put one's soul in touch with God.
H.G. I believe that is so.
A.N.W. I mean we have referred to the first verse of chapter five, whereas we have overlooked perhaps the third chapter.
{147}
G.W.H. Would you connect what you are saying with @Ephesians 1: 17, "The spirit of wisdom and revelation in the full knowledge of him"? Would that be the same thing?
J.T. God will give you that, you mean?
G.W.H. Yes, the apostle's prayer.
J.T. Yes.
G.W.H. They evidently had not the spirit of it.
G.A.T. Faith made good in my soul would prepare me to accept the truth when it is presented to me.
J.T. As soon as the light comes from God you embrace it. Not that we swallow things down without exercise. The principle of this epistle is to work the thing into our souls through the conscience into the mind, so we have the thing intelligently, and yet through the conscience.
G.A.T. Would you say Simeon was in the good of that?
J.T. Yes, quite. He was one that was prepared. He had come by the Spirit into the temple, and he is prepared for the thing, and embraced the light as it came, and so did Anna.
G.A.T. That has made clear to me the reason why I do not always accept the truth.
J.T. You may depend there is some bit of flesh, of will, at work.
H.G. I think, generally speaking, people have an impression that if they are justified, they are justified for this world; that they will be under advantage in connection with this world, whereas really justification is for the world to come. It was so with Abraham. It speaks of him being the heir of the world. It was not this world, as I understand it. Our outlook often indicates how little our souls are in the light of what men call faith. Christianity is a faith system.
A.N.W. From the fact that the first verse of the fifth chapter was true before that verse was written, one wonders how many would be in the good of it if that verse was not written.
H. G. Is that true, what I was saying? Am I right?
J.T. Surely! That is the point of the meeting, that the saints should have faith. You come to meetings and you
{148}
listen to things, but what effect have they on you? As the Lord says, "Do ye now believe?" Well then they say, Yes, Lord, "we believe that thou camest forth from God", but that is not all. There is more than that. He has come from God and He has gone to God. We have to believe all the truth.
W.C.R. I suppose what we believe governs us?
J.T. Yes, that is so. If one believed that Jesus came out from God and that He went in to God, one must believe that He left the world, as it says, "Knowing ... that he should depart out of this world to the Father" (@John 13: 1) -- out of it, so one would go out of it willingly.
H.G. Does not Abraham set forth the principle in a sense? He knew he was the heir of the world and yet he pays his way here -- he buys a burying place for Sarah. Well, a man who has such faith, even if he is cut off from the earth, is not surprised, and yet in his own soul he carries a sense that the world, everything, belongs to him: so he is an anomaly. No one can understand him, but he can understand the line by which God is working. Someone spoke of the way some of our brethren here suffered for their faith in connection with recent matters, I see man has no place here. As far as the world is concerned it is only here on sufferance. As far as God is concerned, the man of the world is only on sufferance. Though faith can take that in, the christian says, I can claim nothing here. If they cut me off, it is what they did to Christ. I wait the time. So a christian waits and faith supports him in the most difficult position and enables him to act intelligently in the midst of the most difficult position.
J.T. Yes, I think Rahab illustrates that. "By faith the harlot Rahab perished not with them that believed not, when she had received the spies with peace", @Hebrews 11: 31. She perished not with those that believed not. Whilst she acted traitorously as regards her country, she acted on the principle of faith. From God's point of view, the present occupants of the earth are only on sufferance, and Rahab seized that.
G.A.T. Would you think what Mr. G. was just speaking
{149}
about would be brought out in @Revelation 10 where the strong angel comes out and sets his right foot on the sea and the left upon the earth? He maintains the whole thing there.
J.T. It is testimony that it is God's, and then he has a little open book in his hand, which he gives the prophet. I suppose in what he spoke the history of Western Europe is taken up. It is there and the prophet understands what it all means. It is very bitter in the carrying out of it, but then the people of God have got to go through that bitterness. God will take up the inheritance and we have to suffer in the process, but it is ours.
J.B. I was noticing in reading about the apostle Paul in the Acts that it speaks of his reasoning. I suppose we really get set forth in the book of Romans his reasonings with regard to Christ.
J.T. I think this is a remarkable treatise on the gospel, and it is a reasoning of the thing.
J.B. Again and again we get the word "reasoned" -- a reasoning from the Scriptures.
J.T. The thing is worked out logically in the school of one Tyrannus at Ephesus. The apostle reasoned there daily.
R.S.S. It is likely this epistle to the Romans is a summary of what we get in the Acts, where we do not get the details.
G.W.H. You said this morning chapter 3 was for God, did you not?
J.T. Chapter 3 is God coming out in righteousness.
G.W.H. And chapter 4 is reckoning.
J.T. Chapter 4 is what Abraham our father found. It is our side. What have I found? So it begins: "What shall we say then that Abraham our father according to flesh has found?"
H.G. You have discovered the line God is working on.
Is that the idea?
J.T. Yes.
R. S. S. It is still objective?
J.T. It is, but these men are brought in to show how
{150}
faith works. What has Abraham found on this line? Well, he found wonderful things. It goes on to say, "For what does the scripture say? And Abraham believed God, and it was reckoned to him as righteousness", @Romans 4: 3. He found that. And then it says further, in verse 6, "Even as David also declares the blessedness of the man to whom God reckons righteousness without works". So that these two men found these things. The one found righteousness, and the other found, as it were, the blessedness of it. Not that David only spoke of the blessedness, but he had the light of it.
H.G. And I suppose Abraham being brought in before the law and David after would suggest that it is the same undeviating principle that God was working on from the outset. Law had not changed it at all.
A.N.W. So it would test the Jew, who counted on Abraham and David.
J.T. It would blast their thoughts in regard of works and boasting, that these very men who were their great worthies were marked by this principle of faith. When you come to the working of the thing from our side, what we find is that God has not only acted in the death of Christ in establishing righteousness, but He has acted in power for us in raising Christ from the dead. "Who has been delivered for our offences and has been raised for our justification". Hence this chapter brings in the power of God.
R.L.C. There is a man in us that would take us off the line of faith. In Galatians it says: "Received ye the Spirit by the works of the law, or by the hearing of faith?" @Galatians 3: 2. There was a tendency to slip away from it into that which was beggarly and of no help to them.
J.T. It is the toleration of the flesh in one way or another. We see the working of the flesh in those who advance, and how it works to rob us of the most precious light that God may give us.
G.A.T. This should exercise us, that the Spirit of God is preparing us for the ministry that He will bring to us when we are in condition to receive it.
{151}
J.T. So circumcision is brought in here as a trial of the righteousness which he had. Circumcision is the proof of it. In other words, the Holy Spirit in the christian is the answer to this righteousness that God is pleased to confer, and that means that I cannot allow the flesh. That is what I understand.
H.G. Circumcision recognized man after the flesh. This is the very reverse of what circumcision was. The presence of the Holy Spirit virtually says, 'I have done with that man'. When God gives the Spirit of another Man, He says, 'I have done with you'.
J.T. And circumcision in the meaning of it involves the Spirit. "We are the circumcision, who worship by the Spirit of God, and boast in Christ Jesus, and do not trust in flesh", @Philippians 3: 3. That is, circumcision has been the proof of righteousness, so circumcision in the spiritual significance of it is that the flesh is to be disallowed continuously.
J.B. Would Colossians come in there? "If ye continue in the faith grounded and settled", @Colossians 1: 23. There is continuance there.
J.T. What was the connection?
J.B. With regard to what was being said about getting off from the line of faith and the allowance of the flesh. So it says in Colossians, "If ye continue in the faith" as though there was a possibility of getting off those lines. Is that the meaning of it there?
J.T. Oh, yes, it is continuance in the thing, in the faith.
W.C.R. Faith there is more christianity, is it not? Not the law of faith.
J.T. Yes, it is "the faith".
J. S. In the epistle of James we get the practical meaning, and I suppose what you have been remarking would convey our thoughts to those men you spoke of. It was Abraham that had the works of faith. We do not need to be deceived in any way with one saying he has faith when he has not the works of it.
J.T. Yes, James shows if you say you have faith, you must prove it by works.
{152}
W.C.R. Apparently from that there is live faith and dead faith.
J.T. As to the reference there to dead faith and living faith, the living faith is evidenced in works.
H.De B. Faith supported by love.
W.C.R. This morning we had the righteousness of God presented to us, and then we are told the righteousness of God is towards all and upon all that believe.
J.T. What have you got to say about that?
W.C.R. I wanted you to open it up a little for us.
J.T. Well, I think God as it were clothes us with that garb on the principle of faith, as you believe. It is towards all, which is the general bearing of the gospel, as we have it in @Luke 7. It was there for Simon as much as for the woman. It was there for faith, as we have often remarked, but He says to the woman, "Thy faith has saved thee; go in peace". It was put on her, so to speak. "Her sins, which are many, are forgiven" (@Luke 7: 47), He says, and she goes forth clothed with righteousness.
W.C.R. In @2 Corinthians 5, we are spoken of as the righteousness of God in Him.
J.T. We are made that. It is there not simply the blood, but as having the answer to His having been made sin. "Him who knew not sin he has made sin for us, that we might become God's righteousness in him", @2 Corinthians 5: 21. It is a very remarkable word. I suppose it contemplates what we shall be as in the glory with Christ.
W.C.R. Would we be that now at all? Would believers be a kind of a declaration of the righteousness of God at the present time?
J.T. Oh, well, they would be in the measure in which they set forth the thing, but how can I say I am, or assume to be the righteousness of God? That I am accounted righteous on the principle of faith is something that I know myself. I can hardly prove that to anyone else. I think "that we might become God's righteousness" is what He displays in the future: that I come out in a glorified body, the full expression of God, acting in answer to the death of Christ. "That in the ages to come he might shew the
{153}
exceeding riches of his grace in his kindness toward us through Christ Jesus", @Ephesians 2: 7. That is, His righteousness is not destructive, as I remarked. It is constructive, and He brings out into public view the full result of it. That is to say, men in glorified bodies like Christ's.
W.C.R. Now the beginning of @Romans 5 seems to be a kind of an answer to what Christ did. The righteousness of God is presented, and the power of God, then in the love of God, but the first part of chapter 5 seems to be an answer in us.
J.T. Yes, that we have peace with God. I think the fourth is a chapter that ought to be especially dwelt upon, as showing how the believer comes into the thing; that he comes into the reality of God's power working for him and the possession of the seal of circumcision; that one has in one's soul by the Spirit a conscious thing, a seal of the righteousness that I already have, namely, the disallowance of the power of the spirit of the flesh. Now that is what circumcision spiritually means.
A.N.W. Why is that so obscure there? Why is the Spirit so content to be obscure there until chapter 8?
J.T. He is only for the moment establishing the principle of faith in these men, in Abraham and David, but we can put a good deal into it from Colossians and Philippians. We can see what circumcision means for us. That is, God had revealed Himself to Abraham as the Almighty God. It is in that connection we get circumcision. It is a question of God's power. If God is Almighty, then I do not need to trust the flesh. It is not to be trusted, but disallowed, and the ordinance of God for me means that He has raised Christ and that power is working in me. That is what it means for me. Therefore I do not need to trust the flesh at all. It profits nothing and I disallow it.
D.R. Then is it on the strength of that that we have the statement in verse 11, "We also joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ"?
J.T. You joy in God instead of in the flesh.
G.A.T. I can see much more clearly than I could this morning how I get relief.
{154}
G.W.H. The very fact of the believer having the Spirit indicates that all he has derived from Adam, the fallen condition, is gone in the cross, is it not? The identity remains.
J.T. The identity of the believer remains, but by the power of the Spirit he is in accord with the righteousness of God. It is how his death was seen in the cross, and at the same time He brings the sinner in before Him without his sins, and the seal of that is the Spirit really. I have with me every day the seal of that, so that I do not allow the flesh. Otherwise I lose the sense of it. I must have the seal. He received the seal, it says, from God.
R.S.S. So @Romans 4 assumes that we have the Spirit.
J.T. Yes, it does. That is (if you understand) if you use circumcision in its spiritual significance.
R.S.S. Quite so. I suppose most of us understand. We talk a great deal about circumcision and the Spirit. They do not seem to be very relative on the face of it, but circumcision was what marked the people of God as God's in Old Testament times; the Spirit is what marks the people of God in New Testament times. We are sealed by the Spirit. That is the relation between the two.
J.T. Baptism has to do with what is outside of a christian; circumcision has to do with what is inside of him, so I cannot disallow the flesh but by the Spirit. The force of it you see is in the endeavour to bring in an heir according to the flesh, to bring in a product of the flesh for God. Circumcision disallows that. The child that is to be brought in is to be brought in on the principle of divine power, not human power, so that Isaac is born after Abraham was too old to be a father according to the flesh, so circumcision is the seal of the righteousness which he had before.
D.R. Speaking of circumcision in that light, it would correspond with the beginning of Ephesians where it says, "having believed, ye have been sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise", @Ephesians 1: 13.
J.T. It works with it in that way, that the Spirit in you maintains you in accordance with the light you have received in the gospel.
{155}
H.G. You do not apply then the resurrection of Christ here so much to the power of death that lay upon man?
J.T. Oh, I think it is more than that, Mr. G., because it is worked up from this: "Therefore it is on the principle of faith, that it might be according to grace, in order to the promise being sure to all the seed, not to that only which is of the law, but to that also which is of Abraham's faith, who is father of us all (according as it is written, I have made thee father of many nations,) before the God whom he believed, who quickens the dead, and calls the things which be not as being; who against hope believed in hope to his becoming father of many nations, according to that which was spoken, So shall thy seed be: and not being weak in faith, he considered not his own body already become dead, being about a hundred years old, and the deadening of Sarah's womb, and hesitated not at the promise of God through unbelief; but found strength in faith, giving glory to God; and being fully persuaded that what he has promised he is able also to do", @Romans 4: 16 - 21. It is a question of God's power. That was what he believed in there.
G.A.T. Did not Sarah laugh at this?
J.T. Yes, you see what is alluded to here is @Genesis 15 to 17. That is, it is faith in a God who reveals Himself as Almighty. That is chapter 4 of Romans.
H.G. It was the inability of the flesh to bring forth anything for God.
J.T. Yes. Well, if I have discovered that I may as well hold to it and the Holy Spirit enables me to hold to it.
L.E.S. Would you say a word as to the distinction between faith and the Spirit.
J.T. The Holy Spirit comes into the believer consequent upon faith and He is the power by which faith is sustained, and by which faith acts in the believer, so that without the Holy Spirit one could not lead a life of faith in this world such as is presented in the New Testament. I do not deny they led a life of faith in the Old Testament, but then the Spirit of God takes up certain things they did and said, and
{156}
clothes them with divine thoughts. Their public life in many respects was occupied with things that are seen, but christianity is "The just shall live by faith". He lives by it.
J.B. Does not Habakkuk call attention to that?
J.T. That is the passage I referred to. It is quoted three times in the New Testament (@Romans 1: 17; @Galatians 3: 11; @Hebrews 10: 38). It seems to be the one expression from the Old Testament that christianity is hung upon. "The just shall live by faith".
R. S. S. In the beginning of chapter 5, there was a remark made in connection with the righteousness of God, the power of God, and the love of God. I think these three chapters are connected with those three things in God, are they not?
J.T. Yes, quite.
R.S.S. Did you make some remark about that, Dr. R.?
W.C.R. I said they were presented objectively to us, and I thought perhaps the beginning of the fifth chapter was our answering to it.
J.T. The fifth chapter begins with a "Therefore". It is very interesting to follow the gradual development in structure in Paul's writings; how he gathers things up. Now he has attained volume, so to speak, in which he is perfectly free. "Therefore having been justified on the principle of faith, we have peace towards God". He brings the christian on to the plane of faith, and from that he works out a wonderful experience. He develops, as you might say, christianity, how it is worked out in the believer from the divine side; not yet from the Spirit's side in the believer, but in the way the light affects the believer. That is chapter 5. He works it out from that point of view. He has attained a very wonderful plane or altitude, whence he develops the result of what he had been presenting, so he says, "Therefore having been justified on the principle of faith, we have peace towards God through our Lord Jesus Christ: by whom we have also access by faith into this favour in which we stand, and we boast in hope of the glory of God". That is what christians are characteristically. That is how matters stand with us.
{157}
F.W.T. Would you say that light is only light as there is corresponding faith?
J.T. Yes, it is quite obvious that the light of the gospel as presented in this world is not light to any except those who have faith.
F.W.T. I meant experimentally in us. That is, as light is received there must be the faith to support it.
J.T. Yes, so that the measure in which we receive the light is the measure of our faith.
R.L.C. The system of faith is established now by the Spirit, is it not? It says in @Galatians 3: 25, "But, faith having come". He refers to faith's day there, does he not?
J.T. Yes, he does.
W.C.R. Where it says, "access by faith into this favour in which we stand", what does that mean?
J.T. I think he is just treating of the christian's position characteristically, as if he said, Now this is how it is with christians; this is how the matter is with christians. "Having been justified on the principle of faith, we have peace towards God through our Lord Jesus Christ; by whom we have also access by faith into this favour in which we stand, and we boast in hope of the glory of God". It is a concise way of putting the christian position for anyone whom it might concern. This was a wonderful company of people.
A.N.W. The christian position individually, would you say?
J.T. Yes, as it is worked out in the individual.
G.A.T. And it ought to be true of every christian that he rejoices. It is for every christian.
J.T. Yes, and it is for every christian to find out, have I reached this altitude?
G.A.T. You do not believe in sad christians then?
J.T. This shows a company of victorious christians, rejoicing in hope of the glory of God.
W.C.R. And boasting in tribulation.
J.T. He goes on to say, "And not only that". There is more than that for us.
Ques. What does "the glory of God" mean in this scripture?
{158}
J.T. It is the showing out of what He is in His attributes.
Ques. As coming out where?
J.T. In the millennial world. That is what we are rejoicing in hope of. The apostle presents a company of victorious people, and the very worst things that can happen to us are working for us. We get several workers in the next paragraph, and they are all working for us, so that the very worst things that you see happening to us are our workers. It is to bring in the munificence of the position.
Ques. Is that where faith comes in?
J.T. It is through faith we have access into this position, "And not only that, but we also boast in tribulations". That is another thing.
H.G. Only a man who had faith would know he was in favour when he was in tribulation. Is it not the antithesis really of what marked judaism in a way as indicating the importance of being in the light of faith?
J.T. So that no circumstances can arise to baffle a man who is in faith. "Not only that, but we also boast in tribulations". That is certainly a new thing in this world. If you analyse the experiences of the Old Testament saints, you will find they dreaded tribulations.
H.G. The king could say, Let it not be in my day, but in the day of my son. He passed it on to his son.
J.T. And "the thing which I greatly feared is come upon me", @Job 3:25. These things show they were not in victory, whereas the christian is. Then he goes on to say, "Knowing that tribulation works endurance; and endurance, experience; and experience, hope". A worldling would think these workers were against him. A christian regards them as his workers. Jacob submitted to the things that befell him, but he complained afterwards. He was not in victory.
W.C.R. How can we boast in tribulation? Can you boast in the actual tribulation, or is it rather in the thought of what it will effect in you?
J.T. That is it.
H.G. "Knowing that".
J.T. Quite so.
{159}
W.L.P. You rise above it.
J.T. Faith says, It is a worker, it is one of the workers. It is a remarkable triumph. It is as if Paul would say, If you only understood christians, this is the kind of thing that we know. The things that you regard as against you are our workers. They are working for us.
G.W.H. So David brought back from Ziklag great spoil. Tribulation brings great fruit, does it not?
J.T. It worketh patience -- one of the scarcest things in the whole world perhaps is patience, and tribulation works it, so that what happens in the way of adversity has got to be looked at and we have got to see whether it is really working this in us. Otherwise it hardens us and sours our spirits. It defeats the divine end unless we are in faith.
J.A.W. All this tends then to build up in us by the Spirit a constitution in which we can really rejoice in the midst of tribulation, and it is all in hope of the glory of God, is it not?
Ques. Is it rejoicing in hope of the glory of God as relief?
J.T. Oh, no, you love the thought of God coming out. What can Satan do against a man who rejoices in tribulation? He is invulnerable.
G.W.H. But a man who would rejoice in tribulation is a man who would accept it from the hand of God, would he not?
J.T. I think so. I think Habakkuk is a great help in this way, he first wonders why it is and then he sees that God has done it, so he arrives at a new song, on the principle of faith. I mention Habakkuk particularly, because, as far as I know, he is the only scripture writer that treats of the subject of faith in the Old Testament strictly.
A.L. He changed his instrument.
J.T. Yes, he did. He found out what God was doing, and now he says, "On my stringed instruments", @Habakkuk 3: 19. It is a higher key.
A.L. One note. It is not a variable note like a wind instrument.
J.B. In high places too.
{160}
J.T. He gets hinds¬ feet.
H.G. The enemy comes imputing the power to his god, but he realizes it is not his god at all. "Thou hast ordained them for judgment; and, O mighty God, thou hast established them for correction", @Habakkuk 1: 12. A man gets salvation, does he not, when he can see that God is working behind all the power of the enemy for His people? And that brings us back to the point that it is a faith system. You have to be in the light of it to take that position. You are justified by faith on that principle.
J.B. The glory system would be that to come, and faith connects one at the present moment with that glory system, would it not?
J.T. Yes.
A.L. Isaiah says "the work of righteousness shall be peace", @Isaiah 32: 17. What is the difference between that and this?
J.T. I think that would fit in here. "The work of righteousness shall be peace; and the effect of righteousness quietness and assurance for ever". It would fit in here as it *affects* faith, I think.
A.L. And then would you not say that Isaiah gives a little help on "through our Lord Jesus Christ"? It says: "Trust ye in the Lord for ever: for in the Lord JEHOVAH is everlasting strength" (or, the rock of ages), @Isaiah 26: 4.
We get stability through our Lord Jesus Christ, would you say? Although we may shake and waver even when we are on the Rock that never shakes.
J.T. The believer according to this chapter does not shake either. There is nothing can disturb you if you are in the light of these things.
D.R. Tribulation as it comes before us here, has it not a future bearing?
J.T. What it says is that it works endurance. That is, you bear things pending the coming of the Lord. You are not going to give up.
D.R. You were speaking of these things as workers. The apostle Paul says, "For our light affliction, which is but for a moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory", @2 Corinthians 4: 17. Is there not a
{161}
connection between that and what comes before us here?
J.T. Yes, quite so.
Rem. It brings us into the truth of the kingdom.
J.B. Why is the love of God shed abroad in our hearts mentioned last? Is that the result reached or is that the sustaining power?
J.T. Oh, I think the chapter leads us on to the covenant, what God is to us, so that He has found an outlet for His love. In the death of Christ He has found an outlet for it into the heart of the christian by the Holy Spirit which is given to us.
H.G. In that sense have we not rather to know the righteousness of God and His power before we can appreciate His love; that, while the gospel is the fruit of His love in a way, yet that is not the first thing presented to man. Is it not a question as to God's rights being secured in your soul, and in His power?
J.T. And then His love.
H.G. And then His love, yes. "Therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith", @Romans 1: 17. It is not, therein is love revealed.
R.S.S. We have to reach chapter 5 before we have love referred to.
H.G. Very often in the preaching Of the gospel the love of God is presented, but it always seemed to me more or less wrong. Because Of man being what he is, it is important that a foundation Of righteousness should be laid there, and too the light of the power of God.
A.L. I would like to understand that a little. You mean that in the foundation of righteousness there is the removal of man? Am I understanding you rightly?
H.G. I thought in righteousness God's rights had been founded, so He might come out to men.
A.L. How were they founded?
H.G. In Christ -- in the mercy-seat.
A.L. In His death, you mean?
H. G. Oh, unquestionably.
A.L. Do you connect verse 5 with what we gain Of divine teaching in the cup?
{162}
J.T. Oh, yes, it runs with it. I always think of this verse in connection with the cup -- the love of God.
A.L. Shed abroad?
J.T. Yes.
R.S.S. You spoke of it as an outlet and an inlet.
J.T. In the death of Christ the love has found an outlet, but then the love is to have a place for us, and it has found an inlet into our hearts by the Holy Spirit which is given to us.
R. S. S. And does this suggest, or does it go too far to say that this verse gives us in our hearts the consciousness of the love of God?
J.T. I think that is true. It does not say that we love too. That is chapter 8, you see, by the Spirit.
R.S.S. Quite so, but we have the consciousness that God loves us -- He loves you.
A.N.W. So is it not rather more than faith?
J.T. It is by the Spirit here.
A.N.W. I perhaps had in mind to question the difference between faith and the Spirit.
J.T. I might see that He loves me by the death of Christ, but this is that I am conscious that He loves me. The love is in my heart.
R.S.S. It is the Spirit that gives consciousness always.
J.T. I think so.
A.L. Would you say that in that sense we drink of it?
J.T. From that side. This is from the divine side. The Holy Spirit coming from God into my heart brings His love into it.
R.S.S. So you might say faith gives you the light; the Spirit the consciousness of it.
J.T. That is very good.
G.A.T. It is encouraging in this scene, where sin has come in, that God is able to maintain for Himself a place where His love can flow, amongst men.
J.T. How important that one should keep one's heart with all diligence, in view of the fact that the Spirit has brought the love of God into it. What a treasure is in the heart of the christian -- the love of God.
{163}
G.A.T. There is more in Romans than we thought.
J.T. And perhaps more in our hearts than we think -- I mean the love of God is in a man's heart. Think of the treasure that is involved in that! The love of God is in a man's heart by the Spirit of God!
W.C.R. So nothing that is not according to love, that is not of God, should be given a place in our hearts. We sometimes allow other things there.
{164}
READING ON @ROMANS 8
@Romans 8: 1 - 17
J.T. It might be well perhaps to link on the things we have already had before us in chapters 4 and 5 with what this chapter presents. I suppose chapter 5 sets out the position, founded on the facts previously presented, from God's side, before we enter into the thing.
R. S. S. Did you say the position?
J.T. Yes, the position occupied by Christians normally.
R.S.S. Would that be the first part of chapter 5?
J.T. The whole chapter I think presents to us what has come in through Christ. It is, as you might say, a summing up of the reasons and of the facts previously presented, and has to be looked at in that way in order that the Christian may see what he is invited into. How he enters into it is developed later.
R.S.S. We should see what is brought in through Christ. As you said, the word "through" is a characteristic word in that chapter. It is not exactly yet what is made good in us, but what is brought in through Him.
J.T. That is it.
G.W.H. So in chapter 6, it is what we begin to say to Him. "What then shall we say?"
J.T. Yes, the question is raised now, "Shall we continue in sin, that grace may abound?" @Romans 6: 1. This leads to the development of our side of the matter, but the magnitude of the position is presented in chapter 5, and as we consider that, the greatness of Christ comes out so that He acquires a place in our hearts and becomes in principle Head in our souls.
R.S.S. Mr. Raven, in Chicago in 1898, pointed out that in chapter 5 we have four things through Christ: the kingdom, the new covenant, reconciliation, and eternal life.
J.T. It is well to be reminded of it, and it helps in what we are remarking. The saint, the believer, has now to see the thing in its magnitude from God's side.
{165}
W.C.R. Does the latter part of chapter 5 present the last Adam, in contrast to the first, and what He brought in?
J.T. Quite so. So He acquires in that way a place in the mind and the heart, and becomes in principle Head. I think the gospels furnish us with examples of how Christ acquired a place in souls through what He did for them, as, for instance, the woman at the well. "Come, see a man who told me all things I had ever done: is not he the Christ?" @John 4: 29. That is to say, she based her judgment or belief on what He did in her case. He told her all things that ever she did. One can understand what a place He would have in her soul henceforth. She would scarcely turn to anybody else to learn anything. She would turn to Christ as she had opportunity.
H. G. You get in chapter 5 not only the place that He acquires with us, but His place as ordained by God in regard of every man. You get the scope of things presented in the word "all" in that section. When the application is brought in it is just "the many" -- is that right?
J.T. Yes, quite.
H.G. So you get the full thought of headship, as well as the place He acquires in our affections.
J.T. So that according to chapter 5 He comes in as One who is able. I suppose leadership in the world came about in that way in the history of the human race, men acquired leadership and dominance over their fellows through their exploits, as for instance in @Genesis 6. Then came men of old, men of renown, probably affording a basis for the mythology of the heathen. These great heroes being magnified, acquired dominance over men. Well, Christ comes in on those lines, and necessarily overshadows every man, not simply because He is the Creator, the Son of God, that is another matter, but because of what He accomplishes as Man before men.
R. S. S. You were saying that here He is Head because of what He has done, and in Colossians He is Head because of what He is, whereas in Ephesians He is given to be Head. Is that correct?
J.T. Yes, that is correct, so Ephesians brings God into
{166}
the thing, God making Him Head. It is a question of God's counsel, but here He is the only available one. He has proved Himself to be the only one.
R.S.S. So is He Head to you and me because of what He has done for us individually?
J.T. Yes.
G.A.T. You said great men came on these lines. They have copied the lines from Him; He has not gone on their lines?
J.T. I spoke of what preceded Christ in the history of the race. Men arose (Scripture speaks of them) of renown, and through their exploits they acquired a place over the hearts and minds of their fellows that gave them leadership. I only referred to it as illustrative of what we have in chapter 5, that Christ coming in, by His exploits acquires a place that cannot be denied Him. Therefore it is on moral grounds. It is really the ground on which leadership exists today among the people of God, and indeed in all times.
G.A.T. But He has not copied the lines from the great men, has He?
J.T. Oh, no, I am not speaking of copying. I just spoke of that as illustrative of what we get in chapter 5.
W.C.R. In @1 Corinthians 11, He is presented as Head, but as Head of every man there. How does that come in?
J.T. That is the order God has set up in the creation. That is divine order I think. Christ becoming man is necessarily Head of every man. The Head of every man is Christ. It is what had then come about. He refers to what then existed, Christ being exalted to heaven. He is not spoken of in @1 Corinthians 11 as the head of the race, but as the Head of every man, as over against woman. He is not the Head of every woman, but the Head of every man.
J.B. Would it be right to say that Adam, as a figure of Him that is to come, is the figure in headship?
J.T. Yes, that is it. He was over everything.
R.S.S. When Peter says in Acts a, that the One whom they had crucified God raised up and made both Lord and Christ, is it the thought of leadership rather than headship? In what connection does that come in?
{167}
J.T. That is what God has made Him. That brings in God's sovereign rights. "Yet have I set my king upon my holy hill of Zion", @Psalm 2: 6. It is a question of God, and I think "the Christ" is hardly the thought of head. Christ is head, of course, but "the Christ" is the anointed. That is the idea in it, so that God has found One by whom He accomplishes everything.
R.S.S. It is not exactly the thought of headship there, is it?
J.T. It is more than headship. He is "the Christ" on God's side because He is anointed. The principle of "the Christ", I think, is that He accomplishes everything for God. God has found a Man by whom He accomplishes everything.
R.S.S. Anointing largely indicates what God has in view for a man. David was anointed. Even Saul was anointed.
J.T. And what God would set forth in him in the anointing. God has a vessel by which He sets forth what He is Himself -- "the Christ" is on God's account, hence nothing shall be left undone. Everything shall be done perfectly and according to the mind of God now that He has "the Christ".
R.S.S. Is headship usually on our side?
J.T. It is what He is on our side Godward, and what He is practically in the way of wisdom.
R.S.S. And is it that in all three scriptures we referred to?
J.T. I think so, that we have found a head now, One who represents us Godward, and who is wisdom to us, so that we will not go to anyone else for anything.
G.A.T. Therefore there is no mystery now to the assembly.
J.T. Things are all known to us, to the assembly, but the mystery remains as regards those outside. Those that are initiated know what is going on.
J.B. You could not have reconciliation unless you have the head.
J.T. No, I think that is it. It is what Christ is Godward
{168}
and we come in under that, but it works out very simply in regard of a christian coming into the truth. Here is a Man that has told me all that ever I did. Now He is to be considered. The conclusion she arrived at on that basis was that He was the Christ. Is not this the Christ? If He could tell me all things that ever I did, He could do more than that. That is a fair conclusion.
G.A.T. She would think He could forgive her all that ever she did.
J.T. He not only tells all, but He does all. He does everything for God. That shuts out man. It shuts out all human innovations, because Christ does it.
A.L. Does the thought of the head suggest one out of whom everything is evolved?
J.T. Yes, I suppose that would be right.
A.L. In the universe of bliss, as we speak of it, everything will be evolved from that Man.
J.T. As we have often remarked, Romans is the potentiality of the thing, and you see in this Man who has done so much for your soul that there is much more, and you get the expression here "Much more". It is a conclusion worked up to.
A.L. A logical conclusion.
J.T. Yes, there is much more you see, and as you proceed on the line of much more (and you are entitled to) you arrive at wonderful results, so that the youngest believer need not be shut out from the principle of headship, because he begins with it. It is what this Man is to me. Well, there is much more, and the "much more" is to appropriate Christ in that light.
O.J.O. Then you would say He should be to you what He was to Mary Magdala at the sepulchre -- she was looking for Him.
J.T. Quite; also Mary the sister of Martha understood what He could do. "Lord, if thou hadst been here, my brother had not died", @John 11: 32. She knew that. That is the principle, you see. It is what she has already learned as to Him that enables her to form that conclusion.
W.L.P. Will you say something in regard to His being
{169}
Lord, as headship here is connected with His being Lord and Christ?
J.T. The lordship of Christ is a question of God's authority -- that is rule. It refers to the subjugation of evil.
W.L.P. It is higher than headship, is it not?
J.T. Oh, I do not know, it has reference to the subjugation of evil and the protection of God's people against evil. The lordship of Christ is in that connection, I think.
W.L.P. No one can call Him Lord except by the Holy Spirit..
J.T. It is the position He takes now against evil, and Satan never recognizes Him in that way. He never, if he can avoid it, recognizes Christ as Lord because he knows that He is against Him.
H.G. In our apprehension of things which do we learn first -- lordship or headship?
J.T. Well, it is difficult to say.
H.G. "Who art thou, Lord?" Saul says, and, "Lord, what wilt thou have me to do?" Afterwards he receives the Spirit. I suppose it is the Spirit of the Head, is that right? (@Acts 9: 5 - 6).
J.T. I suppose that would be the way. It is just a question of whether the recognition of Christ's ability is not already there too. That is, "What wilt thou have me to do". He is doing something, and I suppose that would be the order.
G.A.T. Do you not think we first have to recognize His rights over us as Lord?
J.T. Yes, I suppose so.
G.A.T. And then you recognize His ability to lead you.
J.B. "Why persecutest thou me?" would be headship more, would it not?
J.T. That would bring in His relation to the saints, would it not?
J.B. As Head to them.
G.W.H. But is not subjugation necessary before you can hear -- before you come into that attitude of listening?
J.T. I suppose so.
W.L.P. I suppose to recognize Christ as Head would
{170}
need more spiritual intelligence than to own Him as Lord, would it not?
J.T. Yes, I am sure that is so in the full working out of headship but what is obvious here in chapter s is that the believer from the outset of it, in coming into what God has presented, what God has established, apprehends in this way that He is the One who does things and is to be looked to; He thereby acquires a dominance in the soul which develops into headship.
J.B. Does the illustration of Adam being head not fall short of what we have here?
J.T. Well, it does because Adam had very little opportunity to do exploits, to do anything. But you see the principle in that he named the creatures, and whatever he said was a creature's name that was its name. That God did not alter it is indicative of the remarkable intelligence that Adam possessed from God. I think he qualified as head in that way.
R.S.S. Would the names that he gave the animals set forth their characteristics?
J.T. The name would arise from what he observed in the creature.
A.N.W. God made him head, did He not? And in that way he would be efficient.
J.T. He did, and I think the fact that he named them rightly proved his efficiency. He qualified in that way.
J.B. He also named the woman.
J.T. He did. He considered the facts and said, "This time it is bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh: this shall be called Woman, because this was taken out of a man", @Genesis 2: 23. That shows the intelligence he possessed.
J.B. That is the intelligence of the head?
J.T. Yes.
A.N.W. Although his dominion was not to be exercised alone. Is not the thought "let *them* have dominion".
J.T. Quite so. @Genesis 2 is more Ephesians -- his doing things. This is the basis, you might say, the fundamental principle of headship that I come to recognize Christ as the One who does things.
{171}
G.A.T. In this epistle He is Head now. We come to learn that; is that the idea? We do not make Him Head -- He is that already.
J.T. You come to discern that He is this because of what He has accomplished for you.
G.W.H. Going back to @Acts 2 again, I would like a little help. How do you distinguish between @Luke 3 and @Acts 2, between receiving the Spirit at His baptism and being made Lord and Christ?
J.T. I think in @Luke 3 He was constituted the anointed priest "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach glad tidings to the poor", @Luke 4: 18. The principle of anointing is that God has a vessel or instrument through whom He accomplishes things: whereas in @Acts 2 He is made Lord and Christ in heaven. Therefore, the sphere of His lordship is universal. As Peter says in speaking to Cornelius (@Acts 10: 36), "He is Lord of all" -- of everything. So the Christ detains Paul in @Ephesians 3, and the Lord detains him in @Ephesians 4. In the third it is the working out of the mystery, and in the fourth it is the ordering of the saints -- that we might walk worthy of the vocation wherewith we are called. He is prisoner of the Christ in the third for the reason that the Christ had had him brought there so he might work out the mystery. As he says, "the administration of the mystery" ending up with "to him be glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all generations of the age of ages", @Ephesians 3: 9 - 21. That was what Christ was developing and Paul was employed for that, and he is detained, he is the prisoner of the Christ; but in the fourth he is the Lord's prisoner because the Lord saw the saints needed regulation in the ordering of things, and therefore His authority was necessary, and so He detains Paul in that way. He is the Lord's prisoner, and it is a remarkable thing in connection with the foundation of the assembly that it is not only "the Son of the living God" but "the Christ". "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God", @Matthew 16: 16.
H.G. As Head does He put his own impress on things, or the impress of God?
{172}
J.T. I would say His own. As "the Christ" He would put the impress on things. As "the Christ" I think He represents God.
H.G. Yes, I see, but I thought as Head it was simply our side of what He is as "the Christ" -- that in headship it was rather our apprehension of the place God has given Him representatively of Himself. In headship He is more than "the Christ" -- He is the anointed One who represents God, in a certain sense, as to what God would effect by Him, but in headship I come into that. Headship is more our side you said?
J.T. It is the same Person from our side.
H.G. And the point in my mind was whether in headship I would take colour from God, or whether it would be from Christ Himself. It is of course from Him, but is it God, so to speak, that He writes on things among men?
J.T. I think when you come to writing, it is the "epistle of Christ", is it not?
H.G. Yes, it would be there.
J.T. He is the image of God. H. G. But He sets forth God.
J.T. That is as "the Christ", I think.
H.G. I see.
J.T. If He writes, it is the epistle of Christ, but it is the covenant that He is dealing with. He is the minister of the covenant and it would be, I think, to bring God in and write God, what God is on the saints. It says, "Lest the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should shine unto them", @2 Corinthians 4: 4. It seems as if "the Christ" is the image, is the One who represents God here, but then we have a Head. It is what He is as Man, and He brings in a race of men before God altogether of His own kind, and that is another matter, I think.
W.L.P. You were saying a moment ago that Christ did things, did you not?
J.T. Yes.
W.L.P. Well, does not the Head do things too?
J.T. Oh, yes, of course, you cannot say He does not. It is only just to get the main features of the different titles.
{173}
"The Christ" is obviously the anointed One; if God anoints a Man, He commits Himself to that Man, to the end that that Man should bring about all His thoughts, should accomplish things for Him. So in @Luke 4: 18 He stands up in the synagogue, and says, "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor". So that is the position. It isn't that He is Head there, but He is there on God's account to preach, and that is the light in which "the Christ" stands in scripture. So He is "the Christ". Peter says, "Thou art the Christ". Well now, that does not seem to be anything new, and yet the Lord says, "Flesh and blood has not revealed it to thee, but my Father who is in the heavens", @Matthew 16: 17. So that it was light in Peter's soul that this Man that stood before him was "the Christ", and that would mean that Peter would not look to anyone else; he would not allow anyone else. Everything must be done by the Christ. That is an element of the foundation.
G.A.T. In that way He becomes Peter's Head, does He not?
J.T. You can understand that He would be that. It is not simply that Christ can do things now, but that God has anointed Him to do it. It is a question of God's rights. As an illustration, you might get much abler men on the throne than the present occupant in Great Britain, but it is not a question of his ability but of the oil that is upon him. That is the idea in the Christ.
J.B. Is not that the distinguishing feature all through the book of Luke?
J.T. Quite so.
J.B. He does things on behalf of God, like God, and for God.
G.W.H. But is not the oil an evidence of what is there
J.T. No doubt, but we have to think of God in the thing. It is a question of God's choice. We have to think of that.
R.S.S. As in the case of Saul. That was why David would not take Saul's life when he could.
J.T. He was the anointed. David would not touch him.
{174}
W.C.R. The apostles were ignorant and unlearned men -- yet the principle was there -- they were anointed.
J.T. Quite so.
D.R. On the ground of the revelation of headship, is it in that way the company answers to the Lord?
J.T. I think the Head brings in the company to God.
R.S.S. You made a significant remark a moment ago regarding @Matthew 16, that the assembly is founded on Peter's confession of Him not only as Son of God, but also as the Christ. That is the foundation on which the assembly is built. Now we understand that in a sense in regard to the Son of God, but in regard to "the Christ" how does that come in?
J.T. It is that you disallow human innovations. You disallow man's activities. The Christ does everything. It is an element in the foundation. Not only is the thing set up in life; because the point is "the Son of the living God" but there is an exclusiveness in it -- that man has nothing to do with this -- it is "the Christ" -- the One whom God has anointed. He is the One in this structure, so that it works in that exclusive way, to shut man out.
R.S.S. Yes, and the foundation? It really refers, does it not, to "Upon this rock I will build my church"? It refers to the apprehension in the believer's soul of that One, as the Christ, and as the Son of the living God; as the One who could accomplish everything for God, and, as we would say, a Man of the new order.
J.T. It is "Jesus Christ" when you come to the new order. "For other foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ" (@1 Corinthians 3: 11). Not "the Christ" there, mind you; it is the order of man that is in the foundation, the kind of man. "The Christ" is a question of God choosing a Man, and no one can have anything to do here but the Man of God's choice, the Man whom God has anointed.
R.S.S. I think maybe we are accustomed to laying great emphasis on "the Son of the living God" in @Matthew 16, but in at least one of the other gospels Peter confesses Him as "the Christ" and "the Son of the living God" is omitted, is it not?
{175}
J.T. In Mark it is "Thou art the Christ" (@Mark 8: 29) simply: in Luke it is "the Christ of God", @Luke 9:20.
R.S.S. In connection with what you have said, I would like to understand Christ a little better in that relationship.
J.T. Does it not commend itself to you that the apostles rigidly excluded any human innovation in laying the foundation? No one should have anything to do with things save those inaugurated by Christ. God anointed Him, and He anoints His apostles. So the assembly is built on the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ being the chief corner stone. It is a question of divine authority in it -- a most essential thing -- and that element controls, and it is rigidly exclusive of man's authority in the things of God.
G.A.T. In Peter do you get the kind of a man that is qualified to have part in it?
J.T. Yes, and so the Lord says, "Who then is a faithful and wise servant, whom his lord hath made ruler over his household ... ?" @Matthew 24: 45. It is not anyone essaying to be there. The Lord puts His stamp on a man, and what is he there for -- and what is he to be? A giver of meat in due season to the household. The Lord has put him there for that purpose. So the authority of Christ runs right through in that way, and the authority of Christ is the authority of God.
H.G. The centurion in @Luke 7 seemed to apprehend the dignity of the position that Christ was set in. I mean to say, the Roman emperor must have had a great position in his mind, but he would not have gone to the emperor to heal his servant. He knew the emperor was as powerless as he was himself. So the dignity in which Christ was set was evidently great in his mind, was it not?
J.T. That is a powerful and striking illustration of what we are saying. He had light as to the power that Christ has. "Say in a word, and my servant shall be healed", @Luke 7: 7. That is what every christian here wants to get into his soul, that the headship of Christ is not something away in the distance. The principle is laid in your soul at the outset. He is the
{176}
One that does things. Hence you go instinctively to the Lord.
G.A.T. Would you mind giving us the difference between the three scriptures you referred to in connection with headship -- Romans, Colossians and Ephesians?
J.T. I remarked several times that here it is a question of what He does.
G.A.T. Excuse me, but what I wanted to know is, does it bring me to a different stage in my soul?
J.T. I think so. Colossians is an advance on this. There you come to a recognition of who He is. The truth is developed in Colossians from this point. He has translated us into the kingdom of His dear Son, and then the Spirit goes on to enlarge on that Person, and in right of what He is, He must have pre-eminence in everything, so that He is Head because of what He is personally.
H.G. David was anointed first of all because of what he was in secret. His moral beauty marked him out; and then he acquires a place in the thoughts of the people because of his exploits; then finally he is placed there by God, publicly as head. Is that right?
J.T. Yes, quite so.
G.W.H. And in @2 Samuel 5 they accord him that place at Hebron, do they not?
H.G. They do.
A.N.W. Is not headship difficult to understand apart from associates? I was wondering why you were so hesitant to recognize lordship before headship. Do you not get greatly helped in linking yourself with others?
J.T. That is so.
A.N.W. I thought to bring that to pass lordship must have its effect.
J.T. Only the individual from the outset of his knowledge of the things of God apprehends that these things have come in through Christ. Chapter 5 shows they had come in through Christ, so at the very beginning I see that this is the Man, because "the Christ" is the subject of the gospel, and that principle begins at the outset of your spiritual history.
G.W.H. You said at Rochester that at conversion you get the germ of everything. Do you not?
{177}
J.T. Oh, I suppose you do.
G.W.H. So in the soul of the believer there is a parallel with what is in the mind of God.
J.T. You see in the woman at Sychar's well how simply it works out. There she gives her conclusion on what He did for her. That was capable of infinite amplification. "Come, see a man, which told me all things that ever I did: is not this the Christ?" @John 4: 29. How much there is to be opened up in that. It was the beginning of her spiritual history.
R.S.S. He told her all really that is in God's heart, and all that was in her heart, and there is nothing outside of that.
J.T. Quite so.
D.R. In that way when the Lord begins to speak to the Samaritan woman He commands the situation right away. Lordship is arrived at in that way and she is prepared to, receive everything from Him.
J.T. One is more and more impressed with the fundamental character of Romans: how it forces the truth into the soul logically. If you acquire an apprehension of Christ as presented in @Romans 5, you have an element in your soul that stays there, so you instinctively turn to Christ instead of turning to men in your difficulties.
G.A.T. Like the woman you mentioned in @John 4, you will impress others by what you see and by what you are.
J.T. Yes, quite so.
R.S.S. The necessity of headship, as it is brought out in the close of @Romans 5, is immensely great, from the fact that the human race was without a head. When Adam died, they were without a head, and it was necessary that a new head should be brought in. I was wondering in that connection (we are speaking of things largely from the way in which they stand now in connection with the Lord's resurrection and when He took an abiding place) when He was born into the world, was He head? Could we speak of Him as head on the ground of His birth -- who He was?
J.T. It would be only a question of what was in God's mind. The announcement of the angel to the shepherds is
{178}
very beautiful -- "Unto you is born this day in the city of David" (He is born to them) "a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord". It is very beautiful how it is put. It is not with headship, but lordship. "Unto you is born this day in the city of David a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord", @Luke 2: 11.
R.S.S. He was that, at the moment of His birth.
J.T. That was of course the mind of God. Following on that, Simeon takes the Child into his arms. "It was revealed unto him by the Holy Spirit, that he should not see death, before he had seen the Lord's Christ", and he takes the Child into his arms and says, "Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace ... for mine eyes have seen thy salvation", @Luke 2: 26 - 30. You see the thing was all there.
A.N.W. Even the wise men presented their gifts to Him.
J.T. Yes, just so.
A.N.W. The One born King of the Jews.
J.T. But then that would be all a question of how God took account of things, the mind of God, and certainly how everything was centred in that Babe.
R. S. S. But it gradually developed and came out.
J.T. Quite so.
R.S.S. Largely in His ministry, but above all finally in resurrection and ascension.
J.T. Yes.
D.R. In speaking of headship, you remarked a little while ago about the way it becomes power. In Corinthians He is Head of every man. Would you confine that to those in the assembly, or give it a universal application?
J.T. I think it is universal. It is the position He occupies in God's ordering now.
A.L. You spoke a little about the appropriation of the Head, and I would gather from what you said that the apostle is seeking that we should lay hold of Him as Head in the apprehension of what He has been to us personally in our own souls.
J.T. That is what I think chapter 5 will do, and as you look into it you are impressed with the far-reaching character of His one act of obedience, as, for instance, there are
{179}
now those reigning in life, as one result. Well, what an immense thing that is! Then, to refer to one or two points, justification of life, and then grace reigning through righteousness unto eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord. Think of the scope of it, and the far-reaching character of it. Well, if you have the light of that in your soul, you are restful, and you turn to the Lord. You do not turn to anyone else, because this is what He does, and He can do anything. As Job says of the Lord, "I know that thou canst do everything", @job 42: 2. That was what Job arrived at, and so one arrives at that in regard of Christ.
A.L. That is where Peter came -- "Thou knowest all things", @John 21: 17.
J.T. That is the principle.
G.A.T. The centurion said, "Say by a word", @Luke 7: 7.
J.T. Yes.
A.N.W. Would you say the moral effect of knowing Christ as Head is in the confession of Him as Lord?
J.T. I suppose so. You are not afraid to confess One who can do everything.
A.N.W. You do not own Him as Head of the world, but as Lord.
J.T. That is the confession, but He is known in your soul as Head.
G.A.T. Why is it that we are not always so free to confess Him -- not only young people, but some on the way pretty well are not always free when we get amongst the world. It is easy enough here, but not so easy in business.
J.T. The spirit of the world is against that. Satan is against Christ as Lord. He knows it is the overthrow of his kingdom and he puts it as far away from him as he can.
G.A.T. But do you not think we should be beyond that?
J.T. Oh, quite. We are enjoined that now is the time for confession.
W.L.P. You are apt to run into a legal way of confessing Him, are you not?
J.T. It should be by the Holy Spirit. In that way there is power in it. It is not legal.
{180}
R. S. S. We are under the influence of Christ as here together, but when we are in circumstances such as our brother refers to, although we are still under the influence of Christ, we come to some extent under the influence of the world and the people with whom we are in contact.
The question is, which is the greater? I suppose that would account for our exceeding weakness, but the more the greatness of Christ is before us, the more we will be delivered.
G.W.H. Is it not a very great advantage to see that in @Romans 5, He is the Head of every man in the world by rights of redemption.
J.T. Well, quite so. Headship is available to all. The bearing of redemption, justification, and life, is toward all the human race. The whole human race is immensely enriched by this wonderful Man if He is apprehended.
R.S.S. That is what I was trying to express when I said we were without a head, and the head we had brought us down and down into what? But now the new Head we have brings us up into what? It is inexhaustible.
J.T. It is a great thing to see things in that wide scope.
R.S.S. Do I understand from what has been said that the Lord is Head of every man, even unconverted people in the world?
J.T. That is what it says in Corinthians.
R. S. S. I thought you rather referred to His being Head of man in contrast to woman.
J.T. So I did, but if He is Head to all men He is Head to the women indirectly, because the man is head to the woman.
W.C.R. Mr. Raven spoke of the great advantages in Western Europe and America which were due to Christ being brought in as Head.
J.T. I think that is so. The immense strides that have been made in what has been called 'civilization' are largely due to the emphasis given to the knowledge of Christ as Head here.
G.A.T. Is His becoming Head of great advantage to men?
{181}
J.T. It is a sort of material advantage now, but look at the spiritual advantages in chapter 5. Reigning in life, having "justification of life" (that is, a life against which no charge can be laid), and then grace reigning through righteousness to eternal life. Think of that! Think of the immensity of the riches in that! And that is what is going to be displayed and the testimony will be that He has done this.
H.G. But meantime we can be discovering in Christ features which exhibit His greatness, as did the widow of Nain, and those who returned to John in prison (@Luke 7). But is this not the work of the Spirit, transferring us constitutionally from Adam to Christ, so that we really come out in the character of that Man?
J.T. I am sure that is so.
H.G. The Sanhedrim could not resist the wisdom and the Spirit with which Stephen spoke. He was irresistible.
He not only confessed Christ as Lord, thereby recognizing His absolute rights over him, but as a man there in the constitution of Christ he is perfectly irresistible. They may kill, as they killed Christ, but they could not stand before him. One feels the need of being transferred constitutionally, so to speak, into the life of our Head, so that in that way one has ample wisdom, in the spirit of that Man, for meeting any situation.
J.T. You see in the gospels, on the one hand, illustrations of believers testing what Christ could do, and basing their conclusions on that. On the other hand, you have examples of men benefiting from Christ and getting no moral gain from it, as, for instance, in @John 5. We were speaking of the woman in @John 4 getting moral gain. She based her conclusion on what the Lord said to her, and answered to Him in that light with great results; whereas the man in @John 5 who was at the pool of Bethesda was healed by the Lord but got no moral gain from it. He did not know the Lord. Rather he went to the Jews and really got the Lord, as you might say, into trouble. One just refers to the passage to illustrate it, "The Jews therefore said unto him that was cured, It is the sabbath day: it is
{182}
not lawful for thee to carry thy bed. He answered them, He that made me whole, the same said unto me, Take up thy bed, and walk. Then asked they him, What man is that which said unto thee, Take up thy bed, and walk? And he that was healed wist not who it was: for Jesus had conveyed himself away, a multitude being in that place. Afterward Jesus findeth him in the temple, and said unto him, Behold, thou art made whole: sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee. The man departed, and told the Jews that it was Jesus which had made him whole. And therefore did the Jews persecute Jesus, and sought to slay him, because he had done these things on the sabbath day", @John 5: 10 - 16. He does not appear to have obtained any moral gain from the advantage of getting to Him. On the contrary, he brings persecution on the Lord by his course.
W.C.R. I was thinking of the demoniac, of the moral gain he got "Sitting, and clothed, and in his right mind", @Mark 5: 15. He was able to go into the city and publish how great things God had done for him.
J.T. Yes, he was an illustration on the other side. Then of the ten cleansed, nine of them evidently got no moral gain from it. I suppose these cases are illustrative of numerous believers now who get no moral gain from the benefit accruing to them, whereas those who follow the things up and see that Christ does things, and turn to Him, grow, and progress, come into the good of headship, and come out here in a constitution after Christ.
G.A.T. Do you think that is the reason why so many fall away?
J.T. I think we do not go on from the beginning.
D.R. I was wondering if Stephen would answer to what we find in @Romans 8: 2 -- "The law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has set me free from the law of sin and death".
J.T. Well, I am sure he would, but then you see he goes much further than being free from the law of sin and death, does he not? I think Stephen answers more to what we had yesterday. That is, the Spirit of that Man breathed into him, because we have to distinguish between the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus and the breath of Christ
{183}
communicated to us. The latter is not what is in Christ Jesus, but what is in us. @John 20 is what is in us -- breathed from Him into us. This passage in the beginning of @Romans 8 refers to the position of life. Life is in Christ. According to the end of chapter 6, "eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord". It is the position of it. In the end of chapter 5 it is the instrument through which it has been effected: the end of chapter 6, the position of it; and the beginning of chapter 8, the spirit of that which is in that position "the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus".
G.A.T. And do I understand that @John 20 and the last part of @Romans 8: 9 is the Spirit of Christ in me -- He breathes into us?
J.T. That would be it more. "If any one has not the Spirit of Christ *he* is not of him".
A. L. That is breathed into him?
J.T. It is.
A.L. That is distinct, is it not?
J.T. Yes.
W.C.R. Is not the law of the Spirit of life more than having the Spirit?
J.T. You see it is "in Christ" and there is a law there.
W.C.R. The law of the Spirit seems to suggest the believer coming under the rule of the Spirit. Many believers have the Spirit but are not subject to the Spirit and are not under the rule of the Spirit.
J.T. Yes, but it is the law of the Spirit of life. It is no doubt the Holy Spirit, but it is the thing that prompts the saints as living. The position is in Christ, but it prompts us. To illustrate what I mean, when we are together as we are now there is a Spirit prompting us, which in principle prompts all the saints, but you realize it more when together, and you see how that works out for deliverance to the very youngest when together.
A.N.W. If we are going to speak of chapter 8 at all, would you tell us what the "Therefore" really refers to before we go on with the other part of the chapter?
J.T. I think chapter 7 is the condemnation of conscience that the law would bring in. I think that the state described
{184}
in chapter 7 implies the man was condemned in his conscience, but is no longer condemned. "For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has set me free from the law of sin and death".
J.B. It is power.
G.A.T. Would you say it shows he is in full deliverance from the body of sin?
J.T. Quite.
A.L. And is it not by way of contrast? There is a new law come in, while the old is not abrogated.
J.T. The old law stands. It remains and rules over a man as long as he lives, but he has died out of it, and, as to enjoyment, he is free in his soul because of the new law he is brought into.
J.B. This law has power to free one.
J.T. We have not time really to deal with these great subjects in these short readings, but we cannot *afford* to pass over chapter 6, even at the risk of taking the next reading for chapter 8. The position of the believer now, in the light of all these things, in regard of the world, in regard of what is outside of him, is what chapter 6 opens up to us, and so the chapter is developed from the question, "Should we continue in sin that grace may abound?"
H.G. It is sin viewed there, as you said, more like the world; the principle is in the world, do you mean?
J.T. Yes, I think that is what is alluded to, so the position is that baptism is immediately brought in and its meaning is taught. So it takes place in the presence of the world. It takes me out of the world as regards my interests and the like, but I am still in it literally, so that in @Romans 6 I am dead to it. In Colossians it is dead from it. The thing is here yet and I am in the presence of it, so @Romans 6 becomes a most crucial chapter in that way, as regards one's public position.
R.S.S. In Colossians you said, we are dead from it?
J.T. From the rudiments of the world. Having my back on it, I am going into Canaan; but Romans is not that. Romans is that I am adjusted in regard of God, and live here as thus adjusted in order to witness to the newness
{185}
of the thing that I am brought into, newness of life, newness of the spirit, renewing of the mind. It is a new order of things witnessed to in my daily life before the world.
G.A.T. So in this chapter I refuse to live in sin; I refuse to have it reign over me even.
J.T. Yes, sin does not reign over me, and I am dead to it, and that works out in every moment of my life as before the world. One has to have this truth in one's soul, I am dead to that.
H.G. Dead to the world in which the will of man dominates, do you mean, and baptized to Jesus Christ?
J.T. Yes.
H.G. You were saying yesterday that "Jesus Christ" sets forth character. Is that the idea?
J.T. The order of man.
H.G. Yes, are you baptized to come out in the presence of the world in the character of that Man?
J.T. I think so. It is well to look at it as it reads: "What then shall we say? Should we continue in sin that grace may abound? Far be the thought. We who have died to sin, how shall we still live in it? Are ye ignorant that we, as many as have been baptized unto Christ Jesus, have been baptized unto his death? We have been buried therefore with him by baptism unto death, in order that, even as Christ has been raised up from among the dead by the glory of the Father, so we also should walk in newness of life", @Romans 6: 1 - 4. We are baptized to him, but that is not what he is dealing with. That was already admitted, but he says, "As many as have been baptized unto Christ Jesus, have been baptized unto his death". That is the point to get hold of. So that, He has been raised from the dead by the glory of the Father. It does not yet say that we should be raised, for baptism in Romans does not prefigure resurrection. It does in Colossians because it takes us into the land. There is no wilderness in Colossians, the Red Sea and Jordan coalesce, as has often been remarked. In Romans there is no Jordan, only the Red Sea, so I am not raised. It is Christ that is raised and the bearing in my case is that I am here in newness of life.
{186}
That is, my manner is changed. I am in the same old place, with the same kind of work as I have always done. My surroundings remain what they always were, but I come up out of death different from what I was. My spirit is different; my manner is different.
A.N.W. Is newness of life walking as Christ walked?
J.T. It would amount to that. It is very individual, you see. It is simply newness of life, without saying what the thing is. In Colossians we have the thing concretely presented -- new men.
A.N.W. Not Egyptian slavery any more -- is that the thought?
J.T. No, you are in liberty.
A.L. Is @Romans 8: 2 not much on the lines of @Romans 6:14?
J.T. Now what is your point?
A.L. "Sin shall not have dominion over you, for ye are not under law but under grace". Many a soul reads that and says, there it is in the Scripture, but it has dominion over me. It does have dominion until the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus is apprehended, does it not?
J.T. Oh, quite, but I am quite sure that chapter 6 necessitates the Spirit. However, I think so far it is the workings of what is objective. That is, we are told it is the new system and not the Spirit that is in me that is treated of.
It is what you are under. You are not under law, but under grace. It is not what is in you but what is over you that is brought in.
A.L. Then would you say what is over you is greater than what is in you?
J.T. You see it is the system, the new dominion. It has the effect of liberation, so sin has no power over you.
R.S.S. In connection with continuing in sin -- "Should we continue in sin?" -- I believe Mr. G. made some remark in regard to the world. Is this sin in me or is it the whole character of the scene that you have to do with?
H.G. I said I thought sin in @Romans 6 referred to a principle in the world, not to something in myself. I would base that on the fact that it says "For in that he has died,
{187}
he has died to sin once for all". The Lord did not die to something in myself. Consequently I think it is viewed in that way.
R.S.S. And sin is lawlessness, as we understand. That is the character of the scene we are in, and it is death to that something outside you -- is that so?
H. G. I thought so.
J.T. The body of sin. The more the human race multiplied, the greater the power of sin became; and then, added to that, the education that accrued from the light of God as given to the Jews increased the power of sin in the world, and the greatest evidence of the strength of sin was when the Lord Jesus was crucified. Sin had developed its greatest strength at that moment, so that the crucifixion of Christ involved the crucifixion of the old man. But then the power of sin in the world is not a bit changed. It is only that our old man, the body of sin, is annulled in christians, because christians see that in the death of Christ the old man was crucified.
Ques. Is that where reckoning comes in?
J.T. Quite, that comes in afterward. "Reckon yourselves dead to sin", @Romans 6: 11. That is, to the working of this thing in the world. Reckon yourself dead to that, but alive to God in Christ Jesus.
D.R. Would it be right to say that we have in chapter 6 what we ought to be, and chapter 8 gives us the power to be it?
J.T. The eighth is the Spirit, you see. It is a treatise on the Spirit; what the Spirit is to the christian; but the sixth chapter treats of the elements of the gospel, what is presented today objectively, and it is a reckoning. The presentation of light refers to God.
Rem. One brother said we are actually dead.
J.T. If you were actually dead you would not have to reckon. The reckoning has to be maintained, and chapter 8 comes in as power to do that, but the epistle is worked out logically, as we have remarked, and chapter 6 is based on baptism, which is a public thing. It is a question of my public position and conduct here.
H.G. This is not baptism exactly, as you receive it
{188}
when you are baptized, is it, but the teaching of it?
J.T. It is the teaching of it, and the apostle is evidently greatly encouraged because they had obeyed from their heart the form of teaching in which they had been instructed.
A.N.W. However much more the Israelites had to learn after crossing the Red Sea, on crossing it they had a right to disown the reign of Pharaoh.
J.T. That is so, but they were never changed themselves.
A.N.W. That is open to everyone that has benefited from the death of Christ surely, to reckon that.
H.G. The trouble is their tastes were not changed. Their position was changed, but their tastes were not.
J.T. There was no answer in murmuring. That is a common thing in the world.
G.A.T. And they long for the leeks and garlic.
H.G. It is a very important thing to change the position of a child, or a household, and to have the tastes changed.
J.T. That is the point. The Israelites, you might say, retained their old tastes in the wilderness, so there was nothing new. Nothing new in murmuring, nothing new in longing for the leeks and garlic of Egypt, and certainly nothing new in setting up the golden calf and worshipping it. These were all elements that were old and wicked; the point is to bring in what is new, and what is new is of Christ.
H.G. I judge the manna would suggest the formative principle for the continuance of life. You are baptized with a view of coming out in the life of the manna.
J.T. I think that is beautiful. They say, "What is it?" @Exodus 16: 15. It was something new -- no Egyptian element, and as it was understood it was Christ according to what He was here. That is the new thing. So I have to consider in all my movements now, 'Am I presenting this new thing, or am I what I was before ?'.
G.A.T. Now in the seventh chapter he has the desire, but not the power. How does that affect us now?
J.T. It is the new nature of a christian. It seems he
{189}
delighted in the law of God after the inward man, but, as you said, he had no power. I hope we are all clear about chapter 6, because it is the crucial chapter as regards our public position in this world; whether I am walking consistently with my baptism, and to do that I have got to pat on something new. My manner must be changed.
H.G. I feel what you say cannot be over-emphasized, in view of the increasing lawlessness everywhere. The question is, what kind of spirit are we presenting in the midst of it? I am sure that is the test today and the only thing that will be really testimony.
W.L.P. Will you say a little more about the constitution we are to develop, because if the constitution is right then our tastes will be in accordance with that, will they not?
H.G. Exactly so. It is a serious thing to put people on the Arabian side of the Red Sea in baptism. It will not do, for they will still desire the food of the land they have left behind; I thought manna met them at the outset to form constitutions for a wilderness people. They said, "What is it?" It was something new. If they had fed on that it would not have formed Egyptian constitutions, but Christ-like constitutions, so they would come out in newness of life.
A.N.W. Yet the depths of their hearts were learned in the despising of the manna, rather than in hankering after Egypt.
J.T. Yes.
J.B. Did not the manna bring that out?
J.T. It brought out that they had no taste for Christ. They had not developed new tastes.
J.B. That was really the worst thing brought out with regard to the manna, was it not?
J.T. So my position here, according to chapter 6, is that I am dead to sin. That is the ground I take by reckoning myself dead to sin but alive to God in Christ Jesus. That has to be maintained every moment of my life.
G.A.T. Now sin presents itself, and how does that work out?
J.T. Well, I am dead to it.
G.A.T. Yes, you say so, and the scripture says so, but how am I going to apply that?
{190}
J.T. It is a good thing to turn your eye from it if you see it. You go into the world in the ordinary affairs of life, and the temptations are terrific. One feels it, especially for the young, because we know what the power of the flesh is. In the young it has greater power than in the older ones, and safety for the believer lies in turning from the thing. You have not got to go in and test it out. Solomon did that before you. You gain nothing by testing it out and going through it. Solomon has gone through it and tells us what he found in it. You do not have to. You judge it and turn from it. So we can all understand the prayer the Lord taught the disciples, "Lead us not into temptation". If you are in it, turn from it. Do not look at it.
R.S.S. So sin in @Romans 6 is lawlessness -- that which is outside of you, so to speak -- but when it is a question of sin in us, is that what is spoken of in chapter 8 where it says "condemned sin in the flesh"?
J.T. Yes, the seventh and eighth, I suppose, take up the subject of what is in me.
R.S.S. Yes, that is what I wanted to understand.
J.T. But the sixth is outside of me and my reckoning of that, so, as I remarked, the sixth is I am dead to the thing. In Colossians we are dead from it. I think there is a point in the two words. But here I am in the presence of it, and the thing is to turn away. I have nothing to say to that -- I am dead to that.
W.C.R. The body of sin having been annulled, what does that mean?
J.T. That is in the old man. Our old man having been crucified, I am entitled to disregard all the tendencies of the old man, because God has condemned it; He has crucified it. It is a remarkable word. Not simply put to death, but God shows His abhorrence -- crucifixion.
H.G. Would you say, emphasizing what you have said in regard to reckoning ourselves to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God in Christ Jesus our Lord, that you can only reckon yourself to be dead indeed unto sin as alive to God in Christ Jesus our Lord? It is a retroactive thing, that involves the Spirit, and not only the Spirit, but
{191}
you have used the Spirit so you are constantly and increasingly in the life of the Man who lives to God.
J.T. It would be a poor thing if we only reckoned all the time.
H.G. And you have new power.
G.A.T. If I see sin acting, I have the right and privilege to turn from it. It is very simple.
J.T. The one who dwells on high is the one who closes his eyes from seeing evil, and stoppeth his ears from hearing of blood (@Isaiah 33: 15, 16). That is a good principle.
G.A.T. Did the apostle have the same thought, "Touch not; taste not; handle not", @Colossians 2: 21.
J.T. No, that is the radical. The radical tells you not to do that.
J.B. Is it not wonderful "in that he lives, he lives to God", @Romans 6: 10?
J.T. Yes.
G.W.H. So chapter 6 is inseparably connected with chapter 8, although it precedes it?
J.T. Yes, the things overlap you know, but when you view each thing by itself, chapter 6 is rather the public position.
G.W.H. Baptism is largely in view in chapter 6.
J.T. Yes, baptism has nothing to do with what is inside me, but what is outside me. The Holy Spirit deals with what is inside.
A.L. Would that scripture in @Proverbs 4 "Keep thy heart with all diligence; for out of it are the issues of life" be like turning away from evil? Supposing when I go away from here I see something evil in the world, that would still be what is in me, how am I to turn away from it? Am I to go down the street with my eyes shut?
J.T. It is a good thing to turn your eyes away sometimes.
A.L. You have sometimes to feel your absolute weakness. You may turn from evil but the whole scene is that.
A.N.W. Does not the truth of headship, as you have been presenting it to us, enable you to turn from what you have been speaking of?
{192}
J.T. No doubt.
W.L.P. Is it not possible to be occupied with Christ in such a way that these outward things will not appeal to you?
J.T. I think so, and I think as you develop self-judgment you increase in power in dealing with evil. It has less and less weight with you.
A.N.W. I suppose the gain of being under bondage to God is revealed to one.
J.T. Just so.
A.L. Hence that scripture, "This kind goeth not out but by prayer and fasting", @Matthew 17: 21.
J.T. Just so, all that comes in, and the habit of self-judgment is so important. As it says, "Ye put to death the deeds of the body", @Romans 8: 13.
A.L. And by the Spirit.
J.T. Quite.
A.L. What is self-judgment?
J.T. Oh, well, it is that if you are to judge the world you have to learn to judge yourself. One has to begin with oneself, and disallow the things that God has disallowed in the cross. You take sides with God, I think, in that way.
A.L. Do you mean I have to recognize I have been a part of that system?
J.T. Just so. You have part in the old man and God has crucified him, and you disallow him.
{193}
READING ON @ROMANS 8 AND 12
@Romans 8: 1 - 17; @Romans 12: 1 - 5
A.N.W. This is the first reference to those "in Christ Jesus", is it not?
J.T. The sixth chapter is "alive to God in Christ Jesus", reckon yourselves alive to God in Christ. Here it is "those"; it is abstract here.
G.A.T. Does the Spirit lead us in our souls in the order of these chapters, or does the seventh chapter come before the fourth in our experience?
J.T. These chapters are concurrent. That is, the sixth ends a series. The end of the seventh deals with what one is inwardly. Before the apostle deals with that he introduces the marriage bond, which is an important element in the christian's spiritual career.
Chapter 7 is in a way concurrent with the third in the history of a soul. My state was necessarily dealt with at the same time that my sins were dealt with, but the subjects are treated separately, for we only know in part. God breaks things up for us. We should know each element by itself.
W.L.P. Is that the meaning of knowing in part?
J.T. Yes, it is. We know in part.
R. S. S. So that in chapters 3 and 4 is it rather a question of guilt? Here it is rather a question of state.
J.T. But God dealt with both at the same time.
R.S.S. Yes, in the death of Christ?
H.G. Like the brazen serpent and the blood of the lamb in Egypt -- they are one in the mind of God, you mean?
J.T. Quite.
H.G. The whole man was disposed of.
G.A.T. I imagine you would understand the seventh better if it came in after the third, would you not?
J.T. The seventh is in the form of a psalm. It is an experience. The thesis is stated -- that is, the principle of a marriage bond is introduced, and then it is worked out as to how that is reached. The husband is really married in
{194}
the last verse, the last part of the chapter. The deliverer becomes the husband.
H.G. You mean that you have to be consciously dissociated from the flesh, to which the law was given as a husband, with the view of producing fruit for God; and to take account of yourself as the subject of the work of God, and the answer to that in your soul is the new husband, and as attached to Him in affection you find you can produce fruit for God. Is that the idea?
J.T. Quite.
H.G. And you are consciously married now to Christ and in that sense you reach the point of there being no condemnation -- that as being in Christ. Is that the thought of the marriage bond?
J.T. Yes, that is how it works out. I become attached to Him now as my deliverer, and I see that God's mind is that there should be an indissoluble bond between Him and me, in order that we should be married to another, in order that we should bring forth fruit to God. That is the mind of God, and the remaining part of the chapter works that out for us, so he gets back to a period long before the introduction of Christ and redemption -- a period in which he designates us as in the flesh. "When we were in the flesh" -- that was the period before redemption.
I suppose the marriage bond is involved in "in Christ" but it is an element by itself that the soul enters into. "Those in Christ" is abstract, referring to the normal christian position, but each believer has to enter into the marital bond which is laid down in the first part of the chapter. God entered into it really with Israel in the wilderness. The marriage bond was formed in the wilderness between God and the people, but what is referred to here is not that. The law being the first husband (not God, but the law), the people of God came under a bond which was a legal one, involving bondage instead of liberty, and the chapter shows that they all turn from that. Christians are absolved from that. We become dead to the law by the body of Christ, "that ye should be married to another, even to him who is raised from the dead, that we should
{195}
bring forth fruit unto God", @Romans 7:4. The divine thought is that each believer is to enter into this in order that there should be fruit for God. I think it is an individual bond here in chapter 7. It is not the church, but it lays the basis for it.
R.S.S. And it shows the law was given, not to be kept, but to prove that it could not be kept. Chapter 7 does that.
J.T. Yes, it was a husband in the way of having legal right over the soul; whereas now one is clear of it through the body of Christ.
R.S.S. "Through the body of Christ" refers to His death, does it not?
J.T. Surely.
R.S.S. It is giving His body in death. That is the import of the passage.
H.G. We were speaking about headship this morning; that we appreciate headship because of what the Head has done for us. The law did nothing for them; there was no affection in the law but in the bond with the new husband there is everything to attach your heart to Him. There is affection there.
W.C.R. You leave the world system in chapter 6. Would it not really necessitate someone to support you in that position?
J.T. Well, that is good and that shows how it works out. One has a new link, a bond with Christ; and as He becomes the husband to the soul, He sustains it, so that there is fruit for God, and the Deliverer becomes the Husband. I have often thought that one is not qualified for marriage according to the flesh until one is married to Christ; until one knows the bond with Christ, the spiritual link with Christ. That is a qualification that should be a requirement spiritually.
G.A.T. That makes it all the more serious to marry one that does not know Christ: for a christian to marry one that does not know Christ.
J.T. It is utterly wrong; but, even if one is the Lord's, it is important that one should know this new bond, know Christ in this way.
{196}
R. S. S. Why do you say so?
J.T. Otherwise the link is just taken up in the flesh, and the spiritual element is lacking.
G.W.H. So that many a man has to learn from the; truth of the assembly how to adjust things in his own house.
J.T. That he can only do rightly as coming from the assembly, because we learn how to adjust our houses from Christ.
A.N.W. But is not the expression "in the Lord" used more often in that connection, rather than "in Christ"?
J.T. In regard to the marriage relation?
A.N.W. And are not all household relationships "in the Lord"?
J.T. But then, knowing Christ as head and as husband helps one to be head. The marriage relation is not simply a matter of lordship. It involves headship and affection.
H.G. Unless you know the moral relationship, you might take it up in the spirit of the first husband.
J.T. I think many do that.
W.C.R. What do you mean, Mr. G.?
H.G. Well, in the way of being a lord to your wife, which I do not think scripture contemplates, instead of holding your wife in the power of spiritual intelligence and affection.
J.T. I only mentioned this subject of marriage as an element in the believer's spiritual history. Before the subject is introduced formally in the book, the Spirit is the subject in chapter 8.
H.G. Is the Spirit brought in there to enable you to answer to the position as "in Christ"?
J.T. Yes, and so to discharge every moral obligation in this world according to God.
R.S.S. Are we "in Christ" as having the Holy Spirit?
W.C.R. You might say a little more about discharging our moral obligations.
J.T. I think that is how the matter stands here. "That the righteous requirement of the law should be fulfilled in us, who do not walk according to flesh but according to
{197}
Spirit". In other words, as regards the types in this chapter, we have arrived at @Numbers 21, where Israel wholly failed to yield to God what He had sought of them. They were to be to Him a peculiar people. They were set up in relation with Him and He sought results, which were not brought forth. Instead of the righteous requirement of the law, that which God required of them (as it says in @Deuteronomy 10: 12, "And now, Israel, what doth Jehovah thy God require of thee"), the people spoke against God and against Moses. There was, in other words, a complete breakdown on the part of the people, and this chapter shows that in christians there is that which was lacking in Israel.
A.N.W. In this chapter it does not stop with fulfilling the righteous requirement of the law, does it?
J.T. Not at all, but that must be taken account of. Everything that God had required of man previously must be answered to in the adjustment -- because this is a question of adjustment -- and so the righteous requirement of the law must be fulfilled.
H.G. Would it be right to say that in the law God was demanding a man? I mean a man that loved God, and his neighbour, and brother? In @Exodus 21 God gets what He demands in chapter 20 in the Hebrew servant, "I love my master, my wife, and my children", @Exodus 21: 5. And now, the new head having been introduced, the Spirit being here, and we consciously having reached the truth of being in Christ, there is power to form the kind of a man that God was demanding. Is that right?
J.T. Yes, I suppose so. This epistle develops that -- love to God and love to the brethren.
H.G. I mean, is that the requirement of the law?
J.T. I think so. Love is the fulfilling of the law, or the fulness of it, so that what one finds is that there are certain requirements. God requires love from men, and He requires that men should love one another. Therefore I am obligated in that regard, and how am I to meet my obligations? You see, chapter 6 helps me as to how I am to be before the world, but chapter 8 opens up the question of my relations with God and my relations with the brethren,
{198}
so that it is a question now of what income I have to meet my obligations, and the Holy Spirit is therefore enlarged upon, and He is, so to speak, the income, the means by which the believer is kept here answering to divine requirements.
W.C.R. The widow in Kings suggests the same thought.
J.T. Well, I think that passage helps greatly to elucidate this section, because it was for her to discover what she had in the house, and this chapter shows what the believer has in the house -- the magnitude of the Spirit and the various ways in which He may be used, so to speak, by the believer in the discharge of his obligations.
A.N.W. It is remarkable that in the many references to the Spirit here, He is never called the Holy Spirit. I wondered whether there was a point in it.
J.T. Is it not usually the Spirit?
A.N.W. Yes.
L.E.S. This would be the answer in the saints to the Ark of the Covenant, in a way.
J.T. Yes, it would. This chapter brings us out as boards. In chapter 12 we are set up. That is, the principle of unity comes in -- we are one body in Christ -- not the body of Christ. That is not in Romans. It is one body in Christ, so that the boards are set up in chapter 12. Chapter 7 shows that the board is there essentially, because it says, "I delight in the law of God according to the inward man".
That is a new thought again. God has been working inside and according to that he delights in the law of God. He is qualified as a board as regards his disposition of desires, but the eighth chapter sets him up in power. The Holy Spirit enables him to be that.
W.C.R. Yes, just so. The Lord said that He loved the law; that is what the ark was, and the saint is here shown to be in accord with the ark.
G.A.T. Do you get the same thought when the believer sees deliverance, the first thing he says, "So then I *myself* with the mind serve God's law", @Romans 7: 25.
J.T. "I myself" now is according to the inward man. He is identified with the work of God in him, and this
{199}
chapter comes in to support that, so that by the Holy Spirit one carries out the will of God down here.
G.A.T. And that would include the righteousness of the law.
A.L. Is that the inward man that does that?
J.T. He does it in the power of the Holy Spirit.
A.L. Then what is the precise thought in walking according to Spirit?
J.T. It is that one is not governed by fleshly motives; one draws all one's motives from the Spirit. According to this chapter they walk not according to flesh, but according to Spirit, and that of course becomes extremely searching in one's soul, as to whether one draws one's motives from the Spirit. What motives am I governed by? The Holy Spirit in the believer becomes the spring of everything now, so that we are entitled to bring in @John 4 and @John 7, especially @John 4 -- "the water which I shall give him shall become in him a fountain of water, springing up", @John 4: 14. He becomes the spring of things in the soul.
A.L. Does that mean that if He were allowed scope, He would do it, or does it bring us in?
J.T. You must allow Him to do it, you see. The Holy Spirit is not the responsible party here. You are the responsible party. He has taken a place in relation to the church as the Comforter, or Paraclete, which is not the point here. You are the responsible person here. The Holy Spirit is in me, and it is for me to give scope to the Spirit, and in the measure I do that the righteous requirement of the law is fulfilled in me. The christian, therefore, is to be quiet and willing to disallow the flesh, and as you habituate yourself to that you will be satisfied in finding how the Holy Spirit acts. He does act in you as you are sympathetic with Him. You are the responsible person in the house. The flesh is there too, but you are the responsible person, and now you are free and you say, 'I have abundant power with me and I am not going to allow the flesh any play and am not going to minister to it'. So it says, sow to the Spirit and you will receive life everlasting. Otherwise you reap corruption if you sow to the flesh.
{200}
W.C.R. Ishmael must be cast out entirely.
J.T. That is it.
A.N.W. The princes digged the wells.
W.C.R. Isaac and Ishmael are at first both allowed in the house.
J.T. The process of chapter 7 helps you to discover the enemy of your soul and, discovering him, you died, and he is refused at every point, so that gives the Spirit scope and in that way the Holy Spirit is not constantly at war with the flesh. He is dwelling in you. It is one thing to have the Holy Spirit and another thing to have Him dwelling in you.
G.A.T. It is an encouragement, showing me how I can become a contributor. That is, to refuse the thing. I see it is not for my good.
W.C.R. I was struck as we were reading it, with verse 6, "To be carnally minded is death; but to be spiritually minded is life and peace". Very wonderful.
J.T. It is indeed. I think the thing for us now, adding to what we have had, is to get hold of the idea of being spiritually minded, and that is life and peace.
W.L.P. The apostle, after going through all the experience of chapter 7, at the end thanks God through Jesus Christ our Lord, and then he says, "So then with the mind I myself serve the law of God; but with the flesh the law of sin". I was wondering why that last sentence comes in.
J.T. It is just to show that the flesh serves sin. It is not that he means he serves the law and sins, but the flesh is exposed, and that is all it ever will do.
J.B. Not capable of anything else.
J.T. Yes, it is an immense thing to locate the enemy and to know how to deal with him. Having power in the Holy Spirit you can bind him and render him null and void as in the house.
J.B. And to know the full character of the enemy.
J.T. Yes, that he is essentially against God.
W.L.P. We must recognize always that it is by the power of the Spirit we accomplish that. We cannot in our own strength at all.
{201}
J.T. I think, as I was remarking, we come to find out how it is done, and I would commend that to everybody here, to find out how it is done, and it is only by experience. We have to put the thing into practice, and we find it out by experience, and, finding it out, keep on at it.
H.G. As you say, it is important to notice the way things are put in @Romans 8 in regard of the Spirit. You drew attention to the fact that it is a question of walking after the Spirit -- not a question of those who have the Spirit, but walking after the Spirit, being in sympathy with the Spirit, and the Spirit dwelling in you. One feels that one has read the thing too carelessly. It is not a matter of having received the Spirit and leaving Him to do it.
G.A.T. You have been saying what we should refuse. Do you not think there is the other side -- the things we should do that we are not doing, in connection with our lives and our homes. Would you say a word on that.
J.T. You see how the truth is presented here, what God had in His mind. He says, "For what the law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God, having sent his own Son, in likeness of flesh of sin, and for sin, has condemned sin in the flesh, in order that the righteous requirement of the law should be fulfilled in us". That is what He had in His mind, and then, the Spirit given, that is the spring that enables me to answer to the mind of God. I see what He had in His mind, and I answer to it.
H.G. But you walk in that direction, "Who do not walk according to flesh, but according to Spirit". Very much like the tribe of Asher, is it not, whose foot was dipped in oil? It is pursuing a spiritual course, is it not?
J.T. So, "If we live by the Spirit, let us walk also by the Spirit", @Galatians 5: 25.
W.L.P. Giving scope to the Spirit is really our part.
J.T. I think, as we have been saying, you are the responsible occupant of the house. You say, I am going to give all the space now to the Holy Spirit, and as you give Him space you get results.
H.C. Would you tell us the difference in being in Christ and in the Spirit?
{202}
J.T. I think "in Christ" is position. God has placed me there. In the Spirit is state. You are not in the flesh but in the Spirit. That is state, but here it is the way God takes account of you, you see. When I say "state" it may be assumed that I mean I am spiritual, but it does not mean that. To be spiritual is the result of that. Every one who has the Spirit is in the Spirit according to God. God does not take account of me in any other way but in the Spirit, and I am entitled to take account of myself in that way, but that it is not to be spiritual. Spirituality is developed from that.
D.R. Then would you say John was spiritual when he could say he was in the Spirit on the Lord's day?
J.T. He was spiritual. That is another matter. He was wholly controlled by the Spirit, so as to be entirely outside the natural requisites for the moment. This is another matter. This is God taking account of me as in the Spirit because I have the Spirit. Having judged the flesh, I am no longer regarded as in it, because chapter 7 says, "when we were in the flesh", verse 5. That is now past.
H.D. Being in the Spirit follows upon your consciousness of being in Christ?
J.T. I think the one corresponds with the other. In Christ is my position; in the Spirit is the state that corresponds with it. God has given me the position and He has given me the state. Now the thing is for me to work these things out.
J.B. They correspond.
J.T. Yes.
J.A.W. Would you tell us something about the fruits of the Spirit?
J.T. These are evidence, you see, of spirituality. There are nine of them: nine different kinds of fruit, so a man is only marked off as spiritual by this fruit being in him.
J.A.W. "But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, kindness, goodness, fidelity, meekness, self-control: against such things there is no law", @Galatians 5 22,23.
J.T. If you find a man with those nine different kinds of fruit, he is a spiritual man, and God is delighted with him.
{203}
That is what God is looking for, and, mark you, the *fruit of the Spirit*. There is the fruit in you. It is not what follows on the Spirit, but myself, so to speak. It is what comes out in you.
J.C. There seems to be practical difficulty in the pursuance of what you speak of. I see things in me, that are in the house, that ought not to be there; I see what ought to be there. I covet that, but then pursuance seems to be a practical difficulty especially with those of us who are young.
J.T. Pursuing what?
J.C. Walking in the Spirit and in a state of spirituality -- the spiritual mind.
J.T. You speak of pursuing, what is in your mind?
J.C. You suggested the thought of pursuing -- that is, walking in the Spirit, our being spiritually minded. "To be spiritually minded is life and peace". Previous to that you spoke of two parties in the house, suggested in Isaac and Ishmael, and Ishmael being discovered to you in chapter 7, and when he is discovered the point is to get him out of the house, so that room might be made for Isaac. I was saying it is a practical difficulty with many, especially the young. We delight in that but the point is continuance, or pursuance. What I mean is to arrive at a settled state or condition.
J.T. That you have to continue in the recognition of the Spirit, you mean?
J.C. Yes.
W.L.P. Then it would be a constant discovery of different things, would it not, in us?
J.T. I think we discover a whole lot, you know, Mr. P., that we never thought was there. Things are very bright at the outset usually, but the depths of the heart, the deceptiveness of the heart, pride, and all these things that are concealed in the human breast come out afterwards, and the thing is to deal with them instead of fostering them and ministering to them. As it says here, "If ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live". That is the life line.
W.C.R. It is very largely a question of what we feed on.
{204}
In @2 Corinthians 4:16 you get the outer man perishing and the inner man renewed day by day.
J.T. What you are occupied with.
W.C.R. What you feed your mind with will form in you that character of things you are feeding on, is that the idea?
J.T. Yes.
W.C.R. The outer man perisheth, the man in touch the world. If you feed the inner man the outer man will perish.
C.M.Y. You starve him to death.
W.C.R. Is that so?
J.T. Quite so. You have to be nourished with the sincere milk of the word.
A.L. Is @Romans 6 not a little set forth in the brazen serpent?
J.T. That is what we are saying. God sets up the serpent of brass for the people to look at, and he that looked lived.
That is referred to here: "For what the law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God, having sent his own Son, in likeness of flesh of sin" (that is the brazen serpent) "and for sin, has condemned sin in the flesh". Mark you, "in the flesh"! That is, it is condemned in me.
Well now, the thing is that I regard it as a condemned thing.
A.L. That is the difficulty.
J.T. Yes, I do not regard it as condemned and therefore I suffer.
A.L. It is remarkable that in the type it does not say they were healed, but they that looked *lived*. Life is brought in in connection with it.
J.T. So @John 3 develops the subject more fully and to its completion. He leads us on to eternal life there in connection with the brazen serpent. Here it is connected simply with the righteous requirement of the law being fulfilled.
A.L. And that produces life?
J.T. Well, it does, but this chapter is more showing how one answers to one's obligations; to accept the condemnation of sin in the flesh is an immense thing, because if you accept it you do not expect anything from it.
A.L. If I accept condemnation of sin in the flesh in me,
{205}
am I down before God as a condemned man myself? Is that what you mean?
J.T. It is not that I am condemned, but sin in the flesh is condemned, you see. This chapter says there is no condemnation to those in Christ.
A.L. I was thinking of chapter 7.
J.T. When we were in the flesh, he says, we were condemned. Condemnation came in there, but now you are not in the flesh but in the Spirit.
A.L. Only when you are in the flesh, you do not get away from it personally by saying it is the flesh. That is what I was wanting to inquire about.
J.T. You are the responsible occupant of the house, so to speak, but chapter 7 enables me to dissociate myself in my mind from the thing condemned, so it is not me but the flesh that is condemned. I am in Christ. "There is then now no condemnation to those in Christ Jesus". What an immense thing that is! The thing condemned may be still with me, but the thing for me is that I hold it condemned.
J.C. Am I to regard myself as being in the Spirit from God's side?
J.T. That is what it says here: "But *ye* are not in flesh but in Spirit, if indeed God's Spirit dwell in you".
J.C. When we were in the flesh -- that looks back to what we were in the past?
J.T. That was really a period anterior to the coming of Christ in redemption. It does not apply to christians.
Christians are not in the flesh but in the Spirit.
J.B. Does it not apply to a man before he became a christian?
J.T. Oh, surely, as to himself personally.
J.B. I could say I was at a certain time in the flesh and in nothing else. That has all been condemned.
J.T. But chapter 7 deals with a period in which the people of God were under the law and could not establish it. That is the period covered by "in the flesh".
H.G. It says, "For when we were in the flesh, the motions of sins, which were by the law, did work in our members".
{206}
G.A.T. What is the difference between being in the flesh and acting in the flesh?
J.T. The state described in chapter 7 does not denote a wicked man. It denotes simply what the flesh is. He wants to do right and cannot. He is not personally wicked. A most extraordinary thing.
J.B. The inward man is brought to light, so delights in the law of God.
J.T. That comes to light in chapter 7, and the responsible man identifies himself with that.
W.L.P. That inward man is the christian, is he not?
J.T. It is not an individual at all. It is a state in you.
W.L.P. But that is the christian state.
J.T. It is as far as it goes, that I with the inward man delight in the law of God, but as one has power to carry out what he delights in so chapter 8 comes in. It is added, and now he is able to carry it out.
J.B. Is not the inward man what has been wrought in the soul by God?
J.T. That is what I remarked. It is a product of the work of God, and the inward man is in connection with the ark of the covenant, you see, but as yet he is powerless.
The ark of the covenant was the ark of God's strength. It is not only delight in the law, in Christ, but power to carry it out. Chapter 7 speaks of weakness. The desire was right but there was no power. Chapter 8 is power, and so there I am a board of the tabernacle. I am in keeping with the ark.
J.B. A living one; there is vitality there. As Mr. L. said, the first time life is introduced, whoever looked lived. The question of life did not come up until then, did it?
J.T. No, quite, but the will of God is what is in view here, so it goes on to say "that the righteous requirement of the law" (which is a question of the will of God) "should be fulfilled in us, who do not walk according to flesh but according to Spirit. For they that are according to flesh mind the things of the flesh; and they that are according to Spirit, the things of the Spirit. For the mind of the flesh is death; but the mind of the Spirit life and peace. Because
{207}
the mind of the flesh is enmity against God: for it is not subject to the law of God; for neither indeed can it be; and they that are in flesh cannot please God. But ye are not in flesh but in Spirit, if indeed God's Spirit dwell in you". You see throughout Romans it is not life that is developed. It is introduced incidentally, but the point is to bring in a people who do the will of God and correspond with the ark of the covenant, and so in chapter 12 you have the thing set up -- the saints are walking together as one body in Christ.
G.W.H. According to @Romans 8 the believer has not two natures.
J.T. The believer has only one nature. The old nature is condemned. It is not mine at all. It is still in the house. God allows it in His ways to be there, but the presence of the Holy Spirit enables me to triumph over it and do the will of God in spite of it.
A.L. Would it not be like singing to the well, "Spring up, O well!"
J.T. There was a complete recognition of the Holy Spirit typically there.
A.L. Yes, and the princes digged the well with their staves. They were active.
J.T. That refers to spiritual men, and they digged it at the direction of the lawgiver. It is still the authority of Christ in Romans, right up to the Jordan. It is the lordship of Christ.
A.L. And the result was what is recorded of them in that chapter; they were always in movement. They went on.
J.T. After that, in spite of the flesh, the digging goes on, and that is the point now, whether we are going on or not, and as soon as you recognize the Holy Spirit and learn the flesh you move on.
H. G. You move onto sonship.
J.T. Yes, and the truth of the assembly.
H.G. You would say the Spirit enables us to fulfil our moral obligations, and it goes outside of that, does it not, to sonship?
J.T. Quite so. Verse 15 speaks of our having not
{208}
received a spirit of bondage again for fear, but having received a spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father.
H.G. Yes, and further on, "We do know that all things work together for good to those who love God". Only a son could say that.
G.W.H. Did you say that from the brazen serpent to the Jordan it was the lordship of Christ?
J.T. All the way up to the Jordan it is the lordship of Christ.
G.W.H. How would you designate what lies between the Red Sea and the brazen serpent? Is that wilderness?
J.T. They are both wilderness. The Red Sea introduces you into it. The brazen serpent meets the sin in the flesh. Baptism gives me a position as dead with Christ in regard to sin -- dead to sin. I am not out of the world: still in it, but dead to sin. The brazen serpent deals, not with what I am in relation to public things, but what I am inwardly, so as to adjust my relations with God in a spiritual way. The authority of Christ is maintained throughout Romans, as it is in the wilderness.
G.W.H. I thought the plains of Moab were not strictly wilderness.
J.T. It is divine territory. @Romans 8 is divine territory, but it is not the dwelling place. It belongs to the domain but is not the dwelling place. In the types we have to distinguish between what Moses gave the people and what Joshua gave the people. Moses does not give us the dwelling place. He gives us territory, but not the dwelling place. Joshua gives the dwelling place. Joshua leads you into heavenly places.
G.A.T. Would you mind my raising the question again of the christian having only one nature. I find very often in myself two.
J.T. The christian is only regarded as born of God, you see. He is born of God and there are not two natures there.
G.A.T. Now where do those thoughts and actions that are contrary to the mind of God come from?
J.T. They are from the condemned thing -- not your nature.
{209}
G.A.T. How do I carry them with me?
J.T. It is the will of God that they should remain there. You cannot say anything about that. If God took us to heaven He would not take that, but, leaving us in the wilderness, He works out His will. The righteous requirement of the law is fulfilled in men, just like the men that broke down in the wilderness, just the same kind of people, only that now you have the Holy Spirit and in the process of chapter 7 you arrive at the fact that the flesh is condemned -- sin is condemned in the flesh and you do not recognize it in any other light.
A.N.W. I suppose God enlightens us, that we might look out for the Man, the other husband.
J.T. Yes, I suppose so. "Who shall deliver me out of this body of death?" Whilst the thing remains with you, you are delivered from it. It does not control the house.
J.B. We are intelligently constructed and should be intelligent in God's ways. What we learn in the wilderness is that we might arrive in ourselves, in self judgment, at what God has really judged in the cross of Christ. Is that not of great advantage?
J.T. Quite so, but then we come into other things here. As Mr. G. has been pointing out, the Holy Spirit is not limited to the correcting of the flesh and the meeting of our obligations, but He also leads on to sonship, and, as we have already remarked, this epistle lays the basis for Ephesians, so we are led on, as we recognize the Spirit, to the full counsel of God; but it is an immense thing for God that He has here in the wilderness, where the people under law broke down, a people answering to His mind. The same kind of people outwardly, but, redemption having come in and the work of God having been effected in them, this change is brought about. So the thought of God, that He is to have His house filled, does not fail.
H.G. Does @Romans 8 take you as far as Mount Pisgah, where you can take a survey of the land?
J.T. I think so, and so you can take a retrospective view and a prospective view. You can look back -- Deuteronomy enables you to look back at what God has been to you in
{210}
the wilderness: and then it enables you to look in to what is before you in the land -- Mount Nebo, from which Moses looked into Canaan.
G.W.H. Will you please say a word on the change from lordship to headship?
J.T. You mean from Moses to Joshua?
G.W.H. Yes.
J.T. Well, Joshua is the spiritual leader of the people. He represents Christ known secretly. First of all he goes up with Moses on the mount, and then he is found in the tabernacle -- a young man in the tabernacle.
A.N.W. Would you say it is very nearly the difference between lordship and headship?
J.T. Very nearly. In fact, I would say Moses merges into Joshua. The book of Deuteronomy I think is headship, in the way of directions given for a future position. Joshua leads into that future position, so that Moses merges into Joshua in that way. In Deuteronomy it is not what the Lord says to Moses, but what Moses says himself. That is, he acts in the intelligence he has for the people, and in the intelligence he has he acts in order to educate them for the new position, for the land, and so he merges into Joshua, so to speak. Joshua takes that up and leads the people in.
D.R. Would you not say that, in the light of Deuteronomy, Moses was greater than Joshua? He brings before us the place where God would choose to cause His name to dwell -- that is God's habitation.
J.T. Yes, I suppose so. He had the mind of God, but Joshua is Christ in heavenly places: the spiritual leader of the people of God.
I think we might perhaps, as the time is nearly gone, dwell on the putting together of the boards. What we have had has been in a way rather desultory, and we might perhaps see how the boards are put together -- that is, how the saints are subjugated in their wills and, recognizing the Holy Spirit, yield their bodies to God, and how, as thus yielded up, we are brought into a body wherein the will of God is carried out down here. It says in chapter 12,
{211}
"I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the compassions of God, to present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which is your intelligent service. And be not conformed to this world, but be transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is the good and acceptable and perfect will of God". This is where we come out and are set up here, so to speak, in tabernacle relations, and the thing is to prove the will of God -- the good and acceptable and perfect will of God.
H.D. Is this the result of yielding to and living in the Spirit?
J.T. I think it is those who recognize the Spirit who are in view, and the body is living, and that can only be by the Spirit. The Spirit of life is in the body.
W.L.P. Is this not an appeal of the apostle to the brethren to do this?
J.T. He appeals to them by the compassions of God.
The body of the believer becomes of great importance now. It is living, however.
H.G. That is, it is replete with divine intelligence, is that the idea? Men standing up here, as having come into all the light of God as He has revealed Himself, are at His command and at His disposal.
J.T. And the motions of the flesh in the body are no longer there. The body is the vehicle of the Spirit, replete with life -- a living sacrifice.
J.B. The body and the mind are both brought in here.
J.T. "Be transformed by the renewing of your mind".
W.C.R. Is that necessary before you can prove what the good and acceptable and perfect will of God is?
J.T. Yes, I think divine thoughts come in. The mind is changed. The word "renewal" or "renewing" is characteristic of Romans. Newness of life, newness of spirit, and now the thing is applied to the mind. Renewed things are brought into the mind.
W.C.R. One whose mind is not renewed would not effect the will of God.
J.T. No.
H.G. What you were saying about the body is not given
{212}
in chapter 12. We do not get the body of Christ here. I would like to know just how far Romans takes you in connection with the boards. I thought Corinthians put them together. I thought Romans in a way formed the boards and Corinthians put them together -- that the structure was there.
J.T. Well, I think this chapter puts them together.
Verse 5 says "Thus we, being many, are one body in Christ". Corinthians makes us the body of Christ. This chapter is on the one hand, to curb, to check, or disallow clericalism and independency, and on the other hand, to regard all the brethren as a body. There is only one, but it is not the body of Christ, because that is not the point. The point is to establish the principle of unanimity, and, as one might say, equality. The saints as viewed in this chapter are together, a vehicle collectively for the setting forth of the will of God. Hence the question with me is, 'How am I to be in relation with the brethren'? There can be no greater test for a man in a way than to walk with a lot of brethren that he never knew before, belonging to different stations of life and having different natural pursuits. Consider them in Rome -- it was a very cosmopolitan city, very much like New York or Detroit. All important cities are cosmopolitan, and we find ourselves together from different parts of the world. How am I going to travel along and move with the brethren? This chapter is an immense help on that line.
D.R. Would that be @Psalm 133?
J.T. It is that "How good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity".
Ques. Would you say that chapters 9 to 11 are parenthetical in a way -- that what comes out here, "I beseech you", etc., is connected with things developed in the end of the eighth?
J.T. I think the mercies or compassions of God are seen throughout. I suppose they include chapters 9 to 11.
J.B. This would be just as much a continuation of the eleventh as of the eighth.
Rem. What I meant was, if we consider the wonderful
{213}
position brought out in the end of chapter 8, that nothing is able to separate us from the love of God; if we took that into account then what comes out in chapter 12 would be becoming as a walk in us.
J.T. As you say, the eighth leads us on to what is perhaps the highest result of the intervention of God, but the mercies of God are treated in chapters 9 to 11 also.
W.L.P. Is proving the good and perfect and acceptable will of God a conscious act?
J.T. I think so. As the thing is worked out you find it good and perfect and acceptable, not irksome. There is a sweetness m doing the will of God; a certain sweetness about it, in the doing of it, that it is good and perfect and acceptable.
J.B. There is life, happiness and joy in proving it, is there not?
J.T. Yes.
I was going to call attention to the ground of the apostle's address here in verse 3: "For I say, through the grace which has been given to me, to every one that is among you, not to have high thoughts above what he should think: but to think so as to be wise, as God has dealt to each a measure of faith". It is according to the grace given to me, he says, that I am speaking. We think of how Paul behaved himself, and so he addresses his brethren and says, 'Now do not think more highly of yourself than you ought to think'. It is not that you are not to think of yourself at all, because mock modesty is folly. I have to take account of myself; I am not a cipher; I am a something if I am a subject of God's work. God has intended me for something and it is for me to find that out. Therefore, if I think of myself, I think of myself in sobriety. As it says, "as God has dealt to each a measure of faith". That is, I am entitled to think of myself according to the measure God has dealt to me. Is that right, Mr. G.?
H.G. I think so. Measure is a relative term, I suppose, and you are set up in relation with your brethren. There is no thought of isolation, of being a unit.
J.T. Each one has some measure, and it is for him to
{214}
see that the saints get the benefit of that measure, is that not it?
H.G. I suppose so.
J.T. That saves us from clericalism. It is not one man ministry. The church of God is to be sustained on the principle of mutuality, but when the will of God has rule radicalism has no place. It is as God has dealt to every man a measure of faith. The will of God must rule everything.
It is for me to decide what I have got, and what others have got, and to use what I have got in relation to what they have got, so there is a mutual working in that way and unity is preserved.
D.R. Not anything distinctive?
J.T. No.
A.L. I suppose you get this thought in David behaving wisely. He was a weaned child.
J.T. Quite so.
H.G. What is the meaning of the measure of faith?
Would you not think it means light?
J.T. I think it is faith in an operative sense here; faith that has become operative; that which is available as material among the people of God, that is in view, and you will notice here it is not the gifts of the Christ that are dealt with, but what is suited to the wilderness. It is His appointment. Each has his own measure from God and he is to take account of himself according to that measure in sobriety.
G.W.H. What does @Ephesians 4 mean?
J.T. That is the gift of Christ. They are official, specific gifts, which Christ has received in a Man and distributed for the building up of the church; here the point is that the will of God is to be seen in His people in the way in which ministry and helps are developed.
J.B. It says in @2 Corinthians 11: 20, "For ye bear ... if any one exalt himself".
J.T. That is, they allowed a man to do that.
O.J.O. Would you say it is what one might bring to the morning meeting -- a bullock, a lamb or a turtle dove?
J.T. Well, yes. It is a question of how much one can
{215}
contribute. You see the situation among the people of God is always subject to this -- am I a liability to the saints of God or an asset to them?
J.B. The question here is to think soberly, is it not? I mean to take account of these things soberly, as to what the result is?
J.T. And there is no suggestion that there are some who have not received a measure of faith, because God deals it out to every man, and if I have not got a measure of faith, why have I not?
G.W.H. Therefore you become an asset.
J.T. If I have a measure of faith, I become an asset, and soberly take account of the measure as coming from God.
J.A.W. And is that measure increased?
J.T. Surely.
G.A.T. What does the thought of asset and liability actually mean?
J.T. If I am an asset I am able to contribute according to the measure God has dealt me; if a liability I must be carried by others, not ministering at all. I am not denying that the Lord does take on liabilities in the church. He adds to the church such as should be saved. That is a liability but He can take care of that. Conditions are such as to take care of that.
G.A.T. If I am not a contributor, the church has to contribute to me.
J.T. One would not deny that liabilities are taken care of. There is sufficient power in the church normally to look after those who cannot care for themselves spiritually, but it is for such an one to ask the question, 'Why am I not able to contribute?'
J.B. That would not be confined to when we come together in meetings, would it, but would refer to all our relations with one another?
J.T. Oh, I think so. It is general, you know. Our relationship with one another is not confined to the times when we are here in the meeting. It is a poor thing if they are.
D.R. Would you say it is not a question of trying to
{216}
contribute anything, but being under control of the head?
J.T. That would be so in other epistles, but the point here is not headship. It is according to the measure that God distributes in the wilderness position, so that the will of God is seen in His people. Where lawlessness had been, there is now the will of God. Christendom is simply a huge area of religious lawlessness. That is what christendom has become, whereas God would bring us back to His will. Here before the eyes of God we carry out the will of God.
A.L. You mean that is a question of faith.
J.T. That is how it is presented here.
H.D. What is the difference between faith here and in chapters 4 and 5?
J.T. I think in chapters 4 and 5 it has reference to my apprehension: what God is to me in Christ for righteousness, but this is an operative kind of faith -- that which is available for the help of others.
A.L. And is it not to be according to the proportion of faith?
J.T. That is what it says.
A.L. What is the meaning of "proportion of faith" in verse 6?
J.T. "Having different gifts, according to the grace which has been given to us". Is that what you mean?
A.L. Yes.
J.T. "Whether it be prophecy, let us prophesy according to the proportion of faith". I suppose it is the same idea as measure, but it is according to the proportion that God has given me.
J.B. One is thinking and the other acting. Verse 3 is thinking.
J.T. In verse 3 I take account of myself according to the measure God has given me. That is the basis of my calculations and when I put it into operation, I operate according to that. That is what I apprehend.
{217}
WHAT WE HAVE "OF FAITH" (1)
@2 Corinthians 5: 1 - 21
J.T. "A building from God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens", refers to the body that we are to receive from God. The subject really begins in the 13th verse of the previous chapter: "Having the same spirit of faith". The apostle is led to speak of the things that we have "of faith". "For we know" is normal christian knowledge; it is what belongs to those who have faith. "And we know that the Son of God has come, and has given us an understanding that we should know him that is true", @1 John 5: 20. Such passages express what is normal christian knowledge.
B. This passage contrasts the temporal with the eternal.
J.T. "For our momentary and light affliction works for us in surpassing measure an eternal weight of glory; while we look not at the things that are seen, but at the things that are not seen; for the things that are seen are for a time, but those that are not seen eternal. For we know that if our earthly tabernacle house be destroyed, we have a building from God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens", @2 Corinthians 4: 17 to 5: 1. The apostle is thus not dealing now, as earlier, with the effect of the ministry of the new covenant, but with the things that are eternal; things that belong to eternity; that belong, as you might say, to the feast of Pentecost. The feast of Pentecost covers that which we have been speaking of -- that which is eternal, not governed at all by the limitations of time. The first epistle is, generally speaking, set within the bounds of time; and as the Lord (one speaks with all reverence) had been here in grace within the limitations of time, so the saints are set here in testimony within these same limits, and in these limits we express the will of God and maintain the order becoming to God and to God's house. But, then, we are also set in relation to what is not bounded by time. It is very suggestive at the beginning of the year when we
{218}
are looking, as it were, into time to be reminded of all that which enters into it, namely, the testimony that God would set forth in us whilst we remain here. As Peter says "To live the rest of his time ... to God's will", @1 Peter 4: 2. But alongside of that we have a relation which is not bounded by time and which time cannot affect. So he says: "While we look not at the things that are seen, but at the things that are not seen; for the things that are seen are for a time, but those that are not seen eternal".
A.R.S. There are two houses here -- the one we are in at present is called "tabernacle house" but the "building from God" is eternal.
J.T. The tabernacle suggestion links with the first epistle and covers the position we occupy in relation to the testimony, that is, it is a changeable state of things; but then there is that which is eternal. The temple built by Solomon had a flooring of cedar; you did not stand on the earth, it was on other ground. Whereas the tabernacle had no flooring, it has to do with the earth, and has to do with time -- it could be destroyed, but the house from heaven is indestructible.
R. S. It is said about this building that we have it from God. What about the "tabernacle house"?
J.T. The book of Ecclesiastes deals with what comes under the cognizance of man, your natural vision, what is "under the sun"; that is all dealt with there. And it says there: "Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was; and the spirit shall return unto God who gave it", @Ecclesiastes 12: 7. It was said to Adam: "Dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return", @Genesis 3: 19. A humbling fact for us to accept! That is what we are.
Rem. What is the difference between "tabernacle house" and "house"?
J.T. "If our earthly tabernacle house" -- the word "tabernacle" is put there as an adjective. It is descriptive of your present abode. As to the material of the tabernacle, it is earthly and it is movable -- it can be taken down. Then it goes on to say: "be destroyed". It is not simply to be taken down but to be destroyed -- it is to become decomposed.
{219}
@1 Corinthians 15:44 treats of the thing. "It is sown a natural body; it is raised a spiritual body". That which is sown is raised, that is, the identity remains; but he is speaking here of the material which is a destructible thing; but what we receive is indestructible -- "a building from God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens".
A.N.W. Does verse 1 stand in relation to verse 16 of the previous chapter? "If indeed our outward man is consumed, yet the inward is renewed day by day".
J.T. The "inward man" corresponds with the "building from God". The "outward man" perishes; but the inward man is greater than the outward, it is "renewed day by day", 2 Corinthians 4: 16.
Ques. When do we get it?
J.T. In resurrection. But it is spoken of here as coming from heaven. In the first epistle it is as the result of resurrection: "It is raised in glory", @1 Corinthians 15: 43. It is not that we shall see a visible house come down for each of us; that is a mistaken idea. The thought is that it is of that origin. How the thing comes about is another matter. It really comes about by the power of God in the resurrection.
The book of Ecclesiastes helps us in regard of what we are dealing with. The last chapter of the book speaks of dissolution. The person is regarded as a being distinct from his body. "Man goeth to his age-long home", @Ecclesiastes 12: 5. That is what takes place, but we have a "building from God"; but, then, the apostle goes on to say that he is not wishing to be unclothed, that is, he is not looking for dissolution; but he is looking that what is "mortal may be swallowed up by life".
All this takes place *before* translation. The apostle says: "For indeed in this we groan, ardently desiring to have put on our house which is from heaven; if indeed being also clothed we shall not be found naked. For indeed we who are in the tabernacle groan, being burdened; while yet we do not wish to be unclothed, but clothed, that what is mortal may be swallowed up by life". He is speaking about God coming in and changing his body, making him in every way suited to the work that has already taken place morally.
{220}
A.N.W. "Now he that hath wrought us for this very thing is God". Does that refer to the inward man?
J.T. Yes, God has already wrought us for that. He has wrought us for that now.
A.F.M. The interior of the tabernacle was greater than the exterior; but the exterior of the temple was equal to the interior.
J.T. God did not intend display in the tabernacle. The point was the value of what was inside; but He did intend display in the temple. Ephesians is the collective point of view: "In whom all the building fitted together increases to a holy temple in the Lord", @Ephesians 2: 21. That temple involves all this that he is speaking of here.
A.N.W. How does his desire to see what is mortal swallowed up by life agree with his other desire: "If by any means I might attain unto the resurrection of the dead"?
J.T. Attaining unto the resurrection would be subjective -- his reaching it in his soul. He is aiming at that as to the state of his soul. "If by any means I might attain"
(@Philippians 3: 11) could not refer to what God would do for him; but to what he would attain in a subjective way.
W.B. Referring again to what is limited by time, what would you say about the covenant in chapter 3? Is that within the bounds of time?
J.T. Yes.
W.B. This chapter begins an eternal order of things, a new beginning.
J.T. In a way. He is dealing with faith: "Having the same spirit of faith". It is what you do not see in a natural way.
Rem. When he says "We know", does that cover every believer?
J.T. Normal christian knowledge.
W.B. Not a subjective work in the soul?
J.T. The knowledge we have by faith. You are sure of it.
W.C. The apostle seems very definite about it "We know".
J.T. We like to hear some one saying he knows. Nowadays it is, 'what I think', or 'what I believe'. There is very
{221}
little certainty nowadays. The Scriptures are so pronounced on these matters.
A.N.W. "Through faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God, so that things which are seen were not made of things which do appear", @Hebrews 11: 3. There is no doubt about that.
J.T. "I believed, therefore have I spoken", @Psalm 116: 10.
W.B. Does the earnest of the Spirit help you in your conscious knowledge?
J.T. "The Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit", @Romans 8: 16, at least, the principle is in that. We, really, understand all things by the Spirit. "For what man knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is in him? Even so the things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God", @1 Corinthians 2: 11.
A.F.M. The Spirit is given to us in this chapter as the earnest for our body. The earnest of our inheritance (@Ephesians 1) is a different idea.
J.T. "Who also hath given unto us the earnest of the Spirit". In the first epistle: "Now we have received ... the spirit which is of God; that we might know the things that are freely given to us of God", @1 Corinthians 2: 12.
-.H. With regard to the question of laying aside our earthly bodies, we can all see the immense gain that will be to us; but wherein will we gain by getting glorified bodies?
J.T. It all involves greater capacity. We know in part now. "Now I know in part; but then shall I know even as also I am known", @1 Corinthians 13: 12. Wonderful to think what we shall be: "but we know that, when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is", @1 John 3: 2. We have that hope. We cannot define what it shall be like; but we shall be like Him.
J.S. At present we are much limited.
Rem. Will the saints that are with the Lord now have greater capacity when they receive their glorified bodies
J.T. You cannot say much about the disembodied state. A body is essential to a man for a man is so constituted that he needs it either for enjoyment or for expression.
Rem. Is that what the apostle had in his mind when he
{222}
said: "We do not wish to be unclothed, but clothed"?
J.T. Just so.
A.F.M. What is behind the expression, "far better"? "For I am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ; which is far better", @Philippians 1: 23.
J.T. He had reference to the thought of being with Christ, the One he loved. I suppose love always regards companionship as the greatest thing. But he is not then speaking of what the result was to be for God, or of his own knowledge or service ended. He is only speaking in that remark of his affections for the Lord.
A.F.M. In this passage he says: "Whilst we are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord".
J.T. It was a question of companionship. Love abhors distance, hence the greater the nearness the greater the enjoyment. But then there are other things he is treating of here.
R.S. In connection with this, Moses appeared on the Mount of Transfiguration with the Lord. What kind of a body was it he then had?
J.T. Scripture does not give you any light on that because the time had not yet come for God to set forth what His thought for man was, and He would not until Christ was glorified. Christ must in all things have the pre-eminence. He is the pattern, the Leader in everything, so "We shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is"
@1 John 3: 2. That God could bring in Moses and bring in Elias in such a form that they could communicate with the Lord is simply known to faith. Just as an angel could clothe himself in the form of a man, and as Jehovah did in Old Testament times. All is simply known to faith; but quite outside the range of science.
A.R.S. It is not absolutely necessary to have a glorified body to enjoy the presence of the Lord?
J.T. Love delights in nearness however disadvantageous the circumstances; but the circumstances of the disembodied state are not wholly such as to conduce to the expression and reciprocation of affection. Love thinks of nearness, but then there are other thoughts.
{223}
J. S. Verse 4 indicates his wish to be here until the moment of the change, holding the thing in testimony.
Rem. What would you say about the body in which the Lord appeared in resurrection? Is it the same as we will get?
J.T. Yes, I do not think there is any change from that. The endings of the gospels and the opening of Acts enlarge on what that body was -- how He moved about in it, and how He was outside the range of the natural.
A.B. "Many bodies of the saints which slept, arose ... and went into the holy city", @Matthew 27: 52, 53. What do you think as to that?
J.T. "After his resurrection"; you cannot say anything beyond what scripture gives us. It says: "Appeared unto many". It was obviously a testimony to the great fact that He arose.
A.N.W. As to His body, He died.
J.T. He laid down His life. "I lay down my life that I may take it again. No one takes it from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have authority to lay it down and I have authority to take it again. I have received this commandment of my Father", @John 10: 17, 18.
A.N.W. Mortal is what is liable to death.
J.T. You could not say in any sense that He was liable to death. You could say He could die, having received the commandment of His Father; but He dismissed His spirit as an act of power. "For as the Father raiseth up the dead, and quickeneth them; even so the Son quickeneth whom he will" (@John 5: 21), but becoming Man He could die.
Rem. "Who only has immortality", @1 Timothy 6: 16.
A.F.M. The passage quoted refers to God the Father.
A.N.W. The Godhead.
J.T. I think Christ. "Which in his times he will shew, who is the blessed and only Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of lords; who only hath immortality, dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto; whom no man hath seen, nor can see". It is Christ, only viewed in relation to the Deity for He is the King eternal -- "To whom be honour and power everlasting", @1 Timothy 6: 15, 16.
{224}
Rem. "A spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see m have", @Luke 24: 39.
J.T. So He was a real man in resurrection.
Rem. Whilst we get the character of the house from God, we do not get the form of it.
J.T. The form of it is that we will be like Christ. He the pattern.
It is wonderful to have it before our souls. The years are slipping by, one feels oneself weakening, and days becoming shorter. Even in one's childhood it is an immense thing to keep it always before one -- looking at this spiritual house.
W.B. Does "present with the Lord" refer to the millennial order of things or to every person that pass away?
J.T. It refers to what takes place the minute you expire.
It refers to what we speak of as the disembodied stat What do you mean?
W.B. What does the expression "Lord" mean here?
J.T. It is a term that involves our responsibility. We are under the Lord so we wish "whether present or absent, to be agreeable to him".
W.B. The Lord is the Administrator in the millennial order of things.
J.T. I suppose he is dealing with his responsibility. I goes on to the judgment seat, and he speaks of the terror o the Lord, all that enters into it.
J.S. The responsible path will be in review.
J.T. Knowing all that was involved in the judgment seat of Christ, he was desirous of being suitable himself, and he persuaded others.
Rem. In connection with the judgment seat, the expression is changed.
J.T. But he says "the terror of the Lord". The Lord is the one to whom we are directly responsible in our pathway here -- He is our despot -- there is no escape from His control, so the exercise of the apostle was to be pleasing to Him.
A.F.M. "Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord" but there is no terror connected with our appearance there.
{225}
J.T. "The terror of the Lord" refers to evil wherever it is. God has no more regard for sin in you than in an unconverted man. He is against it.
A.F.M. So the effect would be to rouse us, and the judgment seat of Christ will be the termination of our responsible history as men in flesh.
J.T. It is a question of what has been done in the body. We "receive the things done in the body".
A.F.M. "Each may receive the things done in the body, according to those he has done, whether it be good or evil". Does it cover one's whole life?
J.T. Yes, from infancy. God judges every one from the outset.
Rem. The bad would refer to our unconverted days?
J.T. I am afraid it has to be extended on with most of us, alas!
A.N.W. What do you receive? I do not expect to receive anything from the bad things I have done.
J.T. It refers to the place we are to occupy -- what the Lord thinks of our service, of our testimony here. How much there has been in it for God and how much for the flesh. The receiving for the bad would imply loss of the positive.
-.Ho. More on the line of credit and loss.
J.T. The honour would be smaller.
J.S. Is one to offset the other here, or is it a question of the manifestation of all? "We must all be manifested".
J.T. It is credit and loss here. I do not understand it in any other sense. Nothing like punishment.
W.B. Does the whole life come into review?
J.T. I do not think we are all brought up together. I think the principle of the judgment seat is that each case is taken up by itself. It has reference to the place we shall have in the kingdom. "If any man's work shall be burned, he shall suffer loss: but he himself shall be saved; yet so as by fire", @1 Corinthians 3: 15. He suffers loss on account of the character of his work. I think, in principle, he loses what he should have had normally in the way of reward for his service.
{226}
J. S. Is not this the finishing touch regarding our apprehension of things?
J.T. Your conscience may not condemn you now; but, then, the apostle says, "Yet am I not hereby justified; but he that judgeth me is the Lord. Therefore judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who ... will make manifest the counsels of the hearts", @1 Corinthians 4: 4, 5. He will bring to light everything, and when we are manifested before the judgment seat we shall see everything as He does.
A.N.W. Would the case of the converted thief throw any light on it? He was a man who had lived a bad life and was dying for it, and he asks that the Lord would remember him when He comes into His kingdom, which the Lord does not seem to take account of; but He says, "Today shalt thou be with me in paradise", @Luke 23: 43.
J.T. He will be in the kingdom too. The Lord well knows how to appraise. No one ever rendered testimony like that. It was unique.
A.F.M. Would you then encourage us to pass the judgment seat now as Paul did? He says that he was already manifested. It was from him as though he had already passed it.
J.T. I would not like to say it just as strongly as that. For he said: "Yet am I not hereby justified". Even though his conscience did not condemn him, he would not rest in that. After all, the heart is so deceitful that there might be a shade (as in fact there was in certain things) that you cannot see, but the Lord can see it.
Some one was speaking to me the other day about Mr. Darby; when he was dying, he said: 'What will the Lord say to me?' He had a good conscience, I have no doubt, as to his path; but then the thing was not yet disclosed. What would the Lord say? That is a very solemn thing.
All rights are reserved in regard of judgment -- the Lord holds all rights, hence, you are to wait and when the Lord passes His verdict things may not be just as you thought they were. Not only the things but the motives -- the motives from whence the things spring -- these have to be dealt with.
{227}
Rem. "We persuade men, but have been manifested to God".
J.T. He was manifested to God; but he does not say that everything was manifested to him. "For we must all be manifested before the judgment seat of the Christ". We shall be manifested there.
W.B. What does the word "manifest" mean?
J.T. Everything is seen and transparent; all is out. It will have a very great effect on us. All is closed behind, never to be revived; but, not only that, you have an intelligent judgment of things. Sitting beside the Lord, you will see it all as He sees it -- it is manifested before the judgment seat of Christ, not before the universe. Courts of justice are not necessarily for public display. The point is, to get at the truth -- that the truth should be out.
-.Ho. Is the principle in @John 4?
J.T. Yes. "Come, see a man, which told me all things that ever I did", @John 4: 29. But, in fact, He had only said "Go, call thy husband".
Rem. In Revelation you have the idea of eyes all over.
J.T. All-seeing; but here the thing is gone into so that you see it. It is manifested there.
{228}
WHAT WE HAVE "OF FAITH" (2)
@2 Corinthians 5: 12 - 21
A.F.M. How is it that the thought of new creation and reconciliation are found at the end of this chapter?
J.T. I suppose it is the apostle's design in the structure of the letter. Things are introduced in a regular way. The letter is written on a definite plan and new creation is essential to reconciliation.
A.F.M. Should the thought of new creation and reconciliation come in here to show what we have in the present time? We are awaiting this house from heaven; but already we are a new creation and are reconciled. Is that why it is brought in here?
J.T. I think that the new covenant and then reconciliation is the leading thought in the mind of the Spirit. But an element is introduced here which is not developed in the same way in Colossians and Ephesians. We are said to be "reconciled in the body of his flesh through death", in Colossians, "to present you holy and unblameable and unreproveable in his sight", @Colossians 1: 21, 22. But in @Ephesians 2: 16 it says that He had reconciled "both unto God in one body by the cross, having slain the enmity thereby"; referring to the unity that God has brought about by the cross -- the unity established between the Jew and gentile believers. Here new creation is introduced as an essential.
A.F.M. The old state of man was irreconcilable.
A.N.W. How do you understand verse 19? "God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself".
A.F.M. I suppose that was the character of things when Christ was here -- that God did not view the world at a distance from Him.
J.T. That was the attitude of His mind.
J.S. "In Christ".
J.T. "God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself". That which pleased God was set out in Christ,
{229}
and He had no other thought for the world than that.
In Christ is set out what occasions the "good" pleasure in men, spoken of in @Luke 2: 14.
A.N.W. Does it read God was reconciling the world in Christ rather than God was in Christ?
J.T. I think it is the former. Christ becoming Man sets out what God delights in, and there could be no reconciliation except as all are brought into that. So in the incarnation the angels are delighted in the fact that there should be "good pleasure in men". We often quote it as good pleasure in man; but it is "good pleasure in *men*".
A.F.M. Christ, Himself, was God's good pleasure.
J.T. The thing was begun there; but there new creation did not apply to Christ; but it does apply to all else. "So if anyone be in Christ, there is a new creation".
J. S. Perfect complacency as in Him.
A.A.T. Is new creation something from nothing?
J.T. You might say that. We cannot speak of the material. The point is, that it is used. "Old things have passed away; behold all things have become new: and all things are of the God who has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ".
R. S. It is hardly from nothing. "Has reconciled us". He has the material before Him.
J.T. Surely, only that the point in new creation is that it is new.
A.A.T. Adam was made from nothing.
J.T. He was made out of the dust. But, still, we cannot speak of the material. The truth of the matter is that God takes up what is presented in Christ and uses it in the vision of our souls, and our beings, so that it is wholly new but all evolved out of Christ.
B.P. Does a reconciled man retain his identity?
J.T. Yes.
A.A.T. Are we reconciled now?
J.T. I think so. He has reconciled both in one body by the cross. It was a statement of a fact which covered the Jew and the gentile as they then were in Christ.
Rem. Yet it says: "We entreat for Christ, Be reconciled to God".
{230}
J.T. The Corinthians were not practically in reconciliation, and it was for them to come into it, and the two letters were that they might come into conformity to Christ.
Ques. What is the difference between the ministry of the new covenant and the ministry of reconciliation?
J.T. Just as he had been an able minister of the new covenant so he had received the ministry of reconciliation. The new covenant is what God is in Christ, and reconciliation what man is in Christ. So in Colossians he is aiming at presenting "every man perfect in Christ".
Rem. The idea of the apostle is that they should come into it. Is it a matter of light, or of faith or conformity to the teaching?
J.T. The apostle had received the ministry of reconciliation, and he had also the ministry of the new covenant. They are both involved in the gospel. Only the ministry of reconciliation would lead on more definitely to the ministry of the assembly. There are strictly but two ministries, especially in Colossians, the ministry of the gospel and the ministry of the assembly. Reconciliation, I suppose, might be said to be bound up in the ministry of the assembly; but, at any rate, they are distinguished here.
It would work out in this way. The apostle while in Corinth presented what God is in Christ, and then, on the other hand, he would present what man is according to God in Christ, and the ministry of reconciliation would involve that and the effect of it would be that a Corinthian saint would say, That is what I am to be practically. He would say, My exercise is that I might move about in Corinth agreeable to God -- that I should be here for God's pleasure in all my motives and movements. How is that coming about, save as I see the idea in Christ and work it out in my daily experience?
A.N.W. Where is reconciliation in @Luke 15? Is it in the kiss?
J.T. That is the covenant more. That is what God is towards the prodigal, that is expressing God's heart.
A.N.W. Is it in the robe?
J.T. When he is arrayed, he sets out what man is in Christ. So as reconciled he is in the house without anything
{231}
to cause displeasure to God -- he is there in entire suitability.
J.S. Does it involve sonship?
J.T. Sonship is a question of liberty and dignity. The prodigal is not said to be brought into the house. The elder brother is invited in; but the prodigal is not said to be brought in; because as arrayed he is, in principle, the house. The house is composed of such.
A.F.M. Is there a point where the covenant and reconciliation coalesce? In the covenant I learn the terms on which God is with me and the response is reconciliation.
J.T. I am exercised now as to being for God, so that it comes to this that I am a man in Christ. That is one of the most prominent features in this letter, not that it is fully developed; but the apostle says: "I know a man in Christ". That is a point of knowledge that you want to arrive at.
A.F.M. That is the full thing. Every one has touched the thing though it may be very feebly, like a babe or child in Christ, yet such a one is in the good of reconciliation.
J.T. A babe in Christ is not the divine idea. It is all very well to say "little children" but they are not the divine idea. His delight is not in children but in sons -- those that are men really in development. It is one thing to say I know God in Christ; but it is quite another thing to say, "I know a man in Christ". Perhaps that is a piece of knowledge which is the rarest of all. It depends upon what one is as new created of God.
God approaches me in Christ and removes all that lay upon me, the covenant involves that, it is the covenant in Christ's blood; the blood atoning for all my liabilities, that is the covenant. But, then, on the other hand, you see what man is in Christ and God brings you to that.
A.F.M. It is not only that the faculties are there, but they are developed.
J.T. Not a babe but a man. It involves everything that came out in Christ presented in the Gospels.
Rem. You mean that as a man in Christ I am marked by righteousness. The Lord is said to have loved righteousness and to have hated lawlessness.
{232}
J.T. But, then, that is only one feature. You have to study the gospels to find out what Christ was under God's eye.
Rem. What are the marks of one in the good of reconciliation?
J.T. He would come out here like Christ as a lover of righteousness. You would look for all the marks of Christ in him. He has no less in his mind that that, and reconciliation involves that.
Rem. Was the apostle referring to himself when he said "I know a man in Christ"?
J.T. He was referring to himself. Doubtless he would have referred to others had he known them; but he could speak of himself out of his experience.
Ques. Does the apostle limit it to "That we might be made the righteousness of God in him"?
J.T. That is the full result of the death of Christ that he is speaking of.
A.A.T. We know that what follows on new creation is reconciliation but are there other truths as a consequence?
J.T. The truth of the assembly necessarily hinges on it.
The assembly is formed of those who are pleasing to God.
A.M. You are referring to the assembly as the anointed vessel?
J.T. Especially as it is seen in Ephesians: "To him be glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all generations of the age of ages", @Ephesians 3: 21. It is a wonderful conception! The assembly is the anointed vessel down here for the expression of the will of God; but, then, it is in the heavenlies for the setting forth of the glory of God.
-.H. Where do you get the thought of "the anointed vessel"?
J.T. See @1 Corinthians 12: 12, "For even as the body is one and has many members, but all the members of the body, being many, are one body, so also is the Christ. For also in the power of one Spirit *we* have all been baptized into one body ... and have all been given to drink of one Spirit" -- "So also is the Christ", he is referring to the saints viewed as the body and the baptism of the Holy
{233}
Spirit introduces us into that. It involves that I am here for the will of God. There is a vessel here for the will of God now and it is anointed as Christ was. But Ephesians is the assembly in the heavenlies, and it is a vessel of glory.
Rem. Is the world getting any benefit today from reconciliation?
J.T. It is the line on which God is in the saints, as He was in Christ, so now the ministry of reconciliation is to bring all into that. So the apostle aimed to "present every man perfect in Christ", @Colossians 1: 28.
A.F.M. You would expect from the anointed vessel that the glad tidings would go out. When Christ was here He was the administrator of God's glad tidings so the same thing is continued in the saints.
J.T. It is not that the body preaches, but it is evangelical. At the same time you want to set before souls what man is in Christ. The apostle spoke about his "doctrine" and "manner of life". What he was, was in keeping with what he preached.
A.R.S. It has been said by some 'christianity is a failure'. What would you say to a man about the world being reconciled, for the world has not been reconciled?
J.T. The principle is here. "The darkness is passing", John says, "and the true light already shines", @1 John 2: 8. The "true light" is reconciliation really. It is God's thought for man. It is more than His attitude. There is here in this world in the assembly an answer to what Christ is as Man before God, and that is support for the gospel. It says of Christ: "And the light appears in darkness, and the darkness apprehended it not", @John 1: 5. The darkness was untouched in spite of the light; but, in @1 John 2: 8 the darkness is said to be passing -- men are being found after Christ so "the true light already shines". So every man who is truly converted and formed after Christ is a light. He is "true light" and to that extent the darkness is passing. The passing continues.
A.F.M. @John 1:29 says, "Behold the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world". The sin of the world is taken away to the extent in which you have believers.
{234}
J.T. He "takes away the sin of the world" and "baptizes with the Holy Spirit", @John 1: 33. Sin is lawlessness but that which the Holy Spirit brings in is law abiding -- it does the will of God. "The new man, which according to God is created in truthful righteousness and holiness" (@Ephesians 4: 24), and that is "according as the truth is in Jesus", @Ephesians 4: 21.
Rem. Is there an objective thought and a subjective thought connected with reconciliation?
J.T. The objective thought is, what Christ was personally on earth; and the subjective is, that I am brought to it.
A.A.T. You referred to Christ as He was here; but the apostle said: "If even we have known Christ according to flesh, yet now we know him thus no longer".
J.T. That is a question of knowing Him, personally, by acquaintance, that does not set aside, however, that we are to know "Him that is from the beginning", @1 John 3: 13. We are to consider what marked Him "from the beginning".
You cannot know Him any other way now than as He is. What marked Him here was the divine ideal for man, as He was here under the eye of God.
A.R.S. "Henceforth know we no man after the flesh".
J.T. The apostle could say that. He only took account of men as in Christ. If he looked at a christian, he looked at him potentially, not as he was socially. The apostle says "We do not again commend ourselves to you, but we are giving to you occasion of boast in our behalf, that ye may have such with those boasting in countenance, and not in heart. For whether we are beside ourselves, it is to God; or are sober, it is for you. For the love of the Christ constrains us". That was what he was. It was for them to take account of him in that way; not to take account of him as he was in Christ. They had the liberty of boasting in him, for no one walked nearer to Christ than he did. Then he goes on to speak of the way he took account of things: "Having judged this". That is the way I take account of things. "That one died for all, these all have died"; that is the way I look at you Corinthians -- "And he died for all, that they who live should no longer live to themselves,
{235}
but to him who died for them and has been raised". That is how he took account of them and that is the basis of these letters that they should live to Him who died for them. And then he says, "So that *we* henceforth know no one according to flesh; but if even we have known Christ according to flesh, yet now we know him thus no longer". That is how I am looking at things, he says, and, to my mind, it is a great thing to get on these lines -- to take account of the Lord's people in this way. He may say, they are very much unlike all this; but it is a question of the potentiality of the people of God. And what I would say is, the best way to get results amongst the people of God is to pray for them and you will find out that God will give results. But, then, if I pray for them, I must be what I am desiring them to be, and that was what Paul was.
A.F.M. I was wondering if this was apostolic, "*we* henceforth know no one according to flesh", whether it was because of the peculiar way the apostle had taken up service for Christ. It is encouraging to see that we may all follow after this line.
J.T. He undoubtedly could say it in a more pronounced way than any other as he had no natural relationships; but, at the same time, in measure this is the ground that each believer is entitled to take, and should take. You do not look at what they are naturally but what they are morally.
Rem. What they are to Christ.
J.T. God would look at them according to what He has in mind for them and bring it about in them. The nearer one is to God the more one can reckon this way -- you are never daunted nor discouraged.
Rem. Balaam was caused to see how Israel was viewed by God.
J.T. He "saw the vision of the Almighty".
The apostle wanted to impress upon them what his thoughts were: "Whether we are beside ourselves, it is to God". God was the supreme object of his affections. If he got outside of his natural reckonings, as he did at times, it was wholly to be to God; but, if he came back to natural
{236}
reckonings, as he had to sometimes, "it is for you". He loved them wholly. What a man he was under God's eye!
That is the idea of reconciliation.
H.B. Do you think then that reconciliation is so difficult for us to understand because we know so little of what is the other side of death, resurrection?
J.T. You have resurrection brought in, in this epistle, more frequently and earlier than in the first epistle. In the first he is labouring to bring about order and holiness amongst them so he does not come to resurrection, really, until chapter 15, and then he treats of it as a subject by itself. Whereas in this letter he brings in resurrection in chapter 1. He says "that we should not trust in ourselves, but in God which raiseth the dead". He brings it in immediately because the first letter had brought about a state in them which warranted him speaking to them in this way. It is only as we are prepared to leave the earth that we appreciate resurrection. "If one died for all, then were all dead: and that he died for all, that they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose again".
W.B. Do new creation and reconciliation follow upon that?
J.T. That is how it stands here. The apostle works it out from his own exercise, and point of view, so he says "we henceforth know no one according to flesh; but if even we have known Christ according to flesh, yet now we know him thus no longer. So if anyone be in Christ, there is a new creation".
A.F.M. It is simple to see in chapter 12 how such a man goes up. The idea of ascension -- all that is pleasing to God must go up.
J.T. He was not moored to the earth -- no moorings here.
Rem. That is all that will go up.
J.T. The question is whether I am deferring it in my mind -- whether some things I am thinking of will happen before the event. A man in Christ is ready to depart on the morrow, so to speak. He is quite in keeping with the event.
W.B. Enoch would be an illustration.
{237}
J.T. "He had this testimony, that he pleased God", @Hebrews 11: 5. One would like to be in keeping with the event.
W.B. This does not bring you as far as that, does it?
J.T. He is labouring to bring about the great fact of reconciliation.
W.B. It does not give you the going up.
J.T. It shows the adjustment that is necessary in the soul so that we should be equal to the event when it comes.
-.Ho. So here the judgment-seat of Christ precedes the teaching of reconciliation. The prodigal had to have things cleared from his conscience before he entered the house.
J.T. The judgment-seat of Christ is the element here that adjusts things. Things are adjusted by it.
W.B. That is the end of the responsibility, whereas what follows is not a question of responsibility at all.
J.T. You would not like to shut out responsibility.
W.B. I thought it was more the work of God.
J.T. It is; but leading up to reconciliation, and reconciliation is a practical thing. Whilst God brings it about, yet, you have the word here "Be reconciled to God". That is, that I am practically conformed to Christ so I am like Enoch -- I have the testimony, that I please God. So I am prepared for the event when it comes. It was not a surprise to Enoch, he was equal to the event. There is nothing more practical than that. We all look forward to the event -- the rapture -- but is one equal to it, or will it be a surprise?
J.B. What is the difference between reconciliation in Colossians and Ephesians?
J.T. Reconciliation here is set down as a question of God's mind -- "God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself" and He had committed to Paul "the ministry of that reconciliation", and Paul was aiming at it in the Corinthians so he besought them to "Be reconciled to God". But in Ephesians he does not beseech them, he says that both have been reconciled unto God in one body by the cross -- it is already effected. That is, the practical unity that existed between the Jew and the gentile in the
{238}
power of the Spirit was pleasing to God. But that was not seen in Corinth.
A.F.M. The ministry of reconciliation is still being carried on? The apostles were especially gifted in view of it, but still there is a ministry answering to it today.
J.T. The minister must be in agreement with the ministry. What we have noticed in the first letter is that he was in keeping with his ministry. He saw the Corinthians were in danger of worldly principles so he "determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified. And I was with you in weakness, and in fear, and in much trembling", @1 Corinthians 2: 2, 3. He was in that array according to Christ so that they might have the thing before them.
A.N.W. I was thinking that viewing the saints potentially did not prevent the apostle from writing the first epistle.
J.T. He even says: "Purge out therefore the old leaven, that ye may be a new lump, as ye are unleavened", @1 Corinthians 5: 7. That is how he took account of them -- "as ye are unleavened". And, although they were babes, he says: "I speak as to intelligent persons".
W.B. Do you not take account of the whole world in the same light?
J.T. In Romans it is said that the world is reconciled: "For if the casting away of them be the reconciling of the world" (@Romans 11: 15), and that is, perhaps, something least understood of all. God has taken up the world in Christ, and He is not imputing trespasses to the world now.
The line He is on is to bring all into conformity to Christ; but when you come to the saints it is "And you ... hath he reconciled in the body of his flesh through death, to present you holy and unblameable and unreproveable in his sight", @Colossians 1: 21 - 22.
J. S. Does it depend upon the point of view from which we view the world; "Now is the judgment of this world".
J.T. That refers to the world centred in Jerusalem.
That world was judged; but this, the gentile world, is taken up in Christ as the Head of it. That is the secret of God going on with it today. Were it not that Christ is
{239}
Head of it, provisionally, God would not go on with it at all, and He does go on with it until it sets up a rival head -- antichrist.
W.B. The ministry of reconciliation would extend beyond the Corinthians.
J.T. It was the attitude of the apostle. It was necessary that he should say it to them; but it was his general testimony to all men; "We are ambassadors therefore for Christ, God as it were beseeching by us, we entreat for Christ, Be reconciled to God".
W.B. Mr. Darby leaves out the word "you", I notice.
J.T. Wonderful position! To be an ambassador to the world.
Rem. What you would present is, that God is now favourable.
W.B. Will you explain what you mean by saying Christ is the Head of the world now?
J.T. That is the ground on which the gospel is presented to the world now. It is, perhaps, the least understood of any truth; but, when you do understand it, you see the magnitude of God's attitude. He is not saying, If you do not do such and such a thing, such will happen. It is a question of grace reigning and that is absolute. God has raised up a Head for men and presents in that Head all they need, and it is for men to appropriate it.
The world is in reconciliation in that way; but it is the gentile world and they will receive it. So the apostle says, "The offering up of the nations might be acceptable, sanctified by the Holy Spirit".
A.M. What world is it in @John 3: 16?
J.T. That was the world that then existed, as centred in Jerusalem. It is put in the past tense. He had taken it up in David and Solomon.
A.N.W. "Whosoever" could scarcely be limited.
McN. Reconciliation is not then confined to the people of God?
J.T. They are the only ones who come into it practically. The reconciliation of the world belongs to Romans -- so the magnitude of God's overtures to man. It does not
{240}
alter man's state at all; but it brings into evidence what God is in Christ in grace. God makes it so easy for men to draw near. He is not presenting an ultimatum. He presents grace and in such a Man as Christ.
A.N.W. Where does this stand: "All the world may become guilty before God", @Romans 3: 19?
J.T. That is obviously necessary. It is a mercy that God has so arranged things that men should judge themselves. J. S. It is only by leaving the world that we obtain salvation.
J.T. It is not the world in a bad sense. Christ is Head to it in that sense. Forgiveness is presented in Him. Satan is not outwardly the centre of it yet.
Ques. Where does @John 12 come in?
J.T. @John 12 is Jerusalem. The Lord is speaking of the world which crucified Him. As it says in the @Acts 4: 26, 27: "The kings of the earth were there, and the rulers were gathered together against the Lord and against his Christ. For in truth against thy holy servant Jesus, whom thou hadst anointed". The world as it then stood was the world that was set up in David, although politically the Romans had the power, still the temple was in Jerusalem and Satan arrayed all against Christ in Jerusalem; but now that God has presented Christ as Head to the nations, the nations have accepted Him formally.
A.R.S. Is there not a sense now in which we can say, "Now is the judgment of this world"?
J.T. That is right for faith; but, at the same time, God has not changed His attitude towards it at all. What we want to see is the magnitude of God's grace. No question of condoning the sin of the world; but bringing in what God is in His grace.
W.B. Every head set up prior to Christ failed; but now He has set up one Head in Christ and every one is responsible to bow to that one.
J.T. That cannot be ignored, but you are not presenting an ultimatum. Grace reigns, "through righteousness unto eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord". That is the attitude. It is not an ultimatum.
{241}
W.B. If they refuse Christ, there is only one alternative.
J.T. "God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ according to my gospel", @Romans 2: 16. Romans makes that very clear. What you want to get in your mind is what God is in Christ. We take in so little the magnitude of God's grace as presented in Christ. It reigns. He makes it absolute.
-.H. Would you in presenting the gospel exclude the idea of "judgment to come"?
J.T. I would not. It is simply said that "he reasoned". It is not that he pushed it under men's noses.
A.F.M. "Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord we persuade men", @2 Corinthians 5: 11.
J.T. He knew it and he persuaded men; but he would persuade them to be reconciled -- he would persuade them on the line of the gospel.
W.B. Is this testimony, "God ... in Christ", greater than the testimony of Christ in glory as in chapters 3 and 4?
J.T. I do not know. You see, there could be no reconciliation unless Christ had died and was glorified. The ministry of reconciliation involves all that. I mean to say, you could not be as Christ was, unless you know what it is to be in Christ there as He is. We reach reconciliation, practically down here, by the knowledge of our place in heaven, because it is a heavenly man that is reconciled really. How can I be here for God's pleasure unless I am in the sense of my relationship with Christ?
{242}
THE TEMPLE OF GOD
@Numbers 7: 89; @1 Corinthians 3: 16; @Revelation 16: 1
What I have before me is to seek to show that God would have His people in the knowledge of His mind. It was said of old that "God will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets" (@Amos 3: 7), thus indicating that he would take His servants into His confidence, and make known to them what He had in mind to do. We have throughout the scriptures thoughts parallel to this; from the days of the patriarchs, God had introduced the idea of friendship with men. "Shall I hide from Abraham what I am doing?" He said, @Genesis 18: 17. Abraham had the place of friendship with God. God had called him out. He did not make known His thoughts to Abraham in Mesopotamia. He called him out of that country, directing him to go into a land that He would show him. The principle of separation was set forth at that early date, separation from country, from kindred, and from father's house. It was very drastic. But if one were to enquire from Abraham at the time of his old age whether he had lost anything through answering to the call, his answer would be definitely in the negative. Indeed the Spirit of God tells us that he could have returned to Mesopotamia at any time. If he were minded to have returned he could have returned. But Scripture says that he sought with others "a better country, that is, an heavenly" (@Hebrews 11: 16), so that God was not ashamed to be called his God, and Scripture further says, "he hath prepared for them a city", and that was what Abraham sought. If, therefore, one were to enquire of him as to what he had lost in leaving Mesopotamia he could answer by citing the great wealth of blessing that had accrued to him as having hearkened to the God that had appeared to him. He had now the *Living* God as his God. Set Him over against what he had had in Mesopotamia! What did he have there? Dumb idols. Abraham could
{243}
answer that he had a city and a heavenly country. He was, therefore, beloved, well off.
I spoke of that so as to lead up to what I have to say, namely, that being called out, he was qualified to receive a visitation from God, and then divine secrets, divine communications. So it is that christians now are said to be "friends". "The servant knoweth not", saith the Lord, "what his lord doeth: but I have called you friends; for all things that I have heard of my Father I have made known unto you", @John 15: 15. This position of friendship rests on obedience to what the Lord commands (@John 15: 14). As speaking of friends, one may refer to the friendship of the world. Friendship is probably one of the best known things in the world, but it says, "the friendship of the world is enmity with God", @James 4: 4. That is a solemn word for anyone who fraternises with the world. The privilege open to us as christians is friendship with God. There can be nothing, in a sense, more desirable than to be in the possession of the secrets of God. It is open to everyone of us, beloved friends. But in order to find out the secrets of God we have to know the temple. That is what I want to speak about. In using the word 'secrets' -- the secrets of the Lord -- we must learn to fear Him. As I remarked, nothing in a way is more blessed than to be in the current mind of God, to know, in as real a way as you can know anything, what God is doing and what He is about to do, and then to be in full sympathy with Him.
I bring forward the thought of the temple because the temple of God is that in which His mind is. Anyone visiting the temple has to understand it, and as I speak of it I would remind you that He "dwelleth not in temples made with hands" (@Acts 7: 48) lest anyone here has the thought that the temple of God is in any way material. If anyone thinks thus let him be undeceived. The epistle to the Corinthians states plainly "ye are the temple of God" (@1 Corinthians 3: 16), that means christians. Sad things existed at Corinth; the saints there were, nevertheless, God's temple, because the Spirit of God dwelt in them. The Corinthians had a very remarkable beginning. They lived in a city that was famed
{244}
for its architecture, and for its learning, yet one might say some very bad things about it; indeed, its morals were of the worst. The apostle of the gentiles arrived there in the course of his ministry and abode with a man and his wife, named Aquila and Priscilla, "because they were of the same trade", @Acts 18: 3. The only link, in an outward way, that existed between them was that they were tent-makers. There was not much in that to commend them to the inhabitants of such a city, but if you were to listen to the conversation of these three people, in their lodging house, you would have heard wonderful things. In one of them, at least, who was apparently a simple, insignificant man, there was the light of God by the Spirit. Paul knew what all the learned men of Corinth did not know, that Christ had died and had risen and was in heaven; and he knew that God had appointed a day in which He would judge the world in righteousness by that Man. Further, he knew that that Man had a body down here composed of persons, some of them at Corinth, some at Ephesus and others elsewhere. He knew all that, and yet, beloved friends, Paul could be seen toiling with Aquila and Priscilla as a tentmaker. It is possible that some who knew him questioned the wisdom of his occupying any time in making tents, for others, perhaps, could make a tent as well as Paul; but that the apostle was employed in the city of Corinth in making tents should be well noted. And Aquila and Priscilla were his companions. If one could have heard them converse, it would undoubtedly be in regard to God, in regard to Christ, in regard to the assembly. Their conversation would cover the great subjects that involved the light of God in this world.
Well, that was how the matter began at Corinth; Paul preached and the Jews became aroused. When Silas and Timotheus came, he waxed bold in his ministry, as if to indicate that the ministry is aided by sympathy on the part of the saints. The Lord said to Paul, "Be not afraid, but speak, and hold not thy peace: for I am with thee, and no man shall set on thee to hurt thee: for I have much people in this city", @Acts 18: 9, 10. So for eighteen months he
{245}
preached and taught, and now he is gone and he writes to them. He says, "Know ye not that ye are the temple of God". Were he to have expressed his mind fully on this point he could have said, 'I wish you to know that I am not the temple of God, nor is Peter, nor are the twelve at Jerusalem: no; you are it!' We must think of this, beloved brethren. It is not what is at a distance; it is what we have that we have to work with. Of course, the apostles were in the temple; I am speaking of the force of Paul's words locally. But then what did they have at Corinth? They had the Holy Spirit. Just dwell on that for a moment. "The Spirit of God dwelleth in you", he says. Not in any class among them, but the saints in that city were the temple of God. Then he says, "The temple of God is holy, which temple are ye", @1 Corinthians 3: 17. It is not, 'Ye should be' but 'Ye are'. Now suppose that you lived there and that you were exercised, what would you think of this? You might say, 'Now this is a new thought, but then what does it mean? If we are the temple of God and the Holy Spirit dwells in us, then what about the saint that lives next door to me and all the saints in this town? I must look at them in a new light. I must take account of them in an entirely new way if I am to get the gain of this great truth here at Corinth. There is light in every one of them, if I can only get at it. There is power in every one of them, if I can only get at it. Hence I must not suffer sin on any one of them, or anything of that kind; any influence or evil associations render ineffective this great truth that Paul has just written us about. I must look at them in a new way'. It is in viewing the truth of the temple of God thus that we get the good of it now, beloved brethren.
I read the passage in Numbers because it indicates what the temple really is. It is the chapter which records the remarkable unity that existed in Israel at that particular time. The twelve princes "offered", it says; each one offered in his order, and what you find is that in every instance they offered alike. All had typically the same appreciation of Christ. Their measure was the same; the epistle to the Ephesians contemplates this among christians.
{246}
There was no rivalry. They were all in abundance spiritually, and all offered alike. It was a perfect appreciation of unity in appreciation of Christ. In this last verse, we read that Moses went into the tabernacle, the holiest, to speak to God. We should all do this; there can be no better service rendered to the saints than prayer. What I have found is that, if I pray for a brother, I will get power with him. Jacob wrestled with God and prevailed (@Genesis 32:24 - 28). The "Man" would have withdrawn, but the Lord had tested Jacob and Jacob said to Him, "I will not let thee go except thou bless me". He was determined to get blessing. God says, "Thy name shall be called no more Jacob, but Israel: for as a prince hast thou power with God and with men". If I have power with God in prayer, I will have power with the saints that I pray for. I can go and speak to them in that power, power with God and then power with men. So Moses went in to speak to Him, and being there "he heard the voice of one speaking unto him from off the mercy seat that was upon the ark of testimony, from between the two cherubims". The Spirit of God tells us where the voice came from. The world is confused today; there is no definiteness in it. There cannot be, there are so many voices. Here is a voice that issues "from off the mercy seat that was upon the ark of testimony, from between the two cherubims". Now think of all that is involved in that -- a voice coming to us *through Christ*; through the One who did the will of God here. That is what the ark of the testimony testified -- the mercy seat is the lid of it. In that way God speaks. What I want to show you is that the speaking is connected with unity. If we are to get the mind of God it is essential that we should be united. That is the point I want to establish from this passage. Unity is the divine thought. It is said, "Behold how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity", @Psalm 133: 1. So the voice is heard by Moses "from off the mercy seat". It is God Himself speaking to us through Christ. Depend upon it that if these conditions exist, there shall be no lack. We are all essential to this unity. How can I isolate myself if I see that
{247}
I am essential to it, that I am a part of the temple? I must be there. God has thus an opportunity to speak to us by the Holy Spirit and His is a living voice.
I want to say just a word about Revelation. The idea of the temple is very prominent in this book. The word for "temple" indicates the inner house or shrine. What I wanted to call attention to is that when the seven angels that have the seven vials of the wrath of God are to administer the judgment delivered to them, the voice comes out of the temple. It is a great voice. Moses, it says, heard a voice speaking to him, but here a "great voice" comes out of the temple. That is, it is not judgment executed in an arbitrary or promiscuous way, but judgment based on careful discrimination, the discrimination of the temple. The voice says, "Go your ways, and pour out the vials of the wrath of God upon the earth". It is for us, who have part in the temple of God, to note well what is said here. When God undertakes to deal with matters in this world in His righteousness, He begins with the temple. Careful discrimination is made as the judgments are poured out. First, "the men which had the mark of the beast" are affected. Judgment falls on the earth, the ordered state of things where men are banded together and organized. You see God has taken account of things as they are, as they cause the saints to suffer. The second angel pours out a vial on the sea. That is, the masses of men. We often hear of the masses being uplifted. What does it mean? Does it mean enlightened by the Gospel? Not at all. There is an influence abroad that means apostasy in the masses, and so the second angel pours his vial on the masses and they become "as the blood of a dead man", a most remarkable figure. The third angel pours his vial on the rivers and fountains of waters. God thus carefully takes account of the different features of the world. The rivers and fountains of waters refer to the educational influences that are in the world that are teaching men and women to apostatise from Christ. All is taken account of. The fourth angel pours his vial out on the sun. The supreme authority, whatever it may be, is referred to. It becomes so severe that it scorches
{248}
men with fire. Some think they have arrived at an ideal system of government, but God is taking account of what is going on. He is left out and Christ is left out. Is He going to let all this go on for ever? Those in the temple know He is not. The fifth angel pours his vial upon the seat of the beast, the awful person that impersonates all evil. A terrible darkness sets in in his kingdom. The sixth angel pours out his vial on the river Euphrates; 'the eastern question' is in the mind of God. Those of the temple know about it. It is looming up seriously now. What do statesmen know? They are groping in the dark. I am only pitying them. Whereas those of the temple know the mind of God. The seventh vial is poured into the air. It means that Satan's power is dealt with effectively for ever.
Now is not all that important to us, as we are in the light of the fact that the saints are the temple of God? We are in a position, beloved, to have the mind of God about everything. We know His counsels, and we know what He is going to do with this world, which has revolted against Him. So I want to bring this point before you before leaving, that you may in this city see what is the idea of the temple; that the Holy Spirit is here and that in view of certain conditions which Scripture makes plain, holiness and unity, there is liberty for the Spirit to bring in the mind of God. Now if you accept this, as we are all bound to do, the saints will be viewed, perhaps, from a totally different standpoint. If I see clearly that the Spirit of God is in the saints, I want to get the good of His presence. Thus I see to it that there is nothing, as far as I am concerned, that would stand in the way of the full outshining of the light and the power and the blessing available.
{249}
SPIRITUAL INTELLIGENCE
@Romans 12: 1; @Ephesians 1: 15 - 23
I have in mind to speak tonight on spiritual intelligence, having in view that it is one of the great essentials for believers to be spiritually intelligent. It will be observed by those who read Scripture that the Holy Spirit emphasizes the importance of spiritual intelligence throughout. The prophet Hosea speaks about God's people being destroyed for lack of knowledge. And then the same prophet, having spoken of the resurrection of the saints, says, "And we shall know". In that remark one is reminded of John's epistle which speaks in large measure on this subject. In it he says, "We know that the Son of God has come, and has given us an understanding". The Son of God has abolished death. Indeed the mark by which He was marked off as Son was the resurrection of the dead and He has given to us an understanding, "that we should know him that is true; and we are in him that is true, in his Son Jesus Christ. He is the true God and eternal life", @1 John 5: 20. We might say that there is the culmination in the believer of all knowledge in so far as knowledge may be possessed by a finite being, the knowledge of the true God in a Man and the knowledge of eternal life in a Man. In speaking thus of John's epistle one is led to refer to the gospels for a moment. You will recall how in that passage in Hosea the prophet says "we shall know". As raised up, the saints come into the apprehension of the resurrection. We are not literally raised. It is by faith of the operation of God: He raised Him from the dead. As we are risen by faith of the resurrection the road is clear for knowledge. "We shall know, -- we shall follow on to know Jehovah". And so one is led to speak of the gospels because in them we have the presentation of knowledge, or rather we have everything presented from the divine point of view. It is true that we know in part. We do. But there is such a thing as seeing the parts put together. One bit is added to another and so
{250}
on, until we see it as a great whole in Christ, and that is what an understanding of the gospels leads to. We shall follow on to know as we understand the epistles, and as we learn in part we go to the gospels to see the whole, and so to Ephesians to which I hope to refer.
Now I referred to Romans because it is the initial epistle, and I referred to Ephesians because it presents to us the full divine thought in so far as we may apprehend. It is the spirit of wisdom and revelation, mark you! Not the spirit of wisdom and information, but of wisdom and revelation. We must have that for the gospels. They deal with revelation and in order to apprehend revelation we must have the spirit of revelation, and that can only be received from God. The apostle could not impart it to them; he had the knowledge, the doctrine, but he could only pray for the spirit of wisdom and revelation. And now in turning to the gospels one has in mind what John says in his epistle; that is, his reference to knowing the true God and eternal life, both things presented within the compass of a Man. God had said in Jeremiah that He would create a new thing on the earth, a woman should encompass a man. I have no doubt that a woman in Scripture is the subjective side, the side of desire, the side of need and affection. We read of seven women laying hold of a man to be called by his name (@Isaiah 4: 1). They would provide their own bread but would be called by his name. Later it says, "Jehovah hath created a new thing on the earth, a woman shall encompass a man", @Jeremiah 31:22. I have no doubt that the longings of the apostle in his prayers in the several epistles, particularly in Colossians, Ephesians and Philippians, have that in view.
At Sinai, God thundered! He impressed the people with His majesty and dignity, but then in maintaining His dignity in that way before the people, God would come within their range. He began by calling Moses up to the mount, by calling attention to a pattern. He gives him a pattern and the first thing mentioned is the ark, something that could be carried. What is this? It is God come very near to us that He might be, as it were, compassed according
{251}
to the spiritual intelligence that He gives us, that we might know Him. And so, the tabernacle was made in parts, and they were bound together in wisdom, so that it should be one tabernacle as the pattern was given to Moses; then God came near. What grace is in that! True enough the cloud ascended up, maintaining the truth of Him that was there, God Himself, the everlasting God. Moses, knowing it, says, "thou hast been our dwelling place in all generations ... from eternity to eternity thou art God", @Psalm 90: 1, 2. But God came in in grace within the range of an enclosure measuring one hundred by fifty cubits, even within a range of an enclosure of ten cubits. God was there. He was known there. I refer to it so that we might have before us how God has drawn near so that we might know Him. "Am I so long a time with you", says the Lord, "and thou has not known me?" @John 14: 9. What is that? What was the tabernacle but a type of that? It was God Himself come down within the range of that enclosure to be known by His people. God Himself was near and shining forth, and so in Exodus the tabernacle was set up and God comes in. He comes Himself. It was no less than the divine presence and so He speaks to Moses out of the tabernacle and says, 'I am here to be preached, I am here to be known, I am here to be loved'. He made it clear that He had drawn near to them, approached them, loved them. As one said afterwards, "Yea, he loved the people" (@Deuteronomy 33: 3); God's love would lead Him to come so near. He came within their range, within the very thing that their hands had made. Wonderful grace! It was that they might know Him. As later it was said of Zion, "God is known in her palaces" (@Psalm 48: 3); He was known there as a refuge or fortress.
Now in turning to the gospels, you see that they present that very thing: that God had come near in a Man. And what I would remark is that they contemplate intelligence. We may as well make up our minds as to it, that if we are to understand the gospels it must be in the intelligence of the epistles. You have known in part through the epistles, and are now prepared to see the whole scheme of divine
{252}
wisdom and intelligence presented in a Man; a wonderful proposal. Ephesians speaks of God abounding to us in all wisdom and intelligence, and so the first great feature in the gospels is the kingdom. One has remarked that God comes in kingdomwise to be known householdwise. John comes last; the house comes last. Matthew is the kingdom; hence the love of God and the love of Christ; the beneficiaries of redemption take up the book of Matthew and what we find is "Book of the generation of Jesus Christ, Son of David, Son of Abraham". Books are of divine origin. I know that we are living in an age of books, corrupt books, books which when the gospels are understood will be consigned to the flames. As divine books are understood human books are consigned to the flames. That is what happened at Ephesus. So that, "Book" is the first word, and to understand a divine book, wisdom is needed. "None of the wicked shall understand", @Daniel 12: 10. They preach on it, but unless they have the Holy Spirit, they cannot understand. The wise understand. As Hosea says, "Who is wise, and he shall understand these things" (@Hosea 14: 9), and so Daniel says, "I Daniel understood by the books", @Daniel 9: 2. You see how a wise man profited by books.
The Lord had said, "In the roll of the book it is written of me" (@Hebrews 10: 7), possibly the most profound of all books.
When it was written, I do not know, but the very heading of it was that there was One who had come down to do the will of God. Any book that has not that as its basis is worthless. In that book it was written of Christ (in fact every book should be about Christ), "Lo, I come (in the roll of the book it is written of me) to do, O God, thy will".
That was what was in that book. If we could but read that book we should find much. No doubt it all comes out in this gospel -- that is the great thesis -- the coming of Christ to do the will of God, and so this one, "Book of the generation of Jesus Christ, Son of David, Son of Abraham".
And so we find here the power of the kingdom. We are in the presence of the King. We are in the presence of the One who will set up the kingdom which cannot be moved.
As Daniel says, "Thou sawest till a stone was cut out
{253}
without hands; and it smote the image ... . And the stone that smote the image became a great mountain, and filled the whole earth ... . And in the days of these kings shall the God of the heavens set up a kingdom which shall never be destroyed", @Daniel 2: 34, 35, 44. Before you have the kingdom you must have the king, and the "Book of the generation of Jesus Christ, Son of David" presents the King to us; and so the first great feature of intelligence is knowledge of the kingdom in Christ, and that is the epistle to the Romans. You learn it as it benefits you in Romans, but in Matthew I see it in relation to the whole divine scheme. I see it as laid down in that book in which it is written, "Lo, I come ... O God". That is Matthew, and I would urge on young people to consider this -- the knowledge of the kingdom. The kingdom is not only deliverance and power but an order of things. It affords and asserts divine authority, one of the most essential things today. The wreckage of government is strewn all around us, but in the kingdom of God we have the assertion of divine authority, divine power, divine leadership and divine order; these are the things that the kingdom presents to us.
Now I pass on to Mark, because if you have the established kingdom the next thing is that things have to be known by preaching, so the preacher says, "I, the Preacher, was king ... in Jerusalem"; it is not, 'I, the King, was Preacher' but the Preacher is King; in other words the kingdom subserves the preaching but the preaching is His kingdom. Not that it is confined to that, because the King is preached, the person of the Son is preached, the love of God is preached; hence if we have the kingdom, we must have the preaching. Hence Mark begins, "Beginning of the glad tidings of Jesus Christ, Son of God". The kingdom is the great background and support of the gospel.
And the next thing we find is Luke; divine order, no doubt. That is sympathy, the knowledge of God drawn near in the sympathies of a Man. The eunuch had been reading about the Lord as Man, about One who had grown up as a tender plant. There is sympathy at the very
{254}
outset. "He shall grow up before him". How that should appeal to every young christian as to whether you are growing up before men's eyes or before God. Jesus was cast upon God from the very outset of His being here. He grew up as a tender plant before God; then the prophet outlines the manhood of Jesus. Nothing indeed appeals to one more than the manhood of Jesus. Philip preached Jesus. He had to preach the manhood of Jesus, God come near in a Babe, an Infant. God was there: who can deny it? He was there so as to be known to be compassable by us -- the Man Christ Jesus. One has often referred to Moses, one of the finest types. When Aaron and Miriam had rebelled against Moses, the Spirit says, "the man Moses was very meek, above all men that were upon the face of the earth" (@Numbers 12: 3), a forecast of Christ. If anyone should have known Moses, it was Miriam. She had watched him in the river; she knew his beginning, and if we read the gospel of Luke, we shall know the beginnings of Jesus in this world. There was no room for Him. It was not exactly hostility, but the condition of things. In Matthew He is found in a house. Matthew presents the dignity, whereas Luke presents the humanity, of Jesus. A woman was to compass a man, and so you see how in @Luke 7 a woman came in and washed His feet. She began down below. Those feet had carried wonderful things to her, and she followed those feet, the feet of Jesus. In Luke He is anointed. You see how the Lord had come within the range so as to be known and to be loved.
The gospel of John is the final and great feature of divine and spiritual intelligence, because he presents the Son, and he presents Him in the bosom of the Father; He is to be contemplated in that position. It is not a question of what He does for me; it is a question of what He is "We have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only begotten with a father". The spiritual intelligence involved in that is that I see that God has a family, and as having a family He has a house, and as having a house and family He loves in His house and family and is to be known there. Hence the first disciples drawn to Christ enquire,
{255}
"Where abidest thou?" Why should they say that?
Because it suggests the point of view of that evangelist. What can be more precious than to know where He dwelleth and to be invited to come and see, and then to be freely and happily there, if but for two hours. "They abode with Him that day. It was about the tenth hour". What a time they had! I refer to it because it suggests to you what the spiritual intelligence in John's gospel involves for us.
Now just to come back to the beginning, one would like to say a word for beginners; we have all had to begin. Most of us, perhaps, have not got on very far, but you will find that the epistles to the Romans, Colossians, Ephesians and Philippians each speak of knowledge. The apostle prays in each one that those to whom he is writing may have knowledge. Now, John, in writing to the little children, says, "It is the last hour". He does not occupy them with a long period of time but brings it within an hour. "It is the last hour, and ... there have come many antichrists", @1 John 2: 18. The apostle warns the little ones about them. Who of us who has had his eyes opened is not aware of the antichrist? The apostle says, "Ye have heard that antichrist comes". Then he tells them how they are to know him; the antichrist denies the Father and the Son; he throws off christianity altogether. Then he says, "Ye have not need that anyone should teach you", @1 John 2: 27. So you see, beloved brethren, how God has provided for you in the Spirit, and Romans shows us in this passage how the initial teaching of the gospel brings about intelligence in regard of our bodies. "I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the compassions of God, to present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which is your intelligent service". That is in the light of what you have heard. It is intelligent to use what is always available, that is your body, for God and to present it a living sacrifice. One has to go back in the epistle to see how it can be a living one. It says, "If Christ be in you"; that is a wonderful suggestion; Christ in the believer, in the gentile it may be, for in Romans we are gentiles. "If Christ be in you, the body is dead on account of sin, but the Spirit life on account
{256}
of righteousness", @Romans 8: 10. The Lord would only be in our body as it is governed by righteousness. Chapter 6 shows that the members are to be presented as instruments of righteousness, but here the body is to be presented totally by the believer to God. It means that we are to be in accord with that wonderful book to which I have referred: "Lo, I come", a body controlled by righteousness and by the Spirit. They are, as it were, vessels through which Christ is expressed here. What a triumph, that in the gentile world that wonderful saying of Christ in that book should find a reflection in believers doing the will of God. "Be not conformed to this world, but be transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is the good and acceptable and perfect will of God", @Romans 12:2. That is the proposal to us; Christ in becoming Man is reflected in us in our bodies being presented to God a living sacrifice. That is the beginning of christian knowledge. It works out in the way I hold my body. We all know our bodies and it is an immense thing, knowing our natural propensities, to see how God has provided us with the means of putting them to death, so that the Spirit in us is the means of righteousness. So the great end is in the Ephesians where the apostle says that he prays that God "would give you the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the full knowledge of him", @Ephesians 1: 17. What is the knowledge of Him? "Being enlightened in the eyes of your heart, so that ye should know what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints, and what the surpassing greatness of his power towards us who believe". You begin to look at the saints from God's side. How different they look as God's inheritance. "And what the surpassing greatness of his power towards us who believe, according to the working of the might of his strength, in which he wrought in the Christ in raising him from among the dead", @Ephesians 1: 19, 20. How great and full this is! Then he says, "and he set him down at his right hand in the heavenlies, above every principality, and authority, and power, and dominion, and every name named, not only in this age, but also in that to come; and
{257}
has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be head over all things to the assembly, which is his body", @Ephesians 1: 20 - 22. So you see how intelligence which begins and is seen in presenting our bodies to God finds its full answer in the knowledge of God, that He has placed Christ over all things, and that the assembly is His body. Think of having part in that! What an incentive to begin now with those bodies while we are here, and to learn thus, how we are to be the complement of Christ in the aggregate in the future. He is "head over all things to the assembly, which is his body, the fulness of him who fills all in all". How wonderful! The full knowledge of God is apprehended by those who have the spirit of wisdom and revelation.
{258}
CHURCH AFFECTIONS
@Proverbs 31: 10; @Revelation 19: 7
I have before me to say a little tonight about church affections, believing that the Lord is working to bring about such affections, so that the wife feature of the assembly may appear before Him.
In referring to the Book of Proverbs it may be of service that we should be reminded of the nature of the Old Testament and of the ministry of its early prophets, lest we should be in any way misled as to their apprehension of the truth. They did not know as much as we are prone to accredit them with. Peter tells us, "holy men of God spake under the power of the Holy Spirit" (@2 Peter 1: 21), and that they "searched out; searching what, or what manner of time, the Spirit of Christ which was in them pointed out, testifying before of the sufferings which belonged to Christ, and the glories after these. To whom it was revealed, that not to themselves but to you they ministered those things, which have now been announced to you by those who have declared to you the glad tidings by the Holy Spirit, sent from heaven, which angels desire to look into", @1 Peter 1: 10 - 12. Mark you, these same things are now announced to you, and it is they that the prophets desired to look into; God revealed to them that the things they ministered were not for themselves, they were for us. It was the Holy Spirit by whom they spake, and so the things spoken were spoken anticipatively in view of Christ becoming flesh, the Son becoming flesh; and so this book anticipates the assembly. Not that the speaker could open up to you and tell you what this chapter meant. He could not. It was revealed to him that the things he ministered were for the future, even for us. And so he is made to enquire here by the Spirit, "Who can find a woman of worth?" The same writer in the book of Ecclesiastes says, "one man among a thousand have I found, but a woman among all those have I not found", @Ecclesiastes 7: 28. Now, in a
{259}
way, the book of Ecclesiastes does not require the woman, because it announces the preacher -- a preacher who speaks and writes, and the theme for the preacher is the man. If you have found a man you can preach. Thank God, preaching goes on in this world by many who have no knowledge of the assembly at all, but who have some knowledge of Christ. They can preach accordingly in fact, the preaching is about Christ. As it is said, "God's glad tidings ... concerning his Son (come of David's seed according to flesh, marked out Son of God in power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by resurrection of the dead) Jesus Christ our Lord", @Romans 1: 1 - 4. So that in the man we have the subject of the preaching, but then the book of Proverbs is the counterpart, really, of the book of Ecclesiastes and the more you become acquainted with Christ as the subject of the preaching the more will be the necessity for the woman to appear. For "it is not good", it says, "that Man should be alone". God brought the animals to Adam and among them there was not found one his like. Doubtless they exhibited remarkable variety of instinct and intelligence but there was not found one his like; and so God would provide her. And she must be his like.
Now that is what one had in one's mind: that the features of Christ should be reproduced femininely. You see, he would see a lion, or maybe a sheep coming to him, but he would see nothing like himself. He had intelligence to discern the characteristics of each, for whatever name he gave to a creature it is not altered. God altered nothing. But there was nothing like himself, and so the woman comes out. I need not go into detail; but Adam is not present. He is not in his senses; he is asleep and God forms her out of his rib and brings her to him. This was the supreme test of his intelligence. Where did she come from? He says, "This time it is bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh: this shall be called Woman". It was a test of his intelligence and he answered to the test. The woman is there. Now that is what was in my mind -- something for Christ answering to that, for that is the necessity. One would speak with reverence of the necessity of his love --
{260}
the necessity of the love of Christ. The Holy Spirit, who is God, is here with that in view; He is here in relation to the necessities as it were of the love of Christ. You will remember how Abraham selected his servant, the eldest in his house. Sometimes we call him Eliezer but Scripture says it was "the eldest of his house, who ruled over all that he had". Abraham had already light as to Rebecca; after he had offered up Isaac it says that he returned to his young men and went with them to Beersheba and dwelt there; and one came and told him that Rebecca had been born. He knew; he had light about it. But then she has to be sought, and he has to find her -- select her by certain qualities. Abraham might have given him the name of her father and sent his servant there. No, that is not it. We have to find the bride; the wife is to be found by certain traits. The Lord could have told the disciples when they said, "Where wilt thou that we prepare ... the passover?" @Matthew 26: 17. He might have told them the street and the number in it and the name of the man who owned the house. But, no, "Go ye into the city". You see divine things come before our spiritual intelligence, hence he says, "Go ye into the city, and there shall meet you a man bearing a pitcher of water", @Mark 14: 13. You have to look for him; it is a question of having your eyes opened. I refer to that to indicate the principles upon which divine things are. That we have spiritual intelligence is suggested and so I do not refer to the Spirit Himself, but to the principles upon which divine things are here: "There shall meet you a man".
Now there may be someone here tonight who would love to be where Christ is, where He eats the passover with His disciples, for that is where He eats. If there is one here who would love to find that place I would suggest to you the necessity for spiritual insight. The Lord says, "Go ye into the city, and there shall meet you a man bearing a pitcher of water: follow him. And wheresoever he shall go in", that is the thought.
Well now, the servant is the chief ruler in Abraham's house and he is to select the bride, the wife of Isaac, by
{261}
certain traits, and I wanted to speak of one or two scriptures so that we might see these traits. The Lord is looking for them: the Holy Spirit is looking for them: in all His dealings with us He has these traits in view. Now in @Psalm 45 the Psalmist delights to speak about the King. He says, "Upon thy right hand doth stand the queen in gold of Ophir". That is what I would call, if you bear with me in the use of the word, the abstract idea; and I am persuaded that we shall never arrive at an understanding of the assembly unless we see it in that abstract way -- in the counsels of God. We read that the Lord depicts Himself in the parables of the kingdom as a merchant seeking goodly pearls, and when he had found one pearl of great price he sold whatever he had and bought it. The Lord found the church. He sold everything in His life-time here. But then it was not yet the concrete thing. It could not be until the Holy Spirit came down, but he saw the thing; and so it says "Upon thy right hand doth stand the queen" -- the counterpart of the King. Now, how have I to reach that? For it refers to you. One has to learn to take account of the thing in the abstract and, if so, I have to begin with the ideal wife, with what is in view. God purposed that the King must have a queen at His right hand and Isaac must have a bride and so Christ must have the church. And hence the believer begins. The light of the gospel comes and what is that light? It is the light of a Man. If the gospel is rightly presented to your soul it is a Man that is presented to you. "Come, see a man". I have no doubt the woman at Sychar is representative of the preaching in the latter days. She is not the official preacher -- she speaks of what she had discovered. "Come, see a man", she said. "Is not he the Christ?" The thought is put into the soul and nothing is more important to preachers than to present Christ. As I was saying of Ecclesiastes, it is one man among a thousand and that is all you want -- one Man to preach about.
Now in chapter 30 of this book the speaker says, "What is his name, and what is his son's name, if thou canst tell?" so that the preacher has a man, but there is more than a
{262}
man. He is the son; and preachers should be able to tell what his name is. If you begin to tell the name of Christ you have a wonderful theme. The apostle Paul, as you will remember, entered the synagogue in the city of Damascus, and preached "Jesus that *he* is the Son of God".
It was his first sermon -- it is His name. The eunuch said, "Of whom speaketh the prophet this?" The prophet had spoken about a man -- wonderful delineation of Christ.
Isaiah could not have held a reading on chapter 53, nevertheless he saw it and John says, "These things said Esaias because he saw his glory and spoke of him". Hence Philip announces Jesus and you may be sure he spoke about the name. And so Paul in the next chapter, as I said, went into the synagogue at Damascus and preached at once 'Jesus is the Son of God': that is His name. He tells us later "God ... was pleased to reveal His Son in me". He made him known in his soul "that I may announce him as glad tidings among the nations", @Galatians 1: 16. So the preacher has got the name of the Man and a man becomes attractive to the soul. The apostle himself sets the example: he says he "loved me, and gave himself for me", @Galatians 2:20
Think of one who loves you -- you! I do not know of anything that comes to one's soul more forcibly than this -- He loved me. As he speaks of "the brother for whose sake Christ died", @1 Corinthians 8: 11. That is what the Son of God is; He knows you; He died for you; He loved you and gave Himself for you. Now the presentation of Christ in that way brings about affection. We have been speaking of the eunuch and I have no doubt that he is a representative believer. We have been seeing how he was an individual object with God. He traverses the desert and presently a man joins his chariot as if he had fallen down from heaven; it was really so in principle. The man is reading the book of Isaiah the prophet and Philip says, "Understandest thou what thou readest?" -- a voice from heaven! -- a voice to which every one of us should pay attention. I am afraid there is very little reading of the Scriptures. Nothing, no amount of ministry, will take the place of the reading of the Scriptures, the private reading of the Scriptures and the
{263}
family reading of the Scriptures. If these are neglected you will not be much attracted to Christ; and think what a mine of wealth you have in the word of God. And so Philip says, "Understandest thou what thou readest?" What is the good of reading if I do not understand? A great deal of reading is done, I admit, without any understanding, but I do urge the importance of reading. Daniel says, "I ... understood by the books", @Daniel 9:2. He meant the inspired books. If we read with the understanding we shall understand the light of God. Christ would be before the soul, because "they are they which testify of me", He says. Philip preached to him Jesus. "How can I, except some man should guide me?" and Philip began at the same scripture and announced to him Jesus. He came, as it were, from above to him and announced Jesus, so the eunuch says, "Here is water; what doth hinder me to be baptized?" He goes out in that way and goes on his way rejoicing, and Philip is caught away as if he were a heavenly vision. The scene is a heavenly one.
There are many who love the Lord but they have not breasts. Someone has said that orphans do not develop affection and those who have no mothers particularly are wanting in affection. One says, "We have a little sister, and she hath no breasts" (@Song of Songs 8: 8), not that she did not have love; that is not implied. The point is that she had not developed what she had and therefore she did not come beneath the notice of Solomon. But the other says, "My breasts like towers; then was I in his eyes as one that findeth peace". It is as if we are set down together in the light of the love of Christ. There is one brother there -- not a movement in him. He breaks bread like the rest, takes part physically but no spiritual response. There cannot be a doubt but that he loves Christ but what about development? The Lord is set for the development of our affections, so that these breasts are like towers. That is what I had in my mind, that there might be development in the saints of church affections. But you say, what do you mean by church affections? It may be someone here has some conception of love for the Lord in a personal way, but how,
{264}
you enquire, am I to love churchwise? That is an interesting question, because that is what the Lord wants. He does love to have your personal affections; but what about the church, about loving churchwise? The Lord's supper is to teach us how to develop church affection. And I will tell you how it comes about. If you love Christ you love a brother. You say, you love one brother; it may be you have only learned to love your neighbour -- very good if you have. It is a triumph if one can maintain love for a neighbour day in and day out. Suppose we can do that; if you can love him, you can love with him. If you have learned to love him, you can love with him, that is two of you can learn to love the same object. That is simple and that is what I understand by church affections. And the circle becomes far wider until I love all the saints, and hence I understand and enjoy what we have in the Colossians, "Quickened together with him". If I am quickened with Christ, I want all the saints quickened with Christ; and if in Ephesians I am raised up and made to sit together in heavenly places in Christ, I want the saints there. That is how I understand the Lord would develop church affection. Hence one has the breasts like towers. She says, "We have a little sister and she hath no breasts". She has wanted to have her little sister with her. She could teach her how to love and it is a great opportunity of teaching one another how to love. God teaches us. "Ye yourselves are", says the apostle, "taught of God to love one another" and it is in this constant exercise amongst the saints of God that the Lord develops church affection. He sees the thing permeating the company. That is what He is looking for.
So that is what the Spirit of God has in view in this last chapter of Proverbs: "her price is far above rubies. The heart of her husband confideth in her". The Lord is confiding in the assembly because He loves her; hence He says, "For whosoever has, to him shall be given, and whosoever has not, even what he seems to have shall be taken from him", @Luke 8:18. The Lord will not entrust anything to anyone who does not love Him. Love is the thing. Her husband confides in her; that is a prophetic view of the
{265}
assembly; it is based on what the Spirit would provide as the result of the death of Christ. This woman could be confided in, and so "the marriage of the Lamb is come", an occasion of great joy, "his wife has made herself ready". She has done it herself; that is the thing. What are we doing in view of Christ's coming and the marriage? She is wise. It is not here the bride, it is the wife, because it refers to what we are to Christ in the time of His rejection; it is the marriage of the Lamb. The next chapter gives us the glory of the church, but the point is that it is just the wife here, His confidant, the one in whom His heart can safely confide. Can anything be more enticing to the heart than that the Lord can confide in you in His absence? Here it is simply the wife, and she has made herself ready; she has put on such garments as are becoming, and so to her it is granted that she should be arrayed in fine linen, bright and pure. It is not here a gorgeous display of colours. The colours in Scripture have reference to variety of public glories. They are for display. It is essential purity -- that which is known in private. "And it was given to her that she should be clothed in fine linen, bright and pure; for the fine linen is the righteousnesses of the saints". The King has a queen, but how do the saints come to the good of the position? Well, the first thing in @Psalm 45 is "Hearken, daughter, and see, and incline thine ear ... and the king will desire thy beauty". The Lord sees His own beauty taking form in you and He desires it. And it goes on to say "All glorious is the king's daughter within; her clothing is of wrought gold. She shall be brought unto the king in raiment of embroidery". Embroidery is one stitch after another; it is not a power loom: it is not machine work. Christendom is full of machine work; things are turned out in the mass but that is not divine. Fine linen is the righteousnesses all put together divinely, one stitch after another. It is the daily thing, the work of the Spirit through the exercises of the saints. That is what it is, so that she is all glorious within. This is the King's palace; it is within His apartments. That is the exercise, you see. One speaks of His unrebuking gaze -- lovely thought! He sees you in
{266}
His own perfection so the heart is perfectly at rest. There is not a discrepancy, the assembly is in accord with that palace.
We learn in part and we can only minister in part, but the thought is to offer a suggestion, and if we have before us that the Lord is seeking to produce church affections and to bring about the ability to love together, we see that it is thus that the assembly is formed. So it says "His wife has made herself ready"; things are granted to us so that we should be arrayed in fine linen, that we should have the very best.
{267}
THE INHERITANCE
@Acts 26: 18
In reading this verse I wish to call attention to the thought of the inheritance. I hope to refer to other scriptures later on. I read this because it contains the Lord's opening words to Paul, and in that word He announces His thought of the inheritance and too, that it should be among the sanctified. One has a sense that many receive the light of the gospel and fall short of the thought of the inheritance, hence they do not find that compensation which the Lord intended they should, for that is a present position. We have in Colossians that the Father hath "made us fit for sharing the portion of the saints in light", @Colossians 1: 12. We need that portion, and I would suggest that there is that which is provisional for us, and that which is eternal, and what impresses me is that we largely miss what is provisional and that is a portion now of the inheritance. "Our inheritance", that which is peculiarly our own, is opened up to us in Ephesians, and of that inheritance we have but the earnest now. "In whom also, having believed, ye have been sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise, who is the earnest of our inheritance to the redemption of the acquired possession", @Ephesians 1: 13, 14. I need not suggest that the earnest of a thing is not the thing itself. But then there is that which we have now, and that does not need an earnest. The inheritance of which we have an earnest is one which is peculiarly ours, and which is not shared by others; but then we come into an inheritance which others can share in, and in the meanwhile, so as to furnish us by the way we have this inheritance.
I wish particularly to dwell upon those things, not that one can ever exhaust them, but I would suggest what we have in the way of inheritance at the present time. The Lord had that in mind in this passage, "That they may receive ... inheritance among them that are sanctified by faith in me", @Acts 26: 18.
{268}
Now I would read @Deuteronomy 33: 1 - 4. The Old Testament greatly aids us in the understanding of all truth; it was written for our learning, so I would refer to the feature of our inheritance in Deuteronomy in the blessing of Moses the man of God. God loved the people. That fact should be well noted, for it lies at the bottom of all His activities on our behalf. One in the throes of the conviction of sin is not prepared for the great fact that God loves him; he needs forgiveness, the gospel announces forgiveness; then after forgiveness is known and the Spirit received the precious fact that God loves comes home. So Moses said, "Yea, he loveth the peoples", and he had said, "Jehovah came from Sinai, and rose up from Seir ... . From his right hand went forth a law of fire for them". The law was not against them for nothing that issues from God can be against us. The Lord says He is for them, so Moses says, "Yea, he loveth the peoples". Then it goes on, "Moses commanded us a law, the inheritance of the congregation of Jacob". I wish to speak especially of that. The law was a heritage; we shall not need it in heaven, so there is no question of having an earnest of that inheritance, we have got the whole thing, and we do well to note it. This is connected with Romans and Corinthians -- a precious heritage -- without it a journey through the wilderness would be impossible. So that the law is regarded as a "heritage".
It is not the congregation of Israel, but the congregation of Jacob; Romans and Corinthians contemplate the congregation of Jacob, that is to say, we are all conscious of the authority of Christ, we have wills and these wills need to be broken -- they do -- and one of the great services that the Lord renders is to break my will, or, rather, to subdue me.
It is me, the person that has to be subdued, and the Lord will not move on with us unless we are subject to Him.
Nor shall we freely and happily enjoy our portion unless we are subdued. So Paul says to the Roman saints, "ye have obeyed from the heart the form of teaching into which ye were instructed", @Romans 6: 17. It was delivered to the early saints, and those in Jerusalem continued steadfast in the apostles¬ doctrine. I understand by that that the
{269}
authority of Christ is asserted in the way of teaching. The first great instruction that we get from the Lord is that we should be subject. Romans is the authority of the Lord for individuals. Corinthians is the inheritance for all the congregation of Jacob. We may not regard the inheritance in that respect. The epistles to the Corinthians are a precious inheritance of the congregation of Jacob. I apprehend that the congregation of Israel applies more to Colossians and Ephesians; Jacob is the saints viewed in responsibility, and this precious inheritance is the teaching that refers to the authority of God in Christ. God must rule in individuals first, then in the assembly, therefore we read "a law, the inheritance of the congregation of Jacob". Many of God's dear people do not value this inheritance; they take their own way; they link themselves up with all kinds of associations: they have no regard for what the law says in Corinthians. The Lord said, "He that has my commandments" (@John 14: 21), who is the 'he'? One of the congregation of Jacob. "He it is that loves me; but he that loves me shall be loved by my Father, and I will love him and will manifest myself to him". How many there are who disregard that. I suppose in any country one of the most valuable items is the established law, as in this country we have the Magna Charta, and all the laws hang upon it. What community can subsist without a law, how much less the congregation of Jacob where God is to be known. God proposes to walk among us, and how can that be apart from a law to regulate us? The first epistle to Corinthians insists on holiness, the second is the bringing in of love so that God might dwell. What a precious inheritance! Then we have the very groundwork, the love of God. We do not want the earnest of the love of God; we have got the love of God. Think of the inheritance we have come into, it is not only attested to in the death of Christ, but the Holy Spirit has brought it in too. The Holy Spirit is not here as the earnest of the love of God, for He has brought it in. The love of God is here in this world, but apart from the recognition of the inheritance of the law it is impossible to enjoy the love of God. If
{270}
my will is active how can I enjoy the love of God? The Lord's supper brings in to us, in the body of Christ, the witness that the will of God has been carried out. If I put my hand forward and partake of it, it is a very solemn act, for I am committing myself to that in which the will of God was carried out here. Any other line is inconsistent. "Behold, I come, in the volume of the book it is written of me -- To do thy good pleasure, my God, is my delight", @Psalm 40: 7, 8. I would say that that book is the foundation of all books, any book not founded on that is not fit for a christian library. What is not founded on the will of God must be spurious. The bread is the communion of the body of Christ and it places on me an obligation to pursue the course of subjection to God. Then that brings in what God is to me. So the cup is called the cup of blessing, it is a positive thing, present to me.
When I come to the love of God I come to a heritage which others share; every family will share the love of God. The love of God is expressed in the new covenant, and that is ours, a present heritage. The Lord would have us to be, happily in the enjoyment of the love of God. "He that abides in love abides in God", @1 John 4: 16. "Hereby we have known love, because *he* has laid down his life for us; and *we* ought for the brethren to lay down our lives", @1 John 3: 16. This is present love, and where that is God dwells, therefore the two letters to the Corinthians bring in the covenant and make room for God to dwell.
Then there is the Father's love, that is not the love of the covenant, but the love that Jesus knew down here and He calls that a heritage. He says, "Jehovah is the portion of mine inheritance", and then "the lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places: yea, I have a goodly heritage", @Psalm 16: 5, 6. He refers to the lines of Joshua and Eleazar; you remember how Moses gave an inheritance to the two and a half tribes, well, the Lord does not refer to that, for that was on the wilderness side of Jordan. He referred to the lines that Joshua and Eleazar knew. Think what Jesus found in His life here. His lot was the Father. He had a goodly heritage. John says, "We have contemplated
{271}
his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father", @John 1: 14. They saw what He had, He enjoyed continually the Father's love. I need not say that that is not covenant love. It is a love of relationship, a family love, the Father's love. The most precious feature of our inheritance is what lies in the family, and we have not the earnest of that, for we have got the thing itself. We cry "Abba, Father" by the Holy Spirit -- we are brought into direct relationship with the Father, and the Son, and we have got the spirit of that relationship. It is a present thing, a rich heritage -- the Father's love, the Son's love and the love of the brethren, so that we have truly, as Jesus had, a goodly heritage.
There is that which is beyond the Jordan, and so in Ephesians we have "our inheritance" in the passage read. The inheritance in Ephesians is our inheritance and that is over Jordan, and of that we have but the earnest now. But what an earnest! The Holy Spirit who knows every part of that domain has come down to make known in our hearts in principle what we are soon to be introduced into. In the Ephesian epistle we are blessed with every spiritual blessing; where? In the heavenlies. The Lord would divert us from earth, for the more you lay hold of what is properly ours the less you will think of what is not ours. "If ye have not been faithful in that which is another's, who shall give to you your own?", @Luke 16: 12. Our own is Ephesians. "Arise, shine! for thy light is come, and the glory of Jehovah is risen upon thee", @Isaiah 60: 1. That is what Ephesians is to us, the fight which refers to us exclusively. So we are blessed "with every spiritual blessing in the heavenlies in Christ", @Ephesians 1: 3. How the heart and mind expand at the thought of it. So the apostle prays to the Father of glory, that He "would give you the spirit of wisdom and revelation", @Ephesians 1: 17. The things that belong to us are so great that in chapter 3 he bows his knees "to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom every family in the heavens and on earth is named, in order that he may give you ... to be strengthened with power by his Spirit in the inner man; that the Christ may dwell,
{272}
through faith, in your hearts, being rooted and founded in love, in order that ye may be fully able to apprehend with all the saints what is the breadth and length and depth and height; and to know the love of the Christ", @Ephesians 3: 14 - 19.
These dimensions refer to us only. There are no dimensions found elsewhere. If you think of the height you think of Christ ascended, if you think of the depth you think of the love that led Him to go so low. Then you think of the wide domain in which the love of Christ is known in relation to all the saints. There is not one omitted from that. If I know what the love of Christ is then the thing is to apprehend it with all the saints.
The Lord would touch us in regard to what is our own. That which is for every family is what we are enriched by in the wilderness; but there is that which is particularly our own and of that we have the earnest, the earnest of the Spirit; the Spirit would lead us more into the apprehension of it, and that brings you to eternity.
<blockquote>'And see! the Spirit's power <br>Has ope'd the heav'nly door, <br>Has brought us to that favoured hour <br>When toil shall all be o'er'. </blockquote>
However many visits I make there, I can never define to you what I see there. Paul said after fourteen years, "Whether in the body I know not, or out of the body I know not, God knows". God inhabits eternity, but I am to be there; I already have access there and that is peculiar to our dispensation. You remember the feast of weeks; the Jews were to go up to Jerusalem three times every year. The feast of weeks is not limited. Why is that? Because the believer has to count from the time the sheaf is offered up. There are fifty days, if you count those fifty days spiritually, you arrive at eternity. What does the counting mean? The Lord remained after His resurrection forty days, then they began to count. The sheaf was offered to Jehovah when Christ rose from the dead, and you count from when it was offered.
{273}
Every day would bring in some fresh thought of that Man risen. He had risen and left all the grave clothes behind; not like Lazarus who came out bound hand and foot with grave clothes. The Lord came in through closed doors on the first day of the week. "Ye shall count". What an experience! An experience of the Lord coming in through closed doors. It was spiritual experience. The apostle writes, "If even we have known Christ according to flesh, yet now we know him thus no longer", @2 Corinthians 5: 16. We have got to learn to know Him thus, and so you go on counting until you come to fifty days of spiritual experience. These are wonderful days if you count them with Christ. The assembly's history is a history of weeks; the believer's history is made up of days; but whether days or weeks, it ends in a feast of no limitation. It begins when the Spirit's power opens the heavenly door. We are linked up with eternity already. In those countings we arrive spiritually at the time when we have access to heaven itself. That is our own inheritance, and we have in the Holy Spirit the earnest of it now.
{274}
THE SPIRIT AS THE EARNEST OF THE INHERITANCE
@Philippians 3: 12 - 14; @Numbers 21: 16 - 18; @Numbers 27: 12 - 21
I had in mind, dear brethren, to consider the inheritance, so that we might be encouraged to lay hold of what is peculiarly our own, and for this what is needed is a recognition of the Spirit as the earnest of the inheritance. The Spirit of God carries on a varied service on our behalf. Indeed, as here, He has undertaken everything -- He is that other Comforter of whom the Lord spoke who should take His place on His going away. He has been here for nearly two thousand years, maintaining this service in infinite vigilance, omitting nothing, overlooking nothing so that the assembly should have no lack, should want nothing, and His mission on earth is not yet finished. No, He is succeeding in developing in the saints some outline of assembly formation and beauty, working unceasingly, for the assembly is of Christ and every bit of formation is by the Spirit; all has reference to Christ, so that God delights in the feminine features at the beginning; the Lord was delighted as His eye saw the beauty of the assembly and as His heart found a response in the early days. He said in outlining her beauty that "the king is fettered by thy ringlets" (@Song of Songs 7: 5), her head is like Carmel and the locks of her head like purple -- He was held there by her beauty, that beauty that began to appear in individuals before He left Bethany. The Holy Spirit is working to bring about assembly formation and beauty according to what was at the beginning. At the end it is said, "I, Jesus, ... I am the root and offspring of David, the bright and morning star", @Revelation 22: 16. Every christian who rightly understands the gospel would understand this announcement. Hence the Spirit and the bride say, Come. The Spirit has secured her -- she is the product of His mission on earth which has extended over these two thousand years. As I said He has now succeeded. What that
{275}
history has been no church writer can convey, no church historian ever conveyed the items of the history; the Holy Spirit alone can convey what that history has been and what infinite patience has marked Him in waiting on the saints. Hence, the Lord says that if anyone should speak against the Spirit there should be no forgiveness. One can well understand it, beloved. But notwithstanding the insult and the blasphemy offered to Him, He broke us down and we are here today as the fruit of His service, or we are not here rightly, and these are occasions of the Spirit to bring to our attention what we need. So, beloved brethren, what I would seek is to show how an appreciation of the inheritance and the enjoyment of it depend on the Spirit in us, and not only on the Spirit Himself but on the work to which I refer. As one said, "Things which eye has not seen, and ear not heard, and which have not come into man's heart, which God has prepared for them that love him, but God has revealed to us by his Spirit; for the Spirit searches all things, even the depths of God", @1 Corinthians 2: 9, 10. Think of that -- the Spirit that dwelleth in us searcheth the depths of God. We read of the depths of Satan -- He does not search those. There are those today who are active under the direct energy of Satan; they would enter the domain of hades; what a terrible word! The Lord Jesus has the keys of death and hades. Is He opening the door to you? No, beloved, they are labouring at their own expense and to their own destruction but the blessed Spirit of God, who indwells us, searcheth the depths of God. What profound things there are to be provided. In Scripture we have a perfect record of things. The test for everything today lies in relation to the power of the Son and the Spirit. We are baptized, indeed, to the name of the Father, and of the Son and of the Spirit, and it is for us to enter into all that is disclosed. The Spirit, it says, searches all things, yea the depths of God, and so we are dependent on Him if we are to apprehend and enjoy our own inheritance. We must recognize the Spirit as the power for it, for that is one of His great offices, to bring us to the enjoyment of our own inheritance, and I think, beloved, it
{276}
begins as we by the Spirit cry "Abba, Father". There is much bound up in that, but that cry in a believer involves that he is brought to the heavenly door.
And now I wanted, by the Lord's help, to show you briefly from Numbers how the spiritual state and desire for the inheritance is brought out and how it corresponds with it. God Himself selects Joshua, the one who is to bring them into the possession. Moses, acting under divine command, set a man who had the Spirit before Eleazar and before the whole assembly. The Holy Spirit intends to convey in those beautiful words that we are dealing with what is spiritual; in this way we are helped by the Old Testament scriptures. Holy men of God spake under the power of the Holy Spirit. The Holy Spirit knew what He was saying and it was in view of us. Joshua was a man with the Spirit and we see that we are dealing with what is spiritual, what is properly our inheritance typified in the literal land of Canaan. In chapter 21 you have the recognition by the saints of the Spirit. You will remember that after the passage of the Red Sea it says, "Then sang Moses and the children of Israel this song to Jehovah, and spoke, saying, I will sing unto Jehovah, for he is highly exalted". This song stands out in every believer's history as he apprehends the overthrow of death and of Satan's power in the death of Christ. But you will observe that it is not Moses and the children of Israel that sing the song in @Numbers 21. It is Israel alone that sings, "Rise up, well!" Considerable history had intervened. Moses had, alas, owing to the provocation of the people, disqualified himself, and he is not to be the leader in the spiritual inheritance. It is not now what comes down -- the fact of the Holy Spirit coming down is one of the most wonderful things, but then the next thing is, beloved, the rising up or ascending (the original word really is 'ascend'). From this point onwards our songs of degrees begin -- songs of degrees or songs of ascension. The Lord Jesus came down and stood on a plain. We receive the forgiveness on the plain and we receive the Spirit on the plain, but as we recognize the Spirit the thought of ascension comes in and if we are not on the
{277}
ascending line we may depend on it we will soon be on the descending line. I have been speaking of the depths of Satan. Proverbs speaks of the foolish woman -- her guests are in the depths of hell. For the christian it is either ascending or descending. I cannot remain on the plain. I shall either ascend in the power of the Spirit of God or be on the descending line. And so the song is "Rise up, well!" I am conscious of the power of ascension in me. I hope you young people will lay hold of what I am saying. I have often thought of the birds as a type. There are clean birds and there are unclean birds. They both can fly. An unclean bird is one that has sufficient means in this world to rise above the heads of others -- to soar away -- far away from the ordinary level of humanity. The clean bird is one that has got power of a different kind. If he soars it is not in pride -- he soars in the power of the Spirit -- he begins to ascend -- he has got a song for every ascent as it were and I believe this is the first one: "Rise up, well! Sing unto it: well which princes digged". Thank God for the princes. Princes are not mere officials. A prince is a man who is morally great. A prince is one who has qualified morally. He digs the well. There are those, beloved, whom God has raised up, so that the Holy Spirit might be free and the result is that wonderful things have come to light. The princes digged the well by the direction of the lawgiver, that is, under the direction of Christ, surely, but nevertheless they say that the Holy Spirit was here and that He suffices for the assembly. No need of man. As John said, "Ye have not need that any one should teach you; but ... the same unction teaches you". More than that -- by that same Spirit the saint is united to Christ; we are part of one thing as we are constituted one body by the Spirit, but the most marvellous of all is that we are united to Christ -- the assembly is linked up with Christ by the Spirit and where He is she must be. The principle from the outset is ascent, and so the Lord says to Mary, "Go to my brethren and say to them, I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God". That word 'ascend' would become a family word henceforth. Mary brought it into the company
{278}
from the lips of a risen Christ, from the lips of; Christ who was about to ascend; she brought it in with her lips. How the Holy Spirit would use it! I have often thought, dear brethren, of what conversations the apostles and the other saints would have as they met together in later years; how they maintained their freshness; how they, would revert to that wonderful moment when Mary came in. How radiant her face must have been; how full her, heart must have been as she approached the company of the brethren and told them what she had seen and that He had spoken these things to her. Do you think she omitted anything of these things? Certainly not -- the words were full of meaning -- every word but particularly that word "I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God". Nothing but love marked that company and if Mary were present on those occasions how heartily she would have joined in, and how the Lord would come before her! So the desire to be with Him should fill our hearts with the thought of where He is. Nothing less than that, for He had already told them that "where I am, there ye may be also" and so, since the Spirit has linked us with Christ, our Head, in heaven, the power that we are conscious of in His presence would lead us to rise up as the Lord had said "the water which I shall give him shall become in him a fountain of water, springing up into eternal life".
Now, as earlier in the history of Israel when the first thought of the Spirit came in in the smitten rock (@Exodus 17: 6) so the first move of the Spirit in the soul brings out the bitter opposition of Satan in the flesh. You have to look out for that. Joshua appears at once because it is a question of your hidden history, not what you are in the presence of the brethren, but what you are with God; that is the point. Joshua has to do with the hidden or spiritual history of the saints, not our public history; Moses has to do with our public history. Hence "your life is hid with the Christ in God", @Colossians 3: 3. That is the principle with Joshua. Amalek appears immediately after the rock was smitten so that they might drink of the water. He would hinder the people from entering into their spiritual inheritance; he
{279}
would keep you out at all costs. There is, beloved brethren, a constant spiritual warfare, a constant endeavour to keep the people of God out of their inheritance, but God is acting for us. We know that. In @Numbers 21 they recognize the Spirit, and although Balaam, failing to curse the people or to induce God to curse them, sought to corrupt them through family relationships and social links, the plague was stayed and the people were brought into their inheritance; hence they are numbered for the inheritance in chapter 26 and in chapter 27 the five daughters of Zelophehad come forward for their inheritance. I appeal to everyone here -- what an appreciation have we of this rich inheritance which God has for us, this "incorruptible and undefiled and unfading inheritance, reserved in the heavens for you", @1 Peter 1: 4? Satan cannot touch it. He can touch us for the moment but the inheritance is reserved for us; it is eternal, beloved; it is as God is; it abides and these daughters of Zelophehad would have it. They come forward to Moses and Eleazar the priest and the princes and the whole congregation -- they stand out, beloved, in front of all. Where are we as to laying hold of what is spiritual -- the spiritual inheritance that God has got for us?
Moses loved the inheritance. Oh, he said, I would like to go over there. I would like to see that holy mountain of righteousness. I would love to be there. Ah, but you cannot go, Moses, but I will let you see it. And God showed him all the land. And now, He says, now you see it you will have to die as Aaron did. Sorrowful sentence but humbly accepted by the great lawgiver when he says to the Lord "set a man over the assembly". What a man Moses was! How unjealous he was. He knew Joshua, for Joshua had been his minister. He says to Jehovah "let Jehovah, the God of the spirits of all flesh, set a man over the assembly, who may go out before them, and who may come in before them, and who may lead them out, and who may bring them in". God is dealing with our spirits. He is the Father of spirits, is chastening us that we might become partakers of His holiness. He is preserving our bodies and forming us in our circumstances -- but it is the spiritual part of us
{280}
that refers to God. He will have us perfect. "The spirits of just men made perfect". So this leader reminds us of Christ. He gives us liberty to go in and to go out. That is spiritual. We need to be diverted from what is merely, natural to what is spiritual. The writings of John are intended to promote spirituality in us; to make us spiritual; to go in and to go out is spiritual and Joshua has to do that. Hence Jehovah says, "Take Joshua the son of Nun, a man in whom is the Spirit, and thou shalt lay thy hand upon him". It undoubtedly refers to the Spirit of God in Joshua and indicates that Christ puts us in the possession of the inheritance in a spiritual way.
Well, let us turn to the Lord to know what this means. The Lord gives us understanding. But you say, 'It is a spiritual matter and we have got to know how to enter spiritually'. We find Joshua has got the Spirit, meaning that the Lord Jesus has to be apprehended in a spiritual way as He was apprehended during the forty days of His sojourn on earth after His resurrection. It is in apprehending those forty days that we understand Joshua here by the Spirit. Joshua had the Spirit and we are conducted in in a spiritual way. Hence the great need of our spiritual formation so that, as I apprehend, the apostle was on this line in his great service here and the great result, the one thing before him as he considered his own thought and aspirations, was that he might apprehend that for which also he was apprehended; that he might run so as to obtain the prize of the calling on high. Mark you, not simply the calling but the calling on high of God in Christ Jesus. I consider this a good note of christian experience and I would put it before the brethren as simply and yet as positively as I can. He says, "One thing -- forgetting the things behind, and stretching out to the things before, I pursue, looking towards the goal, for the prize of the calling on high of God in Christ Jesus", @Philippians 3: 13, 14. He had been in then and had seen more than anybody. He says, "I know a man in Christ, fourteen years ago, (whether in the body I know not, or out of the body I know not, God knows;) such a one caught up to the third heaven", @2 Corinthians 12: 2. That
{281}
was his experience. What it is to be in Christ as spiritual, in heavenly glory; to be with Him, to be in that domain, beloved, where He is, with Him as He says, "Where I am ye also may be", @John 14: 3. One often goes back to the lines
<blockquote>'And see! the Spirit's power <br>Has ope'd the heavenly door, <br>Has brought us to that favoured hour'. </blockquote>
You see the Holy Spirit brings us to it and that experience begins with the passage where you refer to the Spirit, "Rise up, well! sing unto it".
{282}
GOD'S SOVEREIGNTY SEEN IN JUDAH
@1 Chronicles 5: 2; @Genesis 49: 8 - 12
J.T. This is a subject that, I am sure, will furnish interest. The gospel of Matthew would be the expansion of these references. It comes in on the side of God's sovereign election, whereas Luke presents the subject of the Lord's coming more from the side of faithfulness.
Ques. Would Joseph suggest Luke more?
J.T. Yes. What did you have in mind?
Rem. It was only that you were speaking of Matthew on the line of sovereignty. What was seen in Joseph was an answer to the devotedness and pressure and suffering in grace which brought salvation to man, the grace of God, which in the man of that order brought salvation to all men.
J.T. That is very interesting and would fit in with Luke.
A.F.M. Then royalty comes in in Joseph in that connection.
J.T. In Luke it begins with Zacharias and Elizabeth, who were blameless before the Lord. That side is enlarged on.
Ques. Would Mark suggest Levi and the line of service?
J.T. Yes, quite. Your thought is that Levi corresponds with Mark?
Rem. I thought that the gospel of Mark would correspond with levitical service.
J.T. Well, I see in Luke that the Holy Spirit introduces certain servants at the beginning and speaks of their blamelessness. More is spoken of Mary in Luke than of Joseph. Judah is said to have prevailed among his brethren.
W.R. Would you attach importance to the history of Judah, particularly as to the affection that he bestowed on Joseph?
J.T. He is said to have prevailed among his brethren. That came out in connection with Joseph.
Ques. Would the references to the women in the genealogy in Matthew, which was on the line of Judah, bring
{283}
out the thought of the sovereignty of God? I mean God's right to take up whom He will, the Moabite, or the Canaanite, or whoever it be; He has got the right to bring whomsoever He will into association with Judah, because he was the one who was to prevail.
J.T. I am sure that is so.
Rem. We would naturally have discarded the women from the line, but there is the majesty of God's sovereign right; He will take the vilest, and He will bring in the One who was to prevail.
A.F.M. Does this line that you have in your mind suggest the responsible side? It was not his own exercises which led up to this.
J.T. There was that in him that injected rule. As prevailing among his brethren, he furnishes the occasion for the selection. It is said "Of him was the prince", @1 Chronicles 5:2.
W.R. Do you think Jacob would have this in his mind regarding Judah prevailing?
J.T. I think it is a prophetic utterance. The tribes of Reuben and Simeon and Levi having failed utterly, Judah comes in in view of their breakdown. The breakdown occurs in 1 Samuel, and royalty is in view, that is, the priest was henceforth to be subordinated to the King, he should walk before His anointed for ever, the anointed being the King. Recovery is in the King, so that the reference to the sceptre and lawgiver in connection with Judah in @Genesis 49 is a prophetic announcement of the entrance of the King.
We have Reuben failing in corruption, and Simeon and Levi in violence; then there is the scattering, but now they are to be gathered; "The sceptre will not depart from Judah, nor the lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh come, and to him will be the obedience of peoples".
Rem. It tends to unity.
J.T. I am sure that is the suggestion, hence the prevailing among his brethren furnishes the occasion for royalty. "Judah -- as to thee, thy brethren will praise thee".
Rem. In @Genesis 37: 21, you find they are about to slay
{284}
Joseph and cast him into some pit and Reuben steps forward and says, "Let us not take his life".
J.T. Judah said, "He is our brother, our flesh". He claims him as his relative; and later he prevailed over his father. Jacob denied Reuben's right to Benjamin and refused the offer of his two sons as hostages, but he accepted Judah's earnest presentation of the case. I think you see how the idea of rule is brought out in the history of God's ways and how Judah should prevail among his brethren.
A.W. That throws light on the reference in Judges to there being no king, showing there is a need for a king to come rather than a priest.
A.F.M. And would the reference in Zechariah come in here -- "He ... shall sit and rule upon his throne; and he shall be a priest upon his throne; and the counsel of peace shall be between them both", @Zechariah 6: 13?
J.T. Quite.
Rem. Saul was the people's choice because of his natural qualities and appearance; he evidently was not the man of God's choice; he was not of the tribe of Judah, and Judah was to prevail in God's sovereignty. Is spiritual instinct seen in that Samuel's heart is burdened in the anointing of Saul, but relieved as he anointed David?
J.T. You feel that in the anointing of David you are, so to say, in the 'trade winds'; you are in the current of the Spirit. The anointing of Saul was a very tame affair. There was no affection at all in connection with it and so the thing was done as it were privately, but David was anointed in the midst of his brethren. The Holy Spirit would have it so. You are in the full current of the Holy Spirit in that passage.
Rem. So that the first man has to come in in order that he may be exposed and removed, whereas the second man, the man of purpose, is surrounded with spiritual affection.
J.T. The bringing in of Saul served as an occasion for man's exposure, but God has His own man. This is seen when Saul broke down. The choice of Saul at that time was the result of the exercises of the people, but when David appears on the scene, the Holy Spirit says to Samuel,
{285}
"This is he". We are told what he looked like. He was ruddy and of a beautiful countenance, so that we are now in the full current of the Spirit of God and the gospel of Matthew is the opening up of it.
Matthew is a beginning, "Book of the generation of Jesus Christ, Son of David, Son of Abraham". The Holy Spirit proceeds immediately to the point that it is not the generations backward, as in Luke, but forward, showing that God began with them.
W.R. So that you could say, "Where is the king of the Jews that has been born?"
J.T. Just so. The book of Chronicles brings it in in that way. We are in the full current of the Spirit from the time David was anointed. The book of Chronicles is from the standpoint of David's anointing; the Holy Spirit stops to point out this, and that would show that God was working.
Rem. The tribe of Judah was the theme in Chronicles.
J.T. You find the Holy Spirit reaches David very quickly in Chronicles; He reaches him in the second chapter, and his genealogy is in the third.
A.F.M. In Matthew you begin with the Person Himself, but in Luke you go backward. Would you mind explaining this?
J.T. The Holy Spirit refers to the genealogy in Matthew and Luke; it is the first thing mentioned in the gospel of Matthew, meaning that they were written to a point, that is, there *had* been a writing; Chronicles had taken up the thread and it was pursued right through. In looking at Chronicles, you will find that it goes past the captivity right on down to persons not otherwise mentioned; the leading thought is the genealogical registration. Now, Matthew takes up that thought, and he begins by saying, "Book of the generation of Jesus Christ, Son of David" -- that is to say, He is of the sovereign line.
A.F.M. Things are left out in Chronicles that would discredit David. What about Luke for a moment?
J.T. He takes up the genealogy from Christ and goes backward to Adam.
W.C.R. Is that because it is a question of birthright?
{286}
J.T. Just so. Luke would show you that the Lord Jesus Christ has a right to a Chinaman as much as He had to a Jew. He has a right to every child of Adam.
A.F.M. Does it not increase the genealogy somewhat -- I mean that these men who preceded brought in such a One?
J.T. Well, Luke begins with Christ and goes backwards, to show you that His rights extend back to Adam. Every child of Adam comes under Him. Luke would therefore establish the great evangelical line of truth.
Rem. In Matthew there is a two-fold testimony, the incoming of light to Israel typified in the two blind men who cry out "Son of David" and the new generation, in children in the temple crying, "Hosanna to the Son of David".
A.W. David is but a man, he is one of the generation in Luke, whereas He is the king in Matthew, and as king he begets a son.
W.L.P. I suppose the reason you refer to the thought of sovereignty is because it is vested in Him -- "I have set my king ...".
J.T. It is God's right. "I have set my king" -- He had the thing in His mind. If the people wanted a king, He would let them have one that suited them. God allows us to have what our exercises call for. He let them have Saul -- he fitted the exercises of the people at the time, I am sure, and that brought out how far they were away from God.
Ques. I suppose that if you acknowledge that, you come to this, that God's choice is the best, but God allows you yours.
A.F.M. He even gave him another heart, so that they might look on God's side.
J.T. So that it is as if He says, 'I will help you'. He helped Saul, did He not? But here it is as if He said, 'Now let Me bring in the Man'. That is the gospel of Matthew.
Rem. Once God has brought in the light of what is in His mind, that is to be followed through whether things are propitious or unpropitious. The time came when the line of David seemed unpropitious: the oppression of
{287}
Rehoboam was a test. So that if God has indicated the line which affects us in Christ, we get into trouble if we depart from it.
J.T. The kingdom is no sooner set up in Jeroboam than you have open idolatry.
Ques. Does not Judah prevail because God was with him?
J.T. Generally God was with the kings of Judah, whereas there was not one among the kings of Israel that was right with God.
W.R. Do you think that God would have in view the bringing in of royalty, establishing a kingdom? Was it in any way involved with the priesthood?
J.T. I think that royalty brought in the idea of the way in which God would subdue. But you must have moral greatness and power underlying royalty. "I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel", @Genesis 49: 7. When God scattered, how could they ever be gathered aside from subjugation? I think one should first of all prevail among his brethren. God would bring in a man like that. David was anointed in the midst of his brethren. I am sure there would be victory. It was a remarkable scene. Here you have one whom his brethren shall praise. You must have moral weight with your brethren.
A.F.M. Was it not also true that Judah as a whole tribe came to Hebron to anoint David there; he was really crowned in the affections of that tribe, and later, in the affections of all the nation.
Rem. So the introduction of David is interesting in that before his personal characteristics are noted, that which is characteristic of Christ is named, "He is feeding the sheep".
That is really greater than overcoming the lion and the bear; so the word comes to Samuel, "Arise, anoint him; for this is he", @1 Samuel 16: 12.
J.T. So throughout his career his personal characteristics are very prominent. It is recorded that Jonathan's soul was knit to David, that is David acquired a place in his affections; he had acquired a place in the affections of the people, he was accepted in the eyes of all the people:
{288}
"Saul hath smitten his thousands, and David his ten thousands". And then, Saul himself showed remarkable grace to David. His last words to David were, "Thou shalt certainly do great things, and shalt certainly prevail", @1 Samuel 26: 25. David overcame through moral greatness.
B.F. Is your thought that Judah and David each foreshadowed that which speaks of the moral greatness and glory of Christ?
J.T. I was thinking that. The narrative goes on to say that when Saul was slain, there was one who thought the incident would appeal to David's natural feelings and that it would be an occasion for satisfaction and that David would commend him, but David thought of the oil with which Saul was anointed. He lamented for Saul and Jonathan. He says, "Saul and Jonathan, beloved and pleasant in their lives, even in their death were not divided", @2 Samuel 1: 23. In that way he acquired a place among the brethren that was indisputable.
A.W. Is the thought of headship held more strongly than that of kingship or lordship?
J.T. It was then, but it is so much easier to submit to one who has acquired a place in your affections. David was anointed at Hebron in the midst of his brethren and later by all the tribes. He had already acquired this place, and hence his rule was all the more to be desired. He acquired his place.
A.F.M. Therefore he was really anointed in affection.
Ques. Is headship not intrinsically a higher thought than lordship? Headship is proven in moral qualities first; then lordship comes in in administrative power and when the need for lordship is over, the qualities of headship will for ever abide.
J.T. Just so. When scattering takes place (and it has taken place) the gathering must be through the king. "Judah -- as to thee, thy brethren will praise thee", and then he says, "The sceptre will not depart ... nor the lawgiver ... until Shiloh come", so that we have the thought of lordship in the sceptre and the thought of headship in the lawgiver. The sceptre brings down all, but
{289}
then the lawgiver makes it obvious that that sceptre is right.
Rem. "The sceptre of righteousness".
A.F.M. The principle of lawgiving is found in Judah, would you say?
J.T. That is how it is put. It was a remarkable place that Judah had when Israel came out of Egypt. Judah was the sanctuary.
B.P. It says, "May his hands strive for them", @Deuteronomy 33: 7.
J.T. That means that Judah's hands strive for his brethren. They work for others. Moses gives us the genealogy of Jacob's sons until he arrives at Levi, because everything centred in the priesthood. In the wilderness it was not royalty, it was the sanctuary; the genealogy in @Exodus 6 does not go beyond Levi, showing that the point was the priesthood, whereas the Psalmist says, "When Israel went out of Egypt, ... Judah was his sanctuary". He would look backwards; he was looking at Solomon and saw that the sanctuary would be brought in and set up permanently by Judah.
Rem. @Psalm 60 says, "Judah is my law-giver".
Rem. So that it is of the deepest interest to see that Christ absorbs not only the royalty, but also the priesthood -- "Thou art priest for ever after the order of Melchisedek", so that He had done everything that would cause Him to prevail amongst His brethren.
J.T. Quite. He sprang from Judah. The priesthood is set up in Christ in a heavenly manner. Judah is the sanctuary. It is the purpose of God that all shall emanate from Christ.
A.F.M. I suppose as to temple services and that kind of thing, it advances upon what Moses brought forward. I was thinking of what Moses says, and what the Lord says in Matthew -- "But I say unto you ...". Is that parentally?
J.T. I think so. There are several statutes that stand out prominently in David, and one of them is that those that remain behind, and those that go down to the battle shall share alike (@1 Samuel 30: 24), but particularly the regime
{290}
set up in connection with the Ark in Zion. David virtually, 'I am not setting aside anything previous'. He meant by that that he recognized sovereignty in Moses, but then he had a new idea. Everything is taken up now David. Levitical service is also emphasized.
A.W. He did not set aside Moses, did he? The Lord in @Matthew 6 does not set aside the law of Moses but rather enforces it.
Rem. He emphasizes the law and makes it honourable; that is, you have the sceptre and the lawgiver fully owned.
J.T. And the next thing is the gathering of the people until Shiloh comes. But gathering without the sceptre and without the law is sure to result in disintegration. It is not simply an agreement to differ but *gathering* on the principle of the sceptre and the law. There is a difference between the thing written down and being spoken, hence we have "The law of thy mouth", @Psalm 119: 72, that is, the lawgiver, and then the law.
A.F.M. The living thing. Would you say that the two thoughts you suggest are in Romans and Corinthians; the law of the mouth in Romans, and then the lawgiving in Corinthians?
J.T. There can be no gathering according to God except on those principles. Building material must be put together with cement and according to line, with plumb and rule and level, otherwise it is sure quickly to fall to pieces.
So that assembly on the line of the sceptre and the lawgiver is according to the rule, and plumb, and cement -- a very different thing to coming together as a rough mass of building material.
W.R. The fulfilment of it is seen in the gospel of Matthew. It says that when the Lord was set His disciples came to Him, and He said, "But I say unto you".
J.T. Yes, the 5th, 6th and 7th of Matthew are introduced, in that way. What is so beautiful about it is the Lawgiver and Shiloh -- you have the living Person speaking to you. Now it is Christ.
Rem. In @Matthew 16, Christ is Shiloh, and the assembling is to be to Him. "On this rock I will build my assembly",
{291}
and then there is the kingdom, glory and power on the mount of transfiguration. This is the lawgiving. I think that @Matthew 16 and 17 bring things to a culmination.
J.T. That is very beautiful. Matthew is the great elective gospel, Luke is the evangelical. It tests the brethren in view of the assembly.
Rem. The principle of the kingdom would be lawgiving, would it not? The believer is in connection with the mount of Transfiguration and the assembling in connection with the Person of Christ.
J.T. We are set up in the light of Matthew. The saints are set up in complete independence of the world. We do not need the support of the state, we have everything in the assembly.
A.F.M. The gates of Hades shall not prevail against it.
J.T. Yes: if anything occurs, you are to tell it to the assembly.
A.W. Do you intend to pass over the couching of the lion? Historically it would come after the stooping down.
J.T. You mean His death? Yes, I am sure, and then all would hinge on that. In Revelation, where the prophet is concerned about the sealed book, one of the elders said, "Do not weep. Behold, the lion which is of the tribe of Juda, the root of David, has overcome so as to open the book". There you get it again; then he sees a Lamb in the midst of the throne as slain, having seven horns and seven eyes, and He prevails through redemption. He takes up the right to open the book and open its seals.
A.F.M. What is the difference between the allusion to the lion and Balaam's similar allusion in his prophecy
J.T. Well, it was in Balaam's prophecy; but the underlying power of Christ works out through the suggestion of a lamb; it is a *Lamb* slain. There is complete spiritual power there. It has not, as you will observe, twelve horns, which would be administration, but the Lamb has complete spiritual power, that is what you need -- complete spiritual perception, because the opening of the books was introductory of the kingdom publicly.
B.F. Would you say that the Lamb was in any way
{292}
converted into the Lion of the tribe of Juda which prevailed?
J.T. Yes, I think so. He took the character of a Lamb, "He was led as a lamb to the slaughter, and was as a sheep dumb before her shearers, and he opened not his mouth", @Isaiah 53: 7.
This gathering is so important as following upon the sceptre and the lawgiver. All gathering without these is futile.
Rem. "According to this rule". This is the only point of gathering I can see.
J.T. "If any one think to be contentious, *we* have no such custom", @1 Corinthians 11: 16.
W.R. Would you say that the lawgiver goes beyond Moses?
J.T. Well, I think the reference is to David. Of course, Deuteronomy is the spirit of the law working out through Moses¬ affection. The Lord reduces the ten commandments to two; that is, it works out through Him, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with, all thy soul, and with all thy understanding", and "Thou, shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. On these two commandments the whole law and the prophets hang". Thus He brings the thing to you as it is. I think that the lawgiving in Judah is in David. It is the wonderful system in connection with the Ark.
Rem. So that Judah prevails. The time comes when it has to be narrowed down to one house; the house of Jesse; and the sovereignty is vested in David, the eighth and youngest. Henceforward there is never any deviation from that house. In @Revelation 5 He is the Root of David and He sits upon the throne, as the throne of David.
J.T. Right.
A.F.M. And a word about praise -- it all refers to Christ.
J.T. No doubt. He is praised by His brethren.
J.S. Is that what is meant in the end of @Matthew 23 where it says: "For I say unto you, Ye shall in no wise see me henceforth until ye say, Blessed be he that comes in the name of the Lord"?
J.T. Yes. That is so.
{293}
B.F. Matthew brings out that Judah was the sovereign choice of God, does it not?
J.T. Because it refers to David "Book of the generation of Jesus Christ, Son of David". He was God's sovereign choice. He chose Judah. He chose David.
J.S. David, the son of Jesse; he had no claim to the throne; he was God's sovereign choice.
{294}
ELEVATION
@Luke 24: 50 - 53; @Acts 1: 9 - 14
In reading these two scriptures I have in view the idea of elevation. Luke the writer of both emphasizes this idea; you get it throughout his gospel and also in the Acts.
He, as you will remember, speaks of the Highest (@Luke 1:35) in recording the announcement of the angel to Mary -- "power of the Highest overshadow thee". And again in chapter 2: 14 in communicating the saying of the multitude of the heavenly host at the birth of Christ, he speaks of "Glory to God in the highest". And in recording the report of the seventy as having been sent out by the Lord in service, he mentions that the Lord said to them, "Rejoice not, that the spirits are subjected to you, but rejoice that your names are written in the heavens", @Luke 10: 20. Further in recording the praises that greeted the Lord as He entered Jerusalem the last time, he records that they said, "Peace in heaven, and glory in the highest", @Luke 19: 38.
In keeping with all these references as Luke writes his second letter to Theophilus, he tells him in chapter 2 that from *heaven* came the sound of a rushing mighty wind. He is in Acts occupied with what is coming out of heaven; as in his gospel he referred to what was in heaven or going to heaven. So in @Acts 9 he speaks of a light from heaven; that is again something coming out of heaven; in chapter 10 he speaks of a vessel as it had been a great sheet knit at the four corners descending out of heaven; so that whilst in the gospel he occupies us with the wonderful elevation in heaven, and what is there -- glory, and the names of the saints, peace, in Acts he speaks of what comes out of it. He speaks thus to bring into view what is here in this provisional period in the way of testimony. What is here is of that kind or it is not in accord with the mind of God; it comes out of heaven *morally*, but none the less *really*. The Spirit comes out, "a sound out of heaven as of a
{295}
violent impetuous blowing" involving something irresistible here; and then a light from heaven exceeding all that was known here "above the brightness of the sun"; and with it the voice of a man and that Man Jesus; then the vessel descending from the opened heaven is suggestive of the house of God.
Luke has in view that the house of God as here in the assembly is the residence of God in His attitude of grace towards men, just as in the gospel He had spoken of "my house". God has that in which He can reside here, and in which He sets out His grace; the vessel having come out of heaven knows, as it were, the mind of heaven; the vessel contains what God has cleansed; that suffices whatever man may think. The sheet was knit at the four corners, it was firmly held, and let down thrice; "it came even to me", Peter said. It contained what God had cleansed; it came down here three times and was received back to heaven -- a wonderful sign of the dispensation. It is a wonderful dispensation! and one of the greatest features of the moment is that God would retain amongst His people a due estimate of this. And hence my desire is to call your attention to this feature of elevation that we might not be found on the level of current religion, with nothing elevated about it, which has dropped to the level of the ancient religions of the world, long since proved spurious. Christianity has dropped to the religious level of the world, long since effete and without moral value. The best of these has grown old and aged and has been discarded by God as a worn-out garment, good for nothing. So God would recall His people to what was at the beginning of this dispensation -- the house of God, suggesting what is elevated, for as coming out of heaven it must be so.
God proposed to Ahaz of old to ask for a sign, "Ask for it in the deep, or in the height above", @Isaiah 7: 11. Poor Ahaz, without faith -- like the modern religionists -- did not ask for it in either place. If we soar up, we cannot go too high for God, for Jesus personally is beyond our very highest conceptions, "far above all heavens". It was the privilege of Ahaz to ask for a sign. God says, as it were,
{296}
Soar up, there is no limit. "Ask for it ... in the height above". I think that Luke in his gospel answers to the divine proposal; he presents to us a sign in the highest; he presents Jesus in the very highest spot. Who can measure the elevation of it -- gone, as it is said, "far above all heavens"? Thence it is the gifts are given; we are not left in the dark as to His mind. Luke also gives us a sign in the deep, for the elevation is in keeping with the wonderful descent of Christ, and that is morally right. Man has gone up, "He that descended is the same who has also ascended". "But that he ascended, what is it but that he also descended into the lower parts of the earth?" Who can fathom these parts? Job speaks of the miner (@Job 28) going down in quest of minerals, but what about wisdom? It went further -- "Destruction and death say, We have heard its report with our ears", verse 22. Far beneath the regions explored by the miner did wisdom go -- He went down to the lower parts of the earth. We can follow, and it is well to dwell upon the marvellous depths to which the Lord went down -- "The waters encompassed me, to the soul ... . The bars of the earth closed upon me for ever", @Jonah 2: 5 - 6. Such is the language of the Spirit of Christ; all the waves of God's judgment rolled over Him. But He ascends for us that upward, shining way, and as God proposed to Ahaz, so we too are invited to soar upward. Our Head has gone up, the Head of the race, "God, who has raised him from among the dead and given him glory, that your faith and hope should be in God", @1 Peter 1: 21. He "is ... gone into heaven, angels and authorities and powers being subjected to him", @1 Peter 3: 22. What thoughts these are! The Lord Jesus has gone on high and the testimony here is according to that. It is not to be on the level of accredited worldly religion such as, alas, Christianity has become publicly. The Lord would direct us to the sign in the heights. There is nothing more elevating than that. What is the sign today and during the whole period of the dispensation? Jesus sitting at the right hand of God. Stephen saw Him standing, and that is in keeping with the end of Luke. Stephen is finishing the chapter with his testimony.
{297}
Elisha may be taken to represent what I am speaking of: he was to take Elijah's place in the testimony. God maintains His right to testify, and He would have vessels in keeping with Himself. Elijah says to Elisha, "Ask what I shall do for thee, before I am taken away from thee". If service is to be of real value, you need to ask: you cannot undertake it in your own strength. Many have done so and have brought discredit on the testimony. In raising up the testimony, we should first know what it is to pour water on the hands of those older and more honoured in the testimony. Elisha poured water on the hands of Elijah, he did not enter the testimony as a rival to Elijah, but he refreshed the hands already weary as labouring in the testimony. Elisha was told to ask, and if we are to do a service we must ask, for what hast thou that thou hast not received? If we have not received, we have nothing, whatever we may have acquired by study. So Elisha asked and he did not ask amiss, as we often do, to consume it upon his lusts, or to cause him to shine for man's approbation here. Elisha says, I have a great appreciation of your spirit. So as we follow the footsteps of Jesus in the gospels what a wonderful spirit we see! So Elisha says, I want that spirit and plenty of it -- a double portion of it. We have a wonderful place, the place of the first-born -- a double portion. Joseph received one portion above his brethren, though he was not the first-born. So Elisha got a double portion, Elisha said, If you see me when I go, but his mind had to be trained. The Lord would train us to look up.
The temple was roughly 180 feet high; this added to the height of Zion gives one some conception of the material elevation. What an imposing spectacle as one approaches it! "Beautiful in elevation, the joy of the whole earth, is mount Zion" -- and the temple crowned it, towering up 180 or more feet. It is a remarkable suggestion of elevation. God would train His people to the principle of elevation, and so we are enjoined to set our minds on things above. Elisha had to be trained -- Elijah says, "If thou see me when I am taken". The mind has to be trained to the upward look; the Lord Himself lifted up His eyes to
{298}
heaven; He looked there, not down, and so Elisha, as you can understand, being intent on obtaining what he desired; kept his eyes on Elijah. This is similar to the end of Luke, for faith followed Him and the end of the path was upward. Elisha saw Elijah go up, and he obtained his desire. Then he took hold and rent in pieces his own garments, discarding what he might have relied on naturally. Let us learn something from this. Your garment is what you have been wearing; discard the old wholly and learn to wear the new. God gives not His Spirit by measure; the Holy Spirit is here; what resources are ours! Elisha, having obtained his desire, took up the mantle of Elijah which fell from him,, and smiting the waters crossed the Jordan. What will he do in the swelling of Jordan? What Christ did in the swelling of Jordan is a lesson book for all. How shall we fathom it? Jordan was driven back, "What ailed thee, thou sea, that thou fleddest? thou Jordan, that thou turnedst back?" Think of the power of Christ! Think of a man like Stephen in the swelling of Jordan, how exhilarating as we dwell on him there! For testimony or service we have to learn what to do in the swelling of Jordan. Death has to be faced experimentally or we shall carry our own feelings and natural aspirations into the service of God, and that is disastrous. We are exposed at every step unless we know what to do in the swelling of Jordan. Where is the Lord God of Elijah? For us, the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ who raised Him from the dead. We too are, raised with Him through faith of the operation of God who raised Him from the dead. So Elisha comes back from the Jordan possessed with the spirit of Elijah to take up his service in the testimony of God.
The company in @Luke 24 is like Elisha, they get the blessing and power and return to Jerusalem with great joy. They worshipped Him "and were continually in the temple praising and blessing God". That was a wonderful contribution in the way of testimony to Israel; there was adequate witness there. Now in @Acts 1 we have not the temple but material for the house. In the gospel of Luke we get the expression of the divine grace towards the city
{299}
instead of judgment. Think of the magnitude of that! Testimony in grace was rendered by the disciples praising and blessing God. But in @Acts 1 we are looking assemblywise, and so they see Him go up and two men stand by in white apparel. The women at the grave in @Luke 24 saw two men in shining garments, heavenly men, but here we have not only that but white, indicating purity -- an essential feature of our position. These two men say, "Why do ye stand looking into heaven?" Then they returned to Jerusalem, a sabbath day's journey, and went to the upper room, not to the temple. Many today have despised the upper room and prefer the cathedral, which ministers to the flesh and represents those religions that are effete, which God has rejected. There is nothing for God there, but much for the flesh. Let us take sides with God. These men who returned were spoken to by men in white garments; the upper room and white garments go together. The overcomers in Sardis are to walk with Him in white; to walk with Jesus in white is to go to the upper room now; and that involves reproach: there are no stained windows or choir there. They went to the upper room; there we see the assembly, a heavenly vessel, a vessel in which the mind of heaven is expressed on earth. They found men dwelling there, "where were staying both Peter, and John, and James", we read, suggesting that the assembly is the abiding place of affection, and also where the authority of Christ is represented. Peter and the apostles are representative of the authority of the Lord; unless that authority is owned there is no room for the Spirit. With these men there were many others -- "the crowd of names who were together was about a hundred and twenty", @Acts 1: 15. Each had a name, something to mark him off spiritually, something of account in the assembly, a spiritual status or energy of life-giving character, for that is what I believe is embodied in a name.
The viewpoint in @Acts 1 is toward the assembly. Acts had the assembly in view, the initial idea of the assembly, so that men went to the upper room. Let us learn to go there today, and dwell there where abode Peter and the apostles, with the brethren of Christ; the Lord's relations were
{300}
there; it is wonderful to be where they are. In the light of the Lord's present position on high we are here in testimony. Our ways are not to be like the ways of the world, but according to the elevation of our position, heavenly ways. We may say, See what is being effected by human methods -- but obedience is better than sacrifice.
If the assembly began with the upper room and men clothed in white, God has not changed His mind. These things are to mark the end. The assembly is the place where the authority of Christ is represented, and where the brethren of Christ dwell.
{301}
GOD'S DWELLING
@Exodus 15: 2 - 11
The thought I wished to present, in connection with the scripture read, was that the believer is called out from this world, and his desire is now to glorify God. On the other hand we find that God glorifies Himself. He glorifies Himself in holiness as we see in verse 11.
In the epistle to the Romans we see how the believer glorifies God by the Spirit. "If, by the Spirit, ye put to death the deeds of the body, ye shall live" (@Romans 8: 13); also by the Spirit we cry, "Abba, Father". The epistles to the Corinthians show us how God glorifies Himself. As a wise architect, Paul laid the foundation in Corinth, but in Ephesians we see the building finished, and the assembly becomes the vessel of God's glory throughout all eternity.
Exodus corresponds to the epistle to the Romans; 1 Chronicles corresponds to the Corinthian epistles, and 2 Chronicles to Ephesians.
My desire now is that we should consider the holiness that characterizes the house of God, as also the love and order that belong to it. While God appreciated David's desire to build Him a house, nevertheless He reserved to Himself the right to give the pattern of His house. Paul, like David, received the pattern of the house. When we see this, we will be preserved from setting up anything else, such as we find in the different church establishments or parties around us. It says of the Thessalonians that they became "imitators of the assemblies of God which are in Judaea in Christ Jesus" (@1 Thessalonians 2: 14); it is clear that the assembly in Thessalonica was in correspondence with the pattern.
It says in @Exodus 15, "Jehovah ... is highly exalted". In @2 Chronicles 3: 4 we read of the porch of the house being one hundred and twenty cubits high. It speaks of the moral elevation of the house. We ought not to be like men of this world; a moral elevation belongs to us as the people
{302}
of God. Then we read in @1 Chronicles 28: 11 of treasuries, upper chambers, *inner* chambers, and the house of the mercy sea. We cannot enter into the good of these things if we are not marked by the moral elevation that places us on another level as distinct from the sects around us in christendom. The upper chambers speak of the secret link that we have with God. The *inner* chambers convey the thought of the Lord's supper where He takes His place amongst us as Head to lead us into the blessings of the house; there are many abodes. There is also the pattern for the house of the mercy-seat, the place where God is *known* in mercy. As we consider the pattern of the house and all its chambers, we learn how to conduct ourselves in our localities. The courts convey the thought of how we should walk worthily in public. "A day in thy courts is better than a thousand", @Psalm 84: 10. We find others with whom *we* can have fellowship; the young ones can rejoice in these courts, and there we can have spiritual intercourse with each other. In the treasuries there is found what spiritual men have written.
Then we come to the priests and levites. As priests we speak to God, and we ought to understand our distinctive place. We read of David that he ordered the courses of the priests. The Spirit teaches us to understand our place so that we do not get in the way of each other in our service. The Levites were also divided into courses "for all the work of the service of the house of Jehovah", @1 Chronicles 28 13.
All the vessels for service are then mentioned. The pattern gives us instructions as to every detail of the service in the house of God. In verse 12 we read of the pattern of all that David had by the Spirit, and in verse 19 it says, "All this said David, in writing, by Jehovah's hand upon me, instructing as to all the works of the pattern". We may think that every believer desires to glorify God, but we must do everything according to the pattern which God has given us.
In 1 Corinthians we see how Paul laid the foundation, but in Ephesians the building is presented as completed.
{303}
The breaking of bread comes in in connection with Ephesus (@Acts 20), where the apostle speaks of how he had declared the whole counsel of God to them. The breaking of bread has to do with the inside of the house, its heavenly character. @Acts 20 begins with the embrace of love, as Paul called the disciples to him and, after he had embraced them, went away to go to Macedonia. Afterwards we read that Paul embraced the youth Eutychus and finally we have the elders embracing Paul. This chapter is really a chapter of love. It is in the breaking of bread that the Lord constantly presents His love to us. It says, "we being assembled to break bread, Paul discoursed to them ... . And he prolonged the discourse till midnight", @Acts 20: 7. He was anxious to present all the truth to them, the whole counsel of God, and so the breaking of bread comes forward, so to speak, in the full light of what Paul had discoursed. As Head the Lord leads us into love's realm so that we might fill out our part worthily in the testimony. The expression 'The Lord's supper' relates more to the public side: "For as often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink the cup, ye announce the death of the Lord, until he come", @1 Corinthians 11: 26.
If our souls keep to those upper chambers, then we will not be living in the sphere where earthly joy obtains; and if we live in the *inner* chambers, we will learn to know the love of God as Father, according to what John says in his gospel (@John 1: 14), "and we have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father". The two disciples enquired as to His dwelling; "Where abidest thou? He says to them, Come and see. They went therefore, and saw where he abode; and they abode with him that day", @John 1: 38, 39. This preserves us from finding our company in the world. When we come to the "house of the mercy-seat", we see how God has come out in mercy to all men, and what the basis is for this. We acquire there a real evangelical spirit. Paul preached as one who had been there, and he speaks of the unsearchable riches of the Christ.
The courts of the house speak of the general relations
{304}
between the people of God. How enjoyable are the occasions which we can spend in each other's homes! They amount to something like the courts of the house of God. From these courts we go up to the house of God. In @Acts 16 we read how Lydia said, "If ye have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my house and abide there", verse 15. How precious were the times spent by Paul and Silas together with others in Lydia's house! "A day in thy courts is better than a thousand", @Psalm 84: 10.
If we consider the priestly side, we find that every believer is a priest. Every young believer ought to covet to serve as a priest, but how often we find that many of our young brothers are silent in the assembly. But God says, "Let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice", @Song of Songs 2: 14. If we think of the Levites, we find there is much for them to do. The need amongst the people of God is great. The Lord says, "supplicate therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he send forth workmen unto his harvest", @Matthew 9: 38. The Lord will give a commission to each one. In the measure in which we learn to speak to God as priests in the assembly, so will we learn to speak to men in a way that will help them.
God gave the pattern to David, but he was not allowed to build the house, because he had shed much blood. This privilege was given to his son, Solomon, and God said, "He shall be my son", @1 Chronicles 17: 13. The house is built by the Son; Christ is Son over the house, because He is greater than the house. In Colossians we are translated "into the kingdom of the Son of his love". There we are sons, and are introduced into the house. The house is built by the Son, and consists of sons, and all the service of God is performed by sons.
{305}
THE ASSEMBLY (1)
@Acts 20: 1 - 12
Chapters 18, 19 and 20 of Acts are very important because they present to us the full light of the assembly. Chapter 18 speaks of Paul's work in Corinth, where he laid the foundation; chapter 19 gives us his handiwork in Ephesus, where the building was completed.
In chapters 18 - 20 we have some important features which speak of that which is universal. In chapter 18 two persons are named, Aquila and Priscilla, who came from the west, i.e. from Rome, and Apollos, who came from Egypt; they were vessels who, in a certain sense, were independent of Paul, but who contributed to the same work that he was occupied with. We are so inclined to be local in our exercises, so limited to the little company of saints in the place where we live. Especially is this a danger with meetings which are isolated or placed at great distances from other meetings. Here in Denmark, for example, there is only one meeting, and meetings are also comparatively few in other European countries; therefore we become so easily limited to what is local.
From these chapters we learn that, while the house of God is formed in a particular place, there is also a universal thought embracing the whole assembly. It is a help for us to come into touch with brothers from other parts of the world. Paul was reminded, through the presence of Aquila and Priscilla, of the work of God in Rome, and through Apollos he was reminded of the work of God in Alexandria. Aquila and Priscilla came from Rome and helped Apollos. We see therefore that God is not limited to any special place or person. He works, so to speak, universally wherever He will, and in all these different places He carries on this same work and brings to light different features in each place.
In this chapter Paul's companions are named at this point, and they represent different places in two parts of the
{306}
world. In addition to Paul and Silas, we hear of seven other brothers. One of them was from Berea; this reminds us of a feature which is very important in every local meeting, namely, searching the Scriptures. Two others were from Thessalonica, which reminds us of the place we have in the love of God. In @1 Thessalonians 1: 4, we read, "brethren beloved of God". They were lovable Christians, such as were drawn to Christ. It says of them that they had turned to God from idols. Gaius and Timothy from Derbe represent those who personally were attracted to the vessel of the testimony. Two others were from Asia. From their names we can understand that they were from Ephesus, but it only states that they were from Asia. The seven assemblies in Asia constituted a picture of the assembly in its completeness; so we get the impression that those two were so drawn to Christ that in their hearts they embraced the *whole* assembly. Thus we find, in this company which assembled in Troas, a representation of the work of God on the whole earth.
Paul represents here in a certain sense the Lord Himself, and in his long discourse presents what is the Lord's thought for us and what constitutes the plumb-line for the assembly at all times. First he discoursed a long time, then after the breaking of bread we read of a conversation between the saints which continued until daybreak. The word which is used in verse 7 refers to a speech or address, whereas the word in verse 11 means a mutual conversation. This corresponds to the reciprocal spirit which marks the present time and which is seen especially in what we call a Bible reading. Paul's address, as we see in Ephesians, gives the full light of the assembly's place. Through this spiritual awakening which took place during the last century, and especially through the teaching which came through Mr. Darby's writings, the truth of the breaking of bread has been recovered to us, and what now proceeds is this conversation until daybreak. We are thus set together in love and mutual interest in one another, as those linked with the name of the Lord. It says in @Malachi 3: 16, "they that feared Jehovah spoke often one to another".
{307}
The circumstances under which the Lord's supper is partaken speak of that which is mutual, as we eat the same bread and drink the same cup. This is typified in the honeycomb which is mentioned in @Song of Songs 5: 1. If we think of a natural honeycomb with its small cells or chambers close to each other and all filled with honey, we have a beautiful picture of the assembly and the saints as closely built together, each one able to present that which is delightful to the Lord Jesus when He comes to His garden. When the Lord had washed the feet of the disciples, he said that they ought to wash one another's feet. This speaks of reciprocal love. We cannot love a person if we do not have respect for him. When I perceive the dignity that belongs to the saints, then I have respect for them; then I can love them and desire to serve them. The Lord showed how great this dignity was when He said to them that they were not only brethren, but that they were His brethren. No dignity is greater than to be His brethren. The Lord Jesus laid aside His garments, i.e. this outward dignity, in order to serve them. He was in the form of God, but He emptied Himself, and at the end of His life we see how He laid aside His dignity to serve them. The Lord never ceased to be God, but He took a bondman's form. He was the worthy One, and as such He washed their feet. We never lose anything of our dignity through doing the smallest service for the saints. It is of great importance to understand the dignity of the saints. They correspond to the Levites, who were taken in place of the firstborn in Israel. As Levites we are all sons, and as sons we can serve. The apostle says, "Ourselves your bondmen for Jesus¬ sake", @2 Corinthians 4: 5. All this unifies us in mutual respect for each other. Our dignity consists in that we are kindred to Christ.
It is Luke who relates these things and he gives expression to what is mutual. It is of interest to note where in Acts Luke comes in. The first time he says "we" is in chapter 16 in connection with Philippi, and it was the Spirit of Jesus who led them there; therefore we see that mutuality goes together with the Spirit of Jesus. Here in
{308}
@Acts 20: 7 he says, "And the first day of the week, we being assembled to break bread". The epistle to the Philippians speaks of christian experience and mutuality.
In chapter 24 of his gospel, Luke tells us how the Lord on an occasion after His resurrection ate "part of a honeycomb". It is a picture of mutual conditions among the brethren, that Luke has in mind. When he tells us of the company that were assembled in the upper room, he takes into consideration that each person had their own particular name (see @Acts 1: 15). Each one had his own name, and this name betokened each person's dignity. When we perceive the dignity of the saints, we love them, and in the measure in which we love them, so we serve them.
These seven brethren who accompanied Paul represent the work of God in the different places from which they came. Here, in Copenhagen, we are gathered from many different places, and thus have the opportunity to appreciate the work of God in all these different places, as it says of Zion in @Psalm 48: 12, "Walk about Zion, and go round about her: count the towers thereof; mark ye well her bulwarks". The towers correspond to the brethren. It is important that the brethren come together from different places, and that we notice all these different features of the work of God, as thereby the love of God becomes greater to us. In the Old Testament God had ordained that His people throughout all the land of Israel should come together three times in the year, and, when they met in Jerusalem, they could take account of what God had wrought in all the different tribes. When we come together in this way, it helps us to see beyond national feelings and class distinction, which so easily can creep in amongst us. We ought not to be ashamed of each other, nor to allow any distance between us. The Lord says He is not ashamed to call us brethren.
The youth became overpowered by deep sleep while Paul discoursed very much at length. We ought never to tire of listening to Paul. He had the whole counsel of God to declare. The more you listen to Paul the richer you will become; Paul instructs you as to the elevated place you
{309}
have with God and as to your inheritance. He prays in Ephesians that the saints may receive power to *understand* (see chapter 1: 18). The young man fell down because he tired of listening to Paul. He is a type of the assembly during the dark middle ages. All the ten virgins slept (@Matthew 25). The youth sat at the window; he was, so to speak, too near the world, and could cast an eye over two different worlds. It is like the position which many young believers occupy. He was in a place of great privilege; there were many lights in the upper room. His fall was great, and if it had not been for the power of recovery found with Paul, he would have been outside and lost, at least for the assembly. In verse 10 we read that Paul descended and fell upon him and enfolded him in his arms. The youth came into the warmth of Paul's love. It was a beautiful feature with Paul to go down so low and embrace him. The brethren's distress and concern for the youth speak of their love, and we see that Paul did not exercise his power of healing apart from the brethren's exercise. When Paul later left them, he left with them a living person in youthful power. They did not break bread before the young man had come to life again (see verse 11).
We have here a prophetic presentation of the assembly's recovery to life. "His life is in him", said Paul of the youth. Even during the darkest period, there was always life in the assembly. All the ten virgins slept. Sleep and death are similar. It says in @Ephesians 5: 14, "Wake up, thou that sleepest, and arise up from among the dead". A person asleep has life in him, but is not aware of what is happening around him. When we awake from sleep, we wake up like the ten virgins to the truth that the Lord is coming.
There is a special connection between the breaking of bread and Paul's teaching. In the beginning of Acts they used to break bread in the house, and this was allowed to begin with, while God waited on the Jews, but later, when the full light of the assembly came out through Paul's ministry, we find the breaking of bread received its proper place in the assembly. Therefore Paul says, "When ye come together in assembly", @1 Corinthians 11: 18. There may be
{310}
circumstances where the breaking of bread takes place in a brother's house, but it is nevertheless the assembly, and this brother's house is temporarily for this purpose placed at the service of the assembly, as we have as to Prisca and Aquila "the assembly at their house", @Romans 16: 5.
A local meeting may get into conditions which are typified in this youth, but if there is a brother marked by the same spirit as Paul, he can be a help for the recovery of such a meeting. Many meetings are like David in his old age; he had no warmth within him, he could not keep himself warm, and clothes were no help. Correct form cannot help us. We need youthful life to retain warmth.
Invalids especially need warmth.
The apostle Paul had much to say, and he desired to say all that God had laid on his heart; therefore he prolonged his discourse until midnight. The conversation which then followed continues until daybreak. We have not yet exhausted all there is to receive. Paul represents Christ's personal interest in the saints, and John supports Paul's ministry. The apostle enfolds the young man in his arms; this typifies the Lord's care for the saints, and at the end of the chapter we find the saints embracing Paul. It is a witness to there being at that time a response to this love. Paul sets out for us the full truth of the assembly. John comes in at the end as a reserve, or as a help kept in readiness. It is John who says that the Lord Himself "knew what he was going to do", @John 6: 6. Despite what difficulties may come, the Lord has always that in reserve ready to meet them.
{311}
THE ASSEMBLY (2)
@1 Corinthians 11: 17 - 26
The instruction in this chapter is in connection with the title Lord. This is the only place where we find the expression, "the Lord's supper". Paul says that he had received from the Lord that which he also delivered to them. Nothing is said here as to what day the Supper should be held, but instead the place is spoken of -- "when ye come together in assembly". In @Acts 20 we find that the breaking of bread stands in relation to the first day of the week. If we notice the scriptures where the first day of the week is mentioned, we will find that it stands in connection with the inward and spiritual side -- for example, in @John 20, where it stands related to our heavenly position. It is this side we will now look into. It says in @John 20: 19, "When therefore it was evening on that day, which was the first day of the week". Nothing is said of the sabbath here, whereas it is mentioned in the three other gospels.
In the gospel by Mark it says, "the Sabbath being now past" (chapter 16: I), and Luke says, "on the morrow of the sabbath" (chapter 2: I). The three first gospels are linked with what had gone before in the Old Testament. This corresponds more with the side of the assembly which is seen in type in Rebecca. After the death of Sarah (typically Israel) Rebecca comes in to fill Sarah's place in the tent and as a comfort to Isaac. The assembly, in the ways of God on the earth, takes up Israel's place in the testimony, while Israel is set aside for the time being. But the side presented in John's gospel is the place the assembly has with Christ, the eternal side, which has no end. The first day of the week speaks of a new and eternal order of things. The revelation made to Mary in @John 20 links the first day with what is eternal. Matthew begins his gospel with "the generation of Jesus Christ, Son of David, Son of Abraham". In Mark there is what the prophet says of Him, and Luke begins with a priest of Aaron's order, so
{312}
that everything is linked in this way with the old order of things. But John speaks of the Word who was "in the beginning with God", and in chapter 17 of the same gospel the Lord speaks of the glory which He had with the Father before the world was. John's gospel corresponds to Ephesians, where the whole counsel of God is presented to us. When we come together to break bread, the Lord Himself is before us, and opens up heavenly things for us. The expressions, "the Lord's day" and "the Lord's supper" stand more in connection with God's testimony down here. In Corinthians, which corresponds to Numbers, we are looked at as here in this world, and the heavenly colour should be seen in us. Ephesians on the other hand presents Christ as ascended up to heaven, and the saints are placed with Him there. We are thus entitled to have our place in heaven even now. When we give Him his place as Head, He will lead us there. We have a type of this in the cleansing of the leper. Two birds are to be brought, the one of them to be slain, and the other dipped in the blood of the slain bird and then let loose, as a testimony that the cleansed leper now is free, so to speak, to fly up to heaven. Ephesians opens for us heavenly things, but Corinthians speaks of the assembly as placed in certain limitations, where she can witness for God, governed by God's commandment and in subjection to God, like Him who said, "Thy will be done as in heaven so upon the earth", @Matthew 6: 10. The apostle says in @1 Corinthians 14: 37, "If anyone thinks himself to be a prophet or spiritual, let him recognize the things I write to you, that it is the Lord's commandment". We should not think that Corinthians leads to Ephesians, for they run side by side. In Corinthians we have the side of responsibility, and in Ephesians the side of privilege.
Ques. What is the thought of the bird let loose along with the offering which is presented for the cleansing of the leper?
The free bird let loose in the open field answers to the truth of Ephesians. It speaks of the Lord ascending above all heavens and of the saints having a place in the heavenlies
{313}
with Him. We find also in Corinthians that which goes together with the truth in Ephesians, for example, in chapter 15: 48 we read, "such as the heavenly one, such also the heavenly ones". The first day of the week is mentioned in @1 Corinthians 16, but there it is in connection with giving, and not in connection with the Supper. The character of God shines out as we give. He is the great Giver. Giving stands in connection with the first day of the week. When God gives us entrance into His thoughts, we come out as givers, and we do it as being impressed with what is eternal and abiding, not by anything down here. "It is more blessed to give than to receive", @Acts 20: 35. These were the Lord's own words, and the apostle brings them before the elders in Ephesus. One side is that as strangers in this world we give our contribution to the collection to meet the general need as those who do not wish to take anything from the world. "Your Father ... makes his sun rise on evil and good", @Matthew 5: 45. Also it says in another scripture, "Every good gift and every perfect gift comes down from above, from the Father of lights", @James 1: 17. It shows that, if we rightly understand the heavenly side, we ought to give liberally, and as we break bread in the light of the first day, we get help that enables us to do so. It was after the Lord was risen that we hear these words for the first time, "It is more blessed to give than to receive". It seems to be a word that the Lord often used. In Corinthians it says, "For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that for your sakes he, being rich, became poor, in order that *ye* by his poverty might be enriched", @2 Corinthians 8: 9. It is His glory to give. As we give, we think of Christ, and His features come out in us; so this constitutes His glory. The apostle also says, speaking of giving, that some were "messengers of assemblies, Christ's glory".
It is of interest that in the slain bird we see a type of Christ who died for our sins, and how He gave Himself for the assembly. In the living bird we have a type of a person who can lift himself up above everything on the earth; but then an unclean bird can do the same, showing
{314}
than an unconverted person can exalt himself above others in the world. So a believer lifts himself in the power of the Spirit off the earth to enter upon heavenly things, to which in Christ he has right. In Ephesians the apostle prays for the saints that they might be "strengthened with power, by his Spirit in the inner man; that the Christ may dwell, through faith, in your hearts, being rooted and founded in love, in order that ye may be fully able to apprehend with all the saints what is the breadth and length and depth and height; and to know the love of the Christ which surpasses knowledge", @Ephesians 3: 116 - 119.
When the Lord Jesus in @John 20, after His resurrection, said to His disciples, "Receive the Holy Spirit", and breathed into them, it was the Father's Spirit He breathed into them, not just "the Holy Spirit", because the scripture should really read, "Receive Holy Spirit".
Ques. What did the apostle mean when he says in @1 Corinthians 11: 17, "ye come together ... for the worse"?
It is not enough to come together in one place; we must also be governed by divine principles. We ought to have respect for our brethren and not think that we are better than they. The rich ought not to think that he is anything above the poor. "The rich and poor meet together; Jehovah is the maker of them all", @Proverbs 22: 2. "But let the brother of low degree glory in his elevation, and the rich in his humiliation", @James 1: 9. All stand on the same plane in the assembly: the ground on which the assembly stands is exalted over every human distinction in rank. There were several parties in Corinth; the rich ate by themselves, and the poor were despised. It is a very serious matter to despise the assembly of God and we do this if we allow any class distinction amongst us when we are assembled. In chapter 12 we find a spiritual distinction where it is a question of the gifts in the assembly, but these ought to be used to bring Christ in. In Corinth worldly principles were governing, which was something dreadful, and Paul must therefore say, "it is not to eat the Lord's supper", chapter 11: 20. If we allow any person to rule in the assembly, we
{315}
are giving place to Judas. Paul says it was on the night in which the Lord was delivered up when He inaugurated this Supper. We therefore, so to speak, shut the doors to exclude all that is human. It says in @Psalm 69: 25: "Let their habitation be desolate; let there be no dweller in their tents". It suggests that no one will take the place of Judas; that man's judgment has been settled in the cross of Christ. It could be said that the Roman Catholic system corresponds to Judas, while Peter's denial has been repeated again in Protestantism.
What the apostle received from the Lord brings in the kind of person who has a place in the assembly. The Lord says, 'This bread is my body, and this cup is the new covenant in my blood'. We give Him His place and, when we do so, we bring Him in. When we acknowledge the Lord in this way at the Supper, we make way for the Spirit, and therefore it goes on to speak of the Spirit in chapter 12.
Ques. Ought a brother to put into the basket both for himself and his wife?
All family relationships cease on entering the assembly. My wife and my children are there under the Lord and His authority; they are not there as specially belonging to me, so at the Lord's supper I have no special connection with my household as such. I have no more right there over my wife than over any other saint. "We, being many, are one loaf, one body", @1 Corinthians 10: 17. But it is interesting that in chapter 112 there is this noticeable difference, that there are different gifts, and in the body there are different members, and some among them are called comely, and others uncomely, which we clothe with more abundant comeliness, @1 Corinthians 12: 23.
Ques. What does the new covenant mean for us?
The new covenant is not made with us, but we see in @2 Corinthians 3 how we come into it. This covenant expresses the love of God for us. We come into Sarah's tent, to fill the place which Sarah, i.e. Israel, once had in the testimony. "The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts", @Romans 5: 5. The Lord is the Spirit in the new covenant.
{316}
@1 Corinthians 3 shows how the spirit of the new covenant operates in us. The love of God is expressed by us. There is no blessing which the saints in the Old Testament enjoyed or which the saints in the millennium shall enjoy, which we now beforehand by the Spirit cannot enter upon.
{317}
THE ASSEMBLY (3)
@1 Corinthians 12: 1 - 31
We remarked that the first three evangelists look at the assembly as the vessel of the testimony here on earth, and as having taken the place of Israel down here, and this is a very important matter. But John's gospel has more in view our association with Christ in heaven. There it is more a question of the persons in the assembly, than of the assembly as the body with its members, so that in John's gospel we have the first day of the week specially emphasized. It was "on the first day of the week" Mary received the message to carry to the disciples that they were His brethren. This day is again mentioned in @John 20: 19 where we read, "When therefore it was evening on that day, which was the first day of the week ... Jesus came and stood in the midst, and says to them, Peace be to you". They are looked at now as in relationship with Him as His brethren. Luke has in view the assembly as the vessel of the testimony and presents the truth of the Supper almost literally as Paul speaks of it. Luke speaks of the Spirit as the anointing. We need to distinguish between these two sides, what the saints are down here as the anointed vessel of the testimony, according to the chapter we have read, and what they are in connection with heavenly privileges. In chapter 12 it says, "So also is the Christ". The word Christ here means *the anointed vessel*, and relates to the assembly.
Earthly possessions can often become a cause of class distinctions amongst the saints, as the case was in Corinth, where the rich had surplus and the poor were hungry. In this way they despised the assembly of God. In chapter 12 we can note the distinction which God makes and gives through the anointing. It is right to be prominent in the dignity and power which is from God. The assembly should be marked by dignity, and this dignity is by the Spirit. In @judges 9: 9 we read that the olive tree refused to take the place of king over the other trees, saying:
{318}
"Should I leave my fatness, wherewith by me they honour God and man, and go to wave over the trees?" The olive tree speaks typically of the Holy Spirit, with which we are anointed, and this alone can give us real distinction in the assembly. A man could have riches and learning or be of noble birth, but those things give him no place in the assembly. Dignity comes from God and depends on our relationship to Christ, that we are His brethren; that is dignity. "Go to my brethren". The Father names every family relative to Christ. But our dignity before men is through the Spirit and His work in us.
Ques. What is the difference between the Holy Spirit as seal, and the Holy Spirit as anointing?
Sealing means that I am God's possession, but the anointing that I have received dignity by the Spirit, so that I can represent God here in testimony, and the earnest of the Spirit is what sustains me here. The subject in this chapter involves the Spirit and has in view the testimony. The anointing reminds us of the oil which ran down from Aaron's head upon his beard, even down to the hem of his garments, and the consequences thereof became manifest as brethren dwell together in unity. The head is what gives expression to a man's understanding and dignity. We can understand how important it is, when we come together at the Supper, to give Christ his rightful place. Room is then made for the Holy Spirit. The Spirit is given to those that obey Him. The sealing, the anointing, and the earnest of the Spirit are three different views of the same matter. To be filled with the Spirit means that the Spirit has His place with me, and everything else is shut out.
Ques. What is the difference between the presence of Christ in the assembly and the presence of the Spirit? It is by the Spirit the Lord reveals Himself. He comes in amongst His own as we see in @John 20, where we find that He comes to His disciples as they were assembled. It is by the Spirit we perceive it, but He comes *Himself*. In the Old Testament He revealed Himself through angels, but now it is through the Spirit. In @John 14 He speaks about sending another Comforter, the Holy Spirit, one of
{319}
the Persons of the Godhead, equal with the Father and the Son. When Rebecca asked the servant, "Who is the man that is walking in the fields to meet us?" he answered, "That is my master", @Genesis 24: 65. The Spirit leads us to Christ.
This picture of the body helps us to think rightly of each other. We see here divine Persons in activity. "There are distinctions of gifts, but the same Spirit; ... distinctions of service, and the same Lord; ... distinctions of operations, but the same God who operates all things in all". We have here three different circles, but with one and the same centre. The Spirit operates in the body; the Lord operates in the kingdom, which constitutes a greater circle; and the Father operates in a greater circle still, but it is the same God who operates all things in all.
Ques. What is the meaning of verse 3 of this chapter? We have to test what goes under the name of spiritual manifestations. The presence of the Holy Spirit here causes Satan to try to imitate spiritual power in the assembly, and we understand that this was the case in Corinth. We must therefore prove everything so as not to be led astray by Satan. "No one can say, Lord Jesus, unless in the power of the Holy Spirit". In the great professing christendom there is much, in a certain sense, which is spiritual, but which nevertheless is not of the Spirit of God. The Spirit of God exalts Christ, and makes much of Him. There is a difference between the activity of the flesh and the activity of an unclean spirit. If we tarry one for another, we make room for the Spirit to operate through the members.
Ques. Can an unclean spirit come in amongst those gathered to the name of the Lord?
If we acknowledge the Lord, Satan is kept out, but in Corinth there was one like Judas, who was not pure, and therefore Satan could come in amongst them. In 2 Corinthians we read that Satan transforms himself into an angel of light, chapter 11: 14. Our standard, by which we test such, is if they can say, "Lord Jesus". None of the unclean spirits spoken of in the gospels called Jesus "Lord". There are many in the present time who presume to operate by
{320}
spiritual power, but we can test them, as John in his first epistle emphasizes the importance of confessing Jesus Christ come in flesh. He says that many false prophets have gone out into the world, but he tests them by their position in relation to the Lord's Person. In Corinthians it is a question of how we confess Jesus as *Lord*. There are many different kinds of spirits in activity today, for example, some believe that spiritual power is connected with them, and so it is, but a spiritual power that is of Satan, and the proof of this is that they do not confess "Jesus Christ come in flesh". It is the same with others who say that they speak with tongues or imagine they can make the sick whole by faith. If you present the truth of the Lord's Person or the name of the Lord Jesus, then they are exposed. Thus we have a sure touchstone to guide us in this matter. These persons could certainly make a confession of the truth as far as the letter goes but the question is what their confession or doctrine leads to. The Lord's authority as Lord is the subject in this chapter and, if we test these persons in relation to this truth, we will find they set aside the Lord's commandment.
There were seven magicians who tried to imitate the spiritual power which was found with Paul, but they could not call Jesus Lord, neither could the unclean spirits do so. These men were like the magicians in Egypt who tried to imitate Moses. Paul calls them by their names. It shows that he knew them well. The believer will do well, not only to be guarded against wrong doctrine, but also against this kind of spirit which is active in these times. John was anxious that the saints should prove the spirits. Those who were of God listened to the apostles and received their word. If we acknowledge the Lord's authority and confess "Jesus Christ come in flesh", then the building will be protected and the family spirit preserved, so that we are preserved by the consciousness that we constitute a family. It is this kind of man, a man of another order, who comes before us at the Lord's supper, He who gave His life for us. All other spirits make much of man after the flesh, as the case is with those that have imposing ceremonies, which
{321}
appeal to the feelings of the natural man, and with those having connection with the power of Satan. If I say, "Jesus is Lord", it means that I want to be subject to Him and keep His commandments. It says "If anyone thinks himself to be a prophet or spiritual, let him recognize the things that I write to you, that it is the Lord's commandment", @1 Corinthians 14: 37, and in Luke the Lord says, "Why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things that I say?" @Luke 6: 46.
In the chapter presently before us the apostle restricts himself to speaking of the operations of the Spirit. He says, "But all these things operates the one and the same Spirit, dividing to each in particular according as he pleases".
In verse 8 knowledge is spoken of, and in verse 9 faith.
Ques. Does what we have in verse 10 continue today? I think these operations and gifts to heal the sick, etc., have ceased -- not that the Holy Spirit could not give them now, if He so pleased, but they are not necessary today; they were for the sake of the unbelieving nations. If God gave to the assembly in the present time the recognition she had in the beginning, it would mean overlooking the breakdown that has come in. The Holy Spirit abides in the assembly, but He always operates for the Lord in a suited manner and never overlooks the damage that has occurred. These signs were a kind of bell-ringing to warn the people, namely the unbelievers (@1 Corinthians 14: 22). Now the people are assembled and the bells are no longer required. Even an unclean spirit can do signs, and it tests us. Antichrist will come with signs and wonders and thus mislead many, if it were possible, even the elect (see @Matthew 24: 24) but the simple believer has a touchstone today which can preserve him. We are tested as to the kind of man we confess. Is it "Jesus Christ come in flesh"?
Moses is perhaps a type of Jesus as Lord, and the ark of the covenant a type of "Jesus Christ come in flesh", typifying His manhood.
"So also is the Christ"; it is wonderful in this verse to see the name "the Christ" applied to the assembly. The assembly is the anointed vessel to carry the testimony down
{322}
here, as Christ was when He was here. Corinthians does not take us as far as Ephesians, where Christ is Head over all things to the assembly. In Corinthians it is rather the assembly considered as a vessel usable by the Lord through the anointing. Verse 13 gives us an explanation of this when it says, "For also in the power of one Spirit we have all been baptized into one body ... and have all been given to drink of one Spirit". That we are baptized into one body corresponds to the thought included in baptism by water. Although it is not here a question of this baptism, it is nevertheless a similar thought and relates to what been done by another, while "to drink of one Spirit" is what we ourselves do. These two things have their correspondence to the two special ordinances we have in christendom, namely baptism and the Lord's supper. By baptism I disappear in the company. I am myself no longer prominent, and this tests me as to how much I am subject to the Lord. This baptism had its beginning at Pentecost, but its importance continues today. We become one company, we drink of one Spirit. I then acknowledge all the saints, and give place to them all. In the spirit of love we drink from the same cup; it is only love that would drink from the same cup.
{323}
THE ASSEMBLY (4)
@1 Corinthians 14: 26 - 40; @1 Corinthians 16: 1 - 9
My thought was that we should consider how the vessel of the testimony receives its dignity by the anointing and by divine love. It is an important matter for us to see what dignity is conferred on the saints through this anointing. What all religious systems try to acquire through training and human learning, the saints receive through the anointing. What emerges as the fruit of the anointing is necessarily superior to everything which man can bring about. It says of Stephen: "they were not able to resist the wisdom and the Spirit with which he spoke" (@Acts 6: 10), and this was before the most learned and most prominent religious assembly on earth at that time, the law-making council in Jerusalem. Stephen's face shone as the face of an angel. Stephen is a type of a real christian. He began in all lowliness by serving tables, but he qualified for a great place, through his faith and courage. This speaks of the power of a heavenly dignity and is something which is open for every believer. It says of him that "all who sat in the council, looking fixedly on him, saw his face as the face of an angel" (@Acts 6: 15). It is through such vessels as Stephen that God addresses Himself to men, and in them shows the power that is of God. Stephen was full of the Holy Spirit.
"The God of glory appeared to our father Abraham", @Acts 7: 2. This speaks of the great dignity of our calling. "The most High dwells not in places made with hands" (@Acts 7: 48), but He will dwell in a vessel filled with the Spirit, and anointed vessels like Stephen, and He commits His testimony to them; they compose His dwelling. What I desire we should see is that, when we have received the Spirit of God, we are quite independent of any religious training that men can give us, and which is so common in the religious systems around us. This can come in, not only in professing christendom around us, but also amongst those who serve in the assembly where only
{324}
the Spirit ought to govern. @1 Corinthians 12 shows this. @1 Corinthians 13 presents to us the love which finds its home in the assembly of God and is active there. This is another feature which distinguishes the saints from the world. In the great counsel at Jerusalem, nothing of this character was found. The assembly, as characterized by this love, became in @Acts 9 the object of Satan's most bitter enmity; Saul persecuted the assembly.
Ques. For what testimony is the assembly the anointed vessel?
The testimony is the presentation of God as He has revealed Himself in Christ. As the anointed vessel, Christ went about doing good down here. Wherever He went He revealed God, and the thought is that the assembly, in the same way down here, should give expression to what God is.
In @Acts 18: 11 it says of Paul that he remained in Corinth a year and six months. The testimony ought to take character from the teaching the saints have been under.
The word of God is a revelation of the mind of God, and this ought to come forward in the assembly.
It was "the word of the Lord" which characterized the ministry in Ephesus. "Thus with might the word of the Lord increased and prevailed", we read in @Acts 19: 20, and in the same chapter, verse 10, we read, "and this took place for two years, so that all that inhabited Asia heard the word of the Lord, both Jews and Greeks". This was the power which would overcome the spiritual power of wickedness in the heavenlies, just as Israel fought against the seven nations of enemies in the land of Canaan. This power is the word of God expressing His mind, and should be found in the assembly. What God is in Himself is revealed in His word. The word of God has a reference to the tabernacle as God's dwelling, where He is revealed. He dwells among men. The tabernacle was outwardly a very unimpressive building, just as the assembly in Corinth was not much to take account of outwardly, but God was there. The apostle says in @1 Corinthians 1: 26: "For consider your calling, brethren, that there are not many wise according to flesh, not many powerful, not many
{325}
high-born", but, if some unbeliever came in, he would understand that God was there. How important that we should make room for the Spirit so that He might be free to strengthen us, as He will do, on the way of more surpassing excellence, that is, the way of reciprocal love towards one another, so that spiritual understanding and discernment might mark us as we take part at the Supper in the service of the assembly. Chapters 12, 13 and 14 speak of how the testimony of God gets in and affects people.
The epistles to Timothy are based on the presentation of the house of God as we find it in Ephesians, in a universal way, that is, as embracing all the saints in their different localities, where prayer goes up to God for all men; but here in 1 Corinthians it is a local thought, and is a question of the saints in a particular place representing the house of God. This looks at the saints as assembled. They are called the assembly of God in Corinth (chapter 1: 1) and this gives them dignity. It is wonderful that the assembly of God can be found in many different localities, for example, here in Copenhagen, and many other places.
Ques. Does the anointing mean that the saints can approach God as priests, or does it stand in relation to the testimony?
We have received the Spirit, and we approach God, "we have both access by one Spirit to the Father", but the Spirit as the anointing is for testimony.
Ques. What do we depend on to be able to affect people? We begin with announcing the death of the Lord, a serious matter for all to pay attention to, and the Spirit distributes gifts to whom He will, in order to call attention to the power of God. In the circle where these things are found there is also love, not merely brotherly love, but the same love that shone forth in Christ down here. This is the way of more surpassing excellence, and that which shone forth in Christ in a most wonderful way. Love abides. This love should mark the saints; therefore Paul says, "if I ... have not love, I am nothing". The question for us is, therefore, Have we love? It is not only brotherly love, but
{326}
the love which comes out through Christ, God's love, which goes further than brotherly love (@2 Peter 1: 7). John says in his first epistle: "Hereby we have known love, because *he* has laid down his life for us", chapter 3: 16: Love was expressed in Christ, and comes out in the saints by the Spirit. If we have not love we have nothing, no matter how much knowledge of the truth we may possess.
The death of Christ becomes for us the proof of this love, but God makes it active in our hearts by the Spirit. In 2 Corinthians we see that all the glory of God consists in making this love active in us. He is the Spirit of the new covenant. John says in his first epistle: "Beloved, if God has so loved us, we also ought to love one another", @1 John 4: 11. @1 Corinthians 13 shows us how we drink of one Spirit, and chapter 14 speaks of spiritual understanding. In verse 15 of this chapter we read, "I will pray with the spirit, but I will pray also with the understanding". This should preserve us from long prayers and long speeches which are not for edification. We ought to be able to take part in discourse, prayer and song in a manner which leads to edification. When it speaks in verse 15 of the spirit, "pray with the spirit", it refers to my own spirit. It is not enough that I am in liberty in my spirit, but what I express ought also to be in keeping with my spiritual understanding and my spiritual discrimination.
Ques. Does having spiritual understanding mean that we are like Christ, that we have His mind?
Yes, that is what lies behind everything that comes forward in this chapter. When the apostle says that he speaks "with the understanding", he is suggesting that there were those who behaved as if they were out of their minds.
We ought to wait upon one another, and be simple in everything. If we come together for prayer, to read the Scriptures, or to break bread, then let us do it. We read in @Luke 22: 14, "and when the hour was come, he placed himself at table, and the twelve apostles with him".
Verse 23 in our chapter speaks of the assembly coming together in one place, for ministry of the word and the like.
{327}
The full meaning of the word "assembly" implies that those who compose the assembly have come out from something; they are called out. Such souls have an understanding of what it is to be gathered to the name of the Lord. Although we cannot say that we, in this period of break-down, constitute the assembly, we can nevertheless conform to assembly order, and this order ought to apply to all occasions as we come together. On an occasion such as this, we cannot say we are together as in assembly. We should give place to the Spirit so that He can be free to operate. We acknowledge the order which according to Scripture ought to govern the assembly, for example, the women keep silence in the assembly. The order which belongs to the assembly ought always to mark us.
Ques. Could not the sisters ask questions in our more private meetings in the home?
It is best not to lay down hard and fast rules, but we must always acknowledge assembly principles. In the courts we can have happy times together, but that is more occasional, and not a recognized or fixed meeting. What is spoken about here in this chapter refers to when we come together for prayer, ministry, or Bible readings. In verse 33 it says that "God is not a God of disorder but of peace"; in verse 34 we read "Let your women be silent in the assemblies"; then in verse 40, "let all things be done comelily and with order". If we have private meetings in our homes, we ought as wisdom's children to know how we should behave ourselves. "Love ... does not behave in an unseemly manner", @1 Corinthians 13: 5. There is yet another matter which we ought to think about, namely, to have regard for one another, and not tire the saints. We ought not to drag our meetings on past a reasonable time, and so tire out our bodies. Therefore it says, "Let two or three prophets speak". Chapter 12 gives us the different gifts, and chapter 13 the power to carry things out, which is love. When I understand what my own measure is, then I appreciate what others have and can wait on them. We gladly wait on a brother who is humble and not so richly gifted. It thus makes room for the youngest among us, and
{328}
that being so, we are glad to hear his voice, so long as everything is in the direction of edification and is according to good order. We can all contribute, but, if it is to be for profit, then there must be found with us spiritual sensitiveness, and this we will have if we drink of the same spirit, that is, love.
Ques. How do we understand the leading of the Spirit? Is it by spiritual instinct, that is, that I am governed by spiritual understanding regarding what is suitable for the time?
Yes, the latter, that I am governed by spiritual understanding. The word in verse 15 refers to my sp. While the Spirit is the power for edification, He operates also through my spirit. We wait on the Lord for leading, not on the Spirit. The measure of our love is tested in chapter 13, and the measure of our spiritual understanding is tested in chapter 14. Understanding refers here, however, to the subjective work of the Spirit in us, and I cannot go further than what the Spirit has formed in me. It is important not to go past what I have received by the Spirit, so that I do not try to present what I have only learned in an objective way. That being so, the Spirit has had to form the vessel.
J.B.S. used to say, nevertheless, that when we acknowledge the Lord as Head and have received from Him, He can lead us further than we have really come in our soul, and that is what causes growth.
One has heard of those who fall into a kind of trance, and they say it is the Spirit which is leading them, but that is contradicted in this chapter. The assembly is composed of those who have spiritual understanding and know what they do or say; they do not get into such a condition as a trance.
Ques. How do we understand the Lord's leading?
The Holy Spirit works in my heart, but through my spiritual understanding I ought to judge if it is suitable to the present moment or not. We are governed by the light that governs the position in its completeness, all that belongs to the christian dispensation.
Ques. How are we to understand verse 30?
{329}
This verse deals with the service of the prophets. Everything is to take place with order and according to what is suitable. "And spirits of prophets are subject to prophets". No matter how much a brother may have to bring forward, he will nevertheless give place to another brother. But it is difficult to say much about these things at the present time, when we perhaps do not have the spiritual power for them. What corresponds most to it is what we call an open meeting -- "each of you has a psalm, has a teaching", etc., verse 26. If the saints are to receive what is suitable and of help, then one must make room for the other.
Ques. Is prayer in its proper place at the breaking of bread?
If we are conscious of a lack of spiritual power, it is then right to ask the Lord to come to our aid, but it is better to do that for which we have come together, to break bread, and the Lord will help us.
{330}
THE ASSEMBLY (5)
@1 Corinthians 16: 1 - 24
On a previous occasion we were occupied with the truth of the Lord's supper. The breaking of bread is a remembrance of the Lord Jesus and is named in connection with the first day of the week. When we remember Him, He will lead us into the Father's counsels.
In @John 20 it was the first day of the week on which the Lord came in amongst His own, after He had sent them word, in which He called them His brethren, and said that His Father was their Father and His God their God. He had in view to link them with what is heavenly, as He was about to ascend there. So we find that the first day of the week and the breaking of bread stand in connection, with the Father's counsels. The expression, the Lord's supper, stands in connection with the Lord's day and is more linked with our testimony *here*. "For as often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink the cup, ye announce the death of the Lord, until he come", @1 Corinthians 11: 26. The Lord's supper is the outward side of this act, while the breaking of bread gives us the inward side. It is one and the same act, but looked at from different sides. The first day of the week is a new beginning; it links us with what is eternal, and we are led into the Father's realm. John knew what it was in @Revelation 1, when he was called back on the Lord's day to the testimonial realm. John became "in the Spirit on the Lord's day"; he was outside the limitations of time, but, as we said, he was recalled from there. He heard behind him a voice which called him back to the testimonial realm. The one who knows what it is to be in the realm of the Spirit knows what it is to come back to the realm of testimony.
We have seen before that John's gospel stands linked with eternal things, while the first three gospels stand connected with what had gone before in the Old Testament. John's gospel begins: "In the beginning was the Word", that is, before anything was created.
{331}
It may be said that most believers in christendom break bread, but the question is, Is it really the Lord's supper they have? Paul says to the Corinthians, "When ye come therefore together into one place, it is not to eat the Lord's supper", @1 Corinthians 11: 20. Every believer ought to be assured that it is the Lord's supper in which he participates. This epistle gives us the conditions for this. It is a help to notice the circumstances which obtained when this supper was inaugurated. The Lord had told his disciples that they should follow a man who was carrying a pitcher of water and, when they followed him, they came to a house where there was a man who acknowledged the Lord's authority. It is most important to recognize the Lord's authority before it can be the Lord's supper. It says also that the room was furnished. In Corinthians we have the proper order presented; the whole epistle is the Lord's commandment, chapter 14: 37. We must not introduce there anything of man's order, as the case is in the systems around us.
We found it of interest to note the different presentations of the assembly in John's gospel and in those of the three other evangelists, the latter speaking of the place the assembly has in the testimony down here, typified in Rebecca as brought into Sarah's tent. The supper is not named in John's gospel. There it is a question of the Father's counsels and eternal things, but feet-washing is mentioned, so that we might have part with Christ.
Ques. What is the meaning of the bread being broken? It was the Lord who broke the bread. They saw Him do it and could remember it. The disciples ate it. Others can see us eating the bread, but no one can see that in our hearts we are remembering Him. Putting out our hand and taking the bread and eating it constitute a testimony to the fact that we are committing ourselves to the Lord's death. It is a love supper, but it is also the *Lord's* supper. It is His body and blood. To say that because we break bread we necessarily eat the Lord's supper, is to destroy all soul exercise in connection with it.
In chapter 15 we have the great truth of resurrection.
{332}
The saints ought to be a testimony to God's great victory over death.
Ques. Does what happened at Emmaus shed light on the breaking of bread?
It is true that the Lord broke the bread there, but it was not the Lord's supper. They had to go back to the eleven in Jerusalem, the place where the Lord's authority was recognized and where the testimony was to be maintained. If it had been the Lord's supper that they had in Emmaus, then they would have remained there. We can say that the Lord breaking the bread in Emmaus presents to us the spiritual side in the breaking of bread; He was made known to them in the breaking of bread. It does not mean that the breaking of bread and the Lord's supper are two different acts, but they are two different ways of looking at the same matter. The thought in the breaking of bread is that we are ready to leave this world, which corresponds to the rapture; but the thought in the expression "the Lord's supper" is that we should be in keeping with the testimony *down here*. The breaking of bread has therefore in view to lead us to the place where He is, and is like a door out of the place where our responsibility is. There comes the moment when the Lord comes before our minds, and He leads us then into the place where He is. "In his shadow have I rapture", @Song of Songs 2: 3. I am, so to speak, away from everything down here, and I go out of sight. The breaking of bread in itself takes us back in our thoughts to the moment when the Lord broke the bread. He comes before us then in a living way, so that we forget ourselves.
@1 Corinthians 15 presents God's victory over death. Ephesians goes further than this, and speaks of the power that works in us, and that God will have glory in the assembly for all eternity. This is the eternal side, whereas Corinthians speaks of the assembly as a testimony to God's victory down here. If God bears testimony to men, He does it through a suitable vessel. When the Lord Jesus was here, He was the One God found competent for this. In His Person He is God. He was in Himself competent
{333}
for every service, but He did not take up any service before He was anointed by the Spirit for that object. Then it was that God committed everything to Him. Now the Holy Spirit has come here and the assembly has been anointed to carry the testimony. It says of the Spirit that "it sat upon each one of them" (@Acts 2: 3) so that the testimony went out from an anointed company. The Spirit's incoming to the assembly involves power; the same power which raised Christ from the dead, operates now in the assembly. Christ was marked out Son of God in power by resurrection of the dead, @Romans 1: 4. It is by this power that the work of God is continued now, as we see in @1 Corinthians 15: 58. In @Job 37: 7 and 8 it says: "He sealeth up the hand of every man; that all men may know His work. And the wild beast goeth into its lair, and they remain in their dens"; that is to say, Satan is restricted, and the work of God goes on unhindered. I refer to job because it shows us how all human power is excluded in connection with the work of the Lord. Satan is restricted as we recognize the principles that distinguish the work of God. In all the various religious systems much is made of what man can do; even money exerts its influence there. Peter says in @Acts 3: 6: "Silver and gold I have not; but what I have, this give I to thee: In the name of Jesus Christ the Nazaraean rise up and walk". There is sufficient power in the assembly to carry out the work of God in a proper manner. Moses says in @Psalm 90: 16: "Let thy work appear unto thy servants, and thy majesty unto their sons. And let the beauty of Jehovah our God be upon us; and establish thou the work of our hands upon us; yea, the work of our hands, establish thou it". God desires that His work should continue in the assembly in His power. I refer to this, as it shows us the vessel through which the testimony is continued down here on God's account.
Ques. How is this power realized in the assembly at the present time?
It is when we are brought back to recognize God's power, the power of resurrection. The power is there if we are in the state to recognize it. When the Lord raised the
{334}
son of the widow of Nain it was a testimony that God had visited His people. Christ is marked out Son of God in power by resurrection of the dead. The power was there present when the widow's son was raised to life (see @Luke 7) and in the same chapter we see the Lord in Simon the Pharisee's house. The Pharisee saw no beauty in Him, although He had brought the grace of God into the world, but the woman washed His feet with her tears, those feet that had come all the long way down here with the glad tidings of grace, and she anointed them; she saw His beauty. We could say that God established the work of her hands. If the work of our hands consists in protecting the rights of God and giving Him right of way, then He will establish it, and we will then compose part of the anointed vessel. As we consider this chapter, we see the wonderful vessel through which God presents His testimony, that is, the assembly, which ought to be independent of the world and its resources. The assembly should not seek to adorn herself with any human education, but the Lord's delight should rest upon her. Despite the ruin and damage which has come in, we can abound in the work of the Lord always. No one needs to lose courage. God says through the prophet Isaiah, "Strengthen the weak hands" (@Isaiah 35: 3), and it was said to Gideon, "Jehovah is with thee, thou mighty man of valour ... Go in this thy might", @Judges 6: 12 and 14.
Ques. What is involved in the testimony at the present time?
We have three different expressions, namely "the testimony of God", "the testimony of our Lord", and "the testimony of the Christ". In 2 Timothy it is a question of "the testimony of our Lord", which we have to preserve, but "the testimony of God" includes the whole truth of God as revealed in Christ, and this in relation to man, as we learn in Romans. "The testimony of the Christ" is more in relation to Him as the vessel through whom God will fulfil all His thoughts, and accomplish all things according to His own pleasure. "The testimony of our Lord" gives us the thought of the power through which He carries it
{335}
out. It says of the apostle in Jerusalem that the Lord stood by Him at night and said that, as he had testified the things concerning Him at Jerusalem, so he should also testify at Rome (@Acts 23: 11). Christ is Lord of all; He rules over even emperors. We have great encouragement to continue in the testimony. The Lord showed mercy to the house of Onesiphorus because he had a heart for the testimony. The Lord will encourage His people as they walk in the light of this.
In 2 Timothy it says, "Do the work of an evangelist", and in @Isaiah 56: 8 we read, "Yet will I gather others to him, with those of his that are gathered". In @Acts 2 we find that, where they were assembled for prayer, the assembly was added to by three thousand; then five thousand are mentioned, and in chapter 5 "more than ever". The thought is that they were gathered to the Lord and loved Him.
To keep the sabbath in the Old Testament was a sign of keeping His covenant, and in the New Testament the sign is the Lord's supper. In @Isaiah 56: 6 and 7 we read, "every one that keepeth the sabbath from profaning it, and holdeth fast to my covenant; even them will I bring to my holy mountain, and make them joyful in my house of prayer". Some of us have enjoyed what it is to have come to His holy dwelling: "For my house shall be called a house of prayer for all the peoples". If we apprehend the true meaning of the house of God, we will pray for all men and God will give blessing through the gospel. "The Lord Jehovah, who gathereth the outcasts of Israel, saith: Yet will I gather others to him, with those of his that are gathered", @Isaiah 56: 8. What a great encouragement for us that God will continue to gather right to the end.
In chapter 16 we hear again of the first day of the week. The apostle speaks of certain persons whom the Holy Spirit names for us. These persons belong to the anointed vessel and they shine out in a special way; they are like stars in relation to the sun. Star differs from star in glory, the one from the other, as we see in chapter 15. We find such a group of stars in verse 17. The apostle says of them,
{336}
"They have refreshed my spirit and yours". Their love for the apostle shone out. They were labourers in the Lord. It is important to notice all those that the Holy Spirit names. It appears that Timothy by nature was somewhat timid, and he thus could easily become the object of criticism or complaint among the saints. We ought to see to it that we are occupied with the good which is found with every brother, no matter how weak he may be. Timothy was one who worked the work of the Lord, as it says. It cannot be said that all work is the work of the Lord. We ought to assure ourselves that it really is the work of the Lord that we are doing. This would preserve us from working independently of the Lord. Paul was the wise architect, and it is right for those who build to follow in his footsteps. The apostle says of Timothy, "he works the work of the Lord, even as I". We ought to receive such, and give place to them, that they might be amongst us without fear (see verse 10). The work of the Lord involves many tears and much labour, and we ought to see to it that we are supporting such a brother. "Let not therefore any one despise him; but set him forward in peace, that he may come to me; for I expect him with the brethren", verse 11. He does not come to Paul as a prominent person, but with the brethren. He should come with *them*, not they with him; he did not come as a prominent servant, but as a brother. It is greater to be a brother than a servant. This should help us to separate from the spirit that marks clericalism.
Another brother named here is Apollos. He represents God's resources alongside such a vessel as the apostle Paul. It says, "I begged him much that he would go to you with the brethren; but it was not at all his will to go now; but he will come when he shall have good opportunity", verse 12. This conveys the thought that he was one who looked after his own special service for the Lord. The Lord always has His resources. Peter once asked, "Lord, and what of this man?" (@John 21: 21), and the Lord answered, "If I will that he abide until I come, what is that to thee? Follow thou me".
{337}
The house of Stephanas had devoted themselves to the saints for service. We find there a house wherein the work of God was carried out. We ought to own all such. "Ye should also be subject to such, and to every one joined in the work and labouring", verse 16. The house of Stephanas was a house like this, and such a house is a great help in a place. In verse 19 Aquila and Priscilla are mentioned, and the assembly in their house. What an honour for a house! Every believer ought to hold himself for service to the saints. Whatever we possess, a horse or a car or whatever it may be, we ought to hold it at the Lord's disposal and service. God brings all this in among the saints for the sake of the testimony.
The giving or collection which is mentioned in verse 2 does not stand connected with the Lord's supper, although it was on the first day of the week. There was to be no collection when the apostle came, but they should lay by at home on the first day of the week. This shows that it should be given in the light of eternity. What generosity God has revealed in connection with creation! What riches we find there! Barnabas, whose name means "Son of consolation", gave like a son. He sold his land and laid the money at the feet of the apostles for the need of the saints. We ought to be like God and give richly, not only when some special brother comes along, for example, when an apostle in the days gone by came to the saints, but what we give ought to be the result of what God has given us in connection with what we have enjoyed on the first day of the week. We do not find anything said in Scripture as to taking a collection on the Lord's Day, but it is in keeping with the spirit of the Lord's supper. It is not that God needs our money, because everything is His, as we read, "For every beast of the forest is mine, the cattle upon a thousand hills", @Psalm 50: 10. But God loves a cheerful giver. He says, "If I were hungry, I would not tell thee", @Psalm 50: 12. The Lord appreciates what we have learnt on the first day of the week, and it is according to this principle that we should act.
{338}
THE QUEEN
@Psalm 45: 9 - 17
On a previous occasion we considered the King as presented in this psalm. We might this time see something of what is said of the queen, and how she is prominent in the latter part of the psalm. This psalm speaks of the queen's relationship to the King. In verse 9 it says, "Upon thy right hand doth stand the queen". The King is the Lord Jesus and, seen from a prophetic viewpoint, the queen refers to the Jewish people, but for us it corresponds to the assembly. In verse 10 we find how the saints come to this position where they compose the queen. "Hearken, daughter, and see, and incline thine ear; and forget thine own people and thy father's house: and the king will desire thy beauty; for he is thy Lord, and worship thou him". This thought is presented in Ephesians, where the saints are brought to this.
The serious thing for us is that the One who was presented as king to the Jewish people was rejected. In all the gospels it says that His accusation was written over His cross, and this accusation was "Jesus of Nazareth the King of the Jews". The world was one with those who crucified Him. This is a very serious matter. The believer begins with the cross. When we are baptized, we are baptized to His death. When we break bread, we announce His death. The assembly began to be formed at the death of Christ. It is formed through suffering and at the end the assembly is presented as the Lamb's wife; she is wife to the suffering Lamb. To reign with Christ we must suffer with Him. The Corinthians saw past this; they wished to reign too early. They reigned as kings without Christ, the One who had loved them so much. The apostles were the offscouring of the world, and ordained to this by God. We see thus it is a path of suffering we have to follow. Paul said he filled up "that which is behind of the tribulations of Christ in my flesh, for his body, which is the assembly", @Colossians 1: 24.
{339}
In verse 9 of our psalm it says, "Myrrh and aloes, cassia, are all thy garments". The Spirit we have received from Christ is a Spirit that is prepared to suffer, so that the assembly comes out at the end as the Lamb's wife; she is suitable for the suffering Lamb. So, dear brethren, we begin with the cross of Christ, where we see this accusation against Him written over His cross. He was crucified because of the testimony He bore. This accusation was written in Hebrew, Greek and Latin. The whole world made itself accomplices in this act. It says of Joseph of Arimathaea that he was a good and righteous man, who "had not assented to their counsel and deed", @Luke 23: 51. Their counsel speaks of their intriguing and their deed of what they did, and they proceeded thus until they murdered Him. The world cannot rid itself of its guilt, unless it separates itself from this act.
The disciples made themselves one with the testimony. We break with this world and commit ourselves to the Lord by baptism and the Lord's supper. We can see how clear the position of the disciples was in Jerusalem; they were baptized to the name of the Lord and broke bread in remembrance of Him whom the world had rejected. The world stood out as the murderer of the Lord, and these disciples had the cross to remind them of this, and what had been written upon it. The position of the world is the same even today, although hidden under a covering. In @Revelation 11 we find the dead bodies of the two witnesses lying in the streets of Jerusalem. We ought not to be deceived by what we see in Sodom and Egypt, "where also our Lord was crucified". We can stand in a right relationship today if we hold fast the truth expressed in baptism and the Lord's supper. It is as if we say by these things, as others said once before to David, "Thine are we, David, and on thy side, thou son of Jesse". If we belong to any of the different systems in this world, then we have not taken our place alongside a crucified Christ, because, as He Himself said, "He that is not with me is against me", @Luke 11: 23. The believers in Corinth were not in agreement with the meaning of baptism and the breaking of
{340}
bread. The Lord is only recognized in an outward, formal way in professing christendom. The will of man rules there. Paul says, "But far be it from me to boast save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom the world is crucified to me, and I to the world", @Galatians 6:14.
The thought of the queen in this psalm is a general idea, which embraces all, the whole company, but this appeal to the daughter is to the individual, so that we might arrive at this position which the queen here occupies. "Hearken, daughter". I wonder if we all know what it is to hear and understand. The gifts which come down from a glorified Christ are given that we might hear. The apostle says that he was a herald and apostle and teacher. The Lord had appointed him to that: "a herald and apostle, ... a teacher of the nations in faith and truth", @1 Timothy 2: 7. This was in respect of making known the testimony. Peter announced at Pentecost: "God has made him, this Jesus whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ". A herald preaches Christ; an apostle represents Christ's authority; and a teacher instructs souls.
I wonder if we are accustomed to hear. We are exhorted to hear and see and to watch. Mary in @Luke 10 sat at the feet of Jesus and heard His word, and later we find her in @John 12 as a worshipper, when she took the ointment of pure nard of great price. As we hearken and see and incline our ear, it means that the Lord has our ear. He has a place with us, and we begin now to reflect something of Himself.
"And the king will desire thy beauty". We see how the queen is formed to be for the King's pleasure. The Lord has great pleasure in us as we hearken and see and incline our ear; that is to say, when we forget our father's house, so as to have more joy in the saints and our spiritual associations than in the natural. If our natural relationships have the first place, then the beauty in which the king delights will not be found with us. The Lord Jesus is the Lord of glory, and yet He gave up everything. Abraham was called out of his country and his father's house. Every
{341}
believing soul can, in the light of that, prove how much spiritual progress he has really made. The natural man's strongest feature is nationalism, but if we retain that, we are not in agreement with God's call. National feelings constitute the greatest hindrance of the people of God. The house of God is neither national nor international. It is completely separate from this world, governed by totally different principles from those we find in the world. The principle that belongs to the house of God comes out in this verse: "Forget thine own people and thy father's house". We must learn to apply these things in order to be in the position which the queen has in this psalm. The queen is a figure of the assembly as presented in @Revelation 21. This psalm refers in the first place to Jerusalem here on earth, but we are speaking now of Jerusalem which is above.
The assembly ought now to reflect the light of Christ, as the moon reflects the light of the sun, when the sun is hidden from the world. Israel is waiting for a new moon. David was rejected in @1 Samuel 20 and his place was empty, as we read. This is a picture of the present time. It was the time of the new moon, that is to say, Israel's opportunity. The time had come for Israel to arise, as it says in @Isaiah 60: "Arise, shine! for thy fight is come". But Jerusalem neglected this opportunity to arise and shine; she preferred to remain in her darkness. Therefore it says that she corresponds to Hagar, and is in bondage with her children. Outwardly professing christendom is in this position; she has taken up a Jewish position, but the word to us is, "Arise, shine! for thy light is come". Our light is the truth which comes out in Ephesians, and we should "arise up from among the dead, and the Christ shall shine upon thee", @Ephesians 5: 14. Although the assembly is in ruins, we can go back to the principles which were given at the beginning. The day is coming when the assembly will shine with the glory of God. Then the latter glory of the house will be greater than the former. First love was manifest at Pentecost. "Gold of Ophir", mentioned in verse 9, with which the queen is adorned, is found in
{342}
Ephesians. Stringed instruments "out of ivory palaces" are also spoken of. These ivory palaces speak of the beauty which marks the throngs of Zion. The Lord is deriving pleasure from such today. We find in 1 Corinthians how these stringed instruments are tuned, and in chapter 12 we have the subject of the Spirit.
{343}
THE LORD'S COMING IN RELATION TO OUR RESPONSIBILITY
@Revelation 1: 12 - 20; @1 Samuel 7: 15 - 17; @John 12: 1 - 3
The Lord Jesus went in and out amongst His disciples. This principle of going in and out is presented in these scriptures and they show how everything found now in the house of God is exposed before Him as Judge. He "walks in the midst of the seven golden lamps", @Revelation 2: 1. We know that the Revelation looks at the assembly from its public side, and how she has come short, but perhaps we have not properly understood what it means that the Lord now in this manner walks in the midst of the assemblies. Philadelphia is included here, because, even amongst those who in some measure are faithful to the Lord, He walks as Judge. His garments give us this thought. Nothing unsuitable escapes His eye and His judgment.
It is on the ground of the assembly's shortcomings that the Lord here wears the garments of a Judge. He stands out as Son of man, "his head and hair white like white wool, as snow". He is "clothed with a garment reaching to the feet, and girt about at the breasts with a golden girdle". His love is in a distinct way held back. "His eyes as a flame of fire; and his feet like fine brass, as burning in a furnace; ... and out of his mouth a sharp two-edged sword going forth". All these features give us the thought of Him as a Judge. Earlier in the history of the assembly we see Him as going in and out amongst His own. The apostle speaks in @1 Corinthians 15: 5 - 8 of the different occasions when the Lord after His resurrection revealed Himself to them. "He appeared to Cephas, then to the twelve. Then He appeared to above five hundred brethren at once, of whom the most remain until now, but some also have fallen asleep. Then He appeared to James; then to all the apostles; and last of all, as to an abortion, he appeared to me also".
{344}
The Lord stood by the side of Paul in Jerusalem, not to chide him, and also stood by Paul's side in Rome. If we compare these scriptures we see that a great change had taken place; the Lord takes into consideration the assembly's ruin and decay in its completeness, and therefore addresses the assembly in this manner which is seen in the beginning of Revelation. The Lord comes in actuality to different places and He finds joy in that He can come in love, but perhaps the state is such that He must come with a rod.
In @1 Corinthians 4: 15 Paul speaks of himself; he comes forward there as representing the Lord when he writes these words, "If ye should have ten thousand instructors in Christ, yet not many fathers; for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the glad tidings". No one could speak to the Corinthians like Paul, for, though they could have ten thousand instructors, yet they had only one father, Paul; he had a moral responsibility for them, and as apostle he represents the Lord. He did not wish to come to them with a rod, but as a brother in liberty and love, feeling that they were his brethren, and he wished to partake with them in their joy. The Lord is loath to come as Judge amongst His people.
Ques. What is the difference between the Lord coming to His people and the presence of the Holy Spirit at the present time?
The Spirit is not looked at as coming. In accordance with @John 14 the Spirit would abide with the saints as the One who came down from Christ in heaven to abide with His people. The Lord does not now come corporeally to His own; He could do that if He so desired, but He comes now in a spiritual way. He will come one day corporeally to take the assembly.
Ques. Since the Lord returned to the glory and it says of the Spirit that He should take of the things that are Christ's and announce them to us, can we then say that He, as a divine Person, is amongst us?
The coming of the Spirit is something that belongs to this dispensation, but, when the Lord comes in amongst
{345}
us, that means something more; it is something special because He comes as Son over God's house. The Holy Spirit, as a divine Person, is active down here, but not in the same way as Christ. Here in Revelation the Lord speaks personally to the assemblies as a judge, judging in the same way as Samuel once judged Israel. He speaks seriously to the assemblies and He adds: "He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies".
If we think of the difference between the presence of the Spirit and the Lord's presence, we find that the Lord speaks as One who has authority; and the Spirit speaks as well, but it is the Lord who speaks to the assemblies here in the beginning of Revelation. We are not told what the Spirit says; but the voice of the Spirit would bring home what the Lord says to the meeting of our present need. It is important to observe the distinction between the Persons of the Godhead. In the Old Testament, Jehovah, God, was personally near to His people in the form of an angel, but it was no one less than God Himself. The Lord comes in by the Spirit in the same way. But in @John 21 the Lord came personally to the disciples at the Sea of Tiberias, when John says, "It is the Lord".
Ques. Has the Lord the same things to say to the assembly in Gothenburg as, for example, the assembly in Stockholm? No. He speaks to the assembly in Gothenburg according to the conditions that are there; He has His own special thought as to the state of every place and every meeting. Nevertheless, every meeting can devote itself to gaining instruction from what the Lord may say to other meetings. There is instruction for us in all the Lord's words, no matter in what place we find ourselves. It is important to note that all that is said to the assemblies is written in a book, and it is written for all; we belong to some of the seven assemblies and ought to derive benefit from what is written to them all. We should maintain the principles which belong to the house of God; we ought all to be exercised about that. The assembly in Ephesus should in the first place be active to be in the vital reality of what is said to them, but also exercised concerning what is said to
{346}
the other assemblies. The letter to Colosse was to be read also in the assembly of the Laodiceans, and vice versa. The Lord's coming to us depends upon our state, and come He will, even as One who judges. It is a great comfort for all those who love the Lord, and love His saints, that for a time He allows the north wind to blow on our meetings, allows it to blow upon the small gardens. His discipline comes in in this way. We see in the letter to Smyrna that they should have tribulation ten days. The Lord holds this wind in His fist; this tribulation which they should suffer was limited to ten days.
It is good to remember that the Lord reserves His right to walk amidst the assemblies, although the assembly had failed. His arm has power to accomplish His will. He is girt about the breasts with a golden girdle. He is not here a Servant as in @John 13, where His words were the communications of love. Here in @Revelation 1 it reads that a sharp two-edged sword went out of His mouth. He has His own way of claiming His rights through the ministry of which Jeremiah speaks: "Is not my word like a fire, saith Jehovah; and like a hammer that breaketh the rock in pieces?" @Jeremiah 23: 29.
Ques. Could we compare Paul's ministry in 1 Corinthians to a hammer?
1 Corinthians corresponds to the north wind, and the second letter is the south wind. By means of the north wind a way had been prepared for the Lord to come into His garden, His assembly, to eat its fruits. "Let my beloved come into his garden, and eat its precious fruits", @Song of Songs 4: 16.
Ques. Does this garden connect with the Lord's day? Yes. The Lord looks down on us on each occasion and sees what is proceeding.
Ques. It seems it is possible to shut the Lord out?
The state can be such that He cannot come in to let His love flow out.
Ques. It has been said that the Lord comes in as we are assembled, and on the other hand it is sometimes possible that He does not come?
{347}
We must allow the Lord His liberty and not think that the Lord acts, so to speak, automatically. He acts in the liberty which belongs to His glorious Person. "He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me", @John 14: 21. Where there is love for the Lord, which shows itself in keeping His commandments, there the Lord will manifest Himself, and He adds, "and I will love him, and will manifest myself to him"..
Ques. Can the Lord be amongst us, and yet we may not discern His presence?
If there is *one soul* in the meeting who loves the Lord, He will manifest Himself to such a one.
Authority stands related to the Lord walking in the midst of the seven candlesticks. He is the One who judges everything, but His visit to His own, as, for example, in @John 20, is something which cannot be written down in a book. John says in chapter 21: 25, "if they were written one by one, I suppose that not even the world itself would contain the books written".
If the Lord cannot come in love as He desires to do, then we can expect Him as judge.
It is a great favour to be amongst those the Lord visits. What we see in Revelation is that the Lord walks amongst those who are responsible. His walking as Judge concerns the whole of christendom. He has presently to do with Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia and Laodicea.
If the Lord comes to a few gathered to His name in a town, this is of importance for the whole town. Only the heart which is right with the Lord can discern His coming. Everyone who names the name of the Lord has to do with the Lord. He has power to accomplish His will. "Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? are we stronger than he?" The Lord takes up things from the responsible side, and it is of great importance that it says of Him, that He, clothed with power, walks as judge amidst the assemblies to accomplish His will in that sphere.
If we love the Lord, then we love Him even in this His character, because He removes everything that is unsuitable.
Ques. Is it possible that a meeting which once had the
{348}
Lord's approval could be rejected because the principles which belong to the house of God had not been maintained?
Yes. The Lord says, "your house is left unto you desolate", @Matthew 23: 38. If man's will is allowed to be active and the house not held for the Lord, then He must leave it desolate. We can continue as usual with the meetings, but the Lord not there. The Lord takes into consideration the state and condition in relation to Himself in the assembly. He is patient and waits long before He acts in judgment. But in Revelation He walks around in Christendom to take account of everything and express His judgment about it. The time will come when the whole of christendom will be left desolate, and this will take place when the assembly is taken.
Ques. Does the Lord walk about amongst us and deal with us individually, just as He deals with the assembly as a whole?
Yes. This walking of the Lord is not only as we are gathered together, but is something which applies to the assembly as a whole. The Lord goes around constantly in this character, not merely paying a visit now and again.
The result of giving man a place leads to departure, but those who are at one with Him in His thoughts become overcomers. The one who loves the Lord does not fear Him in His character of judge. It says, "There is no fear in love, but perfect love casts out fear; for fear has torment, and he that fears has not been made perfect in love", @1 John 4: 18. We can be without fear or alarm. The Lord laid His right hand on John and said, "Fear not; I am the first and the last, and the living one: and I became dead, and behold, I am living to the ages of ages", @Revelation 1: 17 - 18.
True believers have really no fear, but rather rejoice at the Lord coming in in this way.
Ques. Could we say that the Lord deals with even greater patience now?
Yes, we could perhaps say that as regards those who walk in the light of the truth which comes out in connection with the assembly in Philadelphia. He does not deal with
{349}
them in the same way as He will one day, in severe judgment, with a christendom which has only an empty profession. These places in @1 Samuel 7: 16, Bethel, Gilgal and Mizpah, convey the thought of different principles, and the judgment was according to these. Every year Samuel went round to Bethel, Gilgal and Mizpah, and he judged Israel in these places. Bethel is the house of God, and the judgments of the Lord are in agreement with it. If He judges, it is in order that these principles should be preserved and maintained in power in His house. Gilgal speaks of circumcision, the complete removal of the flesh. It means that the Lord is "a bloody husband", @Exodus 4: 26. Through circumcision Moses was "a bloody husband" to his wife. It is peculiar to the house of God that the flesh is judged there. Colossians, as previously remarked, was to be read in the assembly at Laodicea. If they had paid attention to it, there would have been no need for John to write to Laodicea what the Lord commanded him in @Revelation 3: 14 - 22. Mizpah means 'watch-tower' and gives us the thought of covenant (see @Genesis 31: 42 and onwards). This place was Jephthah's locality; he dwelt there. We must provide for the Lord a place where He can dwell. The worst that could happen to us would be for the Lord to leave our house unto us desolate.
We find that Israel had a healthy fear of Samuel; when he came to anoint David as king, the elders came trembling and asked, "Dost thou come peaceably? And he said, Peaceably: I am come to sacrifice to Jehovah", @1 Samuel 16: 4 - 5. He came to anoint David.
Ques. Is it not a searching thought for us that Jehovah let none of Samuel's words fall to the ground?
Yes. The word of the Lord abides.
The Lord found a home in the heart of John. We are all called to take up our local responsibility. It belongs to everyone in the meeting to take up their share of the assembly's responsibility. If anyone says he has no responsibility in the meeting, then he is not suitable for fellowship.
Ques. But perhaps someone feels that he is not able to take up this responsibility?
{350}
In @Romans 14 we have the answer to that question. No one looks to a weak brother to decide the more difficult matters in a meeting. A shareholder is not indifferent to the firm's progress as a whole, no matter how few shares he may own.
{351}
THE LORD'S COMING IN RELATION TO OUR PRIVILEGES
@John 12: 1 - 3; @John 20: 19; @Acts 21: 3 - 11
Our subject is the Lord's coming to His people, not in connection with our responsibility, but in relation to the Lord as Head of the assembly.
Earlier today we read @Revelation 1 where the Lord is presented as Judge, walking in the midst of the seven assemblies, this scripture referring to the whole professing church in its responsibility. Every one calling on the name of the Lord is responsible before the Lord, and on this ground each one of us should have to do with Him. The Lord has power to exercise judgment over them. We see this, for example, in connection with those in Thyatira.
It says of Jezebel that she will not repent, therefore the Lord says that He would cast her into a bed, and those that commit adultery with her into great tribulation. The Lord has already done this, which is a serious warning to those who have part in such a system, but the Lord does not take up the same definite position of judgment towards the other assemblies. Laodicea, for instance, receives only a warning. The Lord says, "I am about to spue thee out of my mouth", but at the same time He gives her counsel, as well as saying that He stands at the door and is knocking, and, if anyone opens, He will come in unto him and sup with him, and he with the Lord. Although the Lord thus pronounces judgment upon the church publicly, He nevertheless continues to give counsel so that everyone who is faithful might open unto Him.
But, as was said, our subject is the Lord's coming to those who acknowledge His rights. In @John 12: 1 we see the Lord coming to a certain place and to those who were there, but in chapter 20 He comes to certain persons, without the place being mentioned. "Jesus therefore, six days before the passover, came to Bethany, where was the dead man Lazarus", that is to say, the Lord came there
{352}
while Lazarus was there. In @1 Corinthians 15 where we read this morning, the place is not named where those who had seen the Lord were. He appeared to these persons; but in @John 12 a particular place is named, and the Holy Spirit brings out what was found there. "There therefore they made him a supper". It not only says that they made him a supper, but it says, "There therefore they made him a supper", which means that the supper was just at that place. Therefore the thought rises in our mind, 'What is there for the Lord in the place where I live?'
Ques. Please say something as to Lazarus being there, the one who had been dead.
It reads more correctly, "the dead man Lazarus", which conveys the thought that he was dead to the world. In this way of looking at it, he is a type of the saints according to Colossians: "If therefore ye have been raised with the Christ, seek the things which are above ... for ye have died", @Colossians 3: 1 - 3. Lazarus is a type of such believers, who, in their minds, have left this world. Jerusalem, and all that stood in connection with it, had no attraction for him. You would not find him having anything to do with this world's social activities. He gave character to the company found in Bethany, but something additional is said of what was found in that place, namely, Martha's service. All this is a lovely picture of a company gathered in a certain place.
It is marked by life. All these three, Martha, Lazarus and Mary, represent the different features found in a company of the saints in a certain place.
Ques. Was it wrong for Martha to serve? No; here her service was in its right place.
Ques. Is the supper mentioned in @John 12 a picture of the Lord's supper?
It was *they* who made it. And it is in keeping with John's viewpoint to call attention to their service and their appreciation of the Lord. If the Lord is appreciated by the saints in a place, then assuredly that which Mary did will find expression amongst them.
The teaching of @John 12 is the Lord preparing us so that He might come to the place where we dwell, whereas in
{353}
chapter 20 reference is more to the persons to whom He comes.
This is John's way of supporting Paul's ministry of administration in the assembly. It was Paul's thought that the Lord should have small companies such as this everywhere in the world, and I therefore read @Acts 21, a chapter which speaks more of the results of Paul's labours than of Paul himself. His visiting the different places which are named here brought to light what existed there. When the Lord came to Bethany He knew whom He would find there. He knew those who dwelt there. "He shall drink of the brook in the way", @Psalm 110: 7. It is His desire to be able to do this in the different places which He comes to visit.
It is similar to what we find in @2 Kings 4 when the Shunammite woman thought to entertain Elisha the prophet. She said to her husband, "Behold now, I perceive that this is a holy man of God, who passes by us continually. Let us make, I pray thee, a small upper chamber with walls ... and it shall be when he cometh to us, he shall turn in thither". Thus the thought is that, when the Lord is pleased to come to a place, He is conferring a great honour on those who dwell there. They are dignified by it. If the king of Sweden should come to Gothenburg, it would be a question of where he would live. He would live with those who were dignified and worthy to entertain him. Before the Lord came to Bethany, He had made them dignified to be able to receive Him. Lazarus was dignified and represented, together with Martha and Mary, the spiritual distinction and sensitiveness which were suitable to the Lord's presence. If the king came to my house, I would hardly know how to entertain him. It demands a certain upbringing.
Ques. Do we get the distinctiveness or breeding in Colossians?
Yes. But it is possible to be together without the right thought of the Lord's coming amongst us. He says in @Malachi 1: 14, "I am a great King". We need to be in exercise regarding this and see to it that we cultivate the dignity suited to the Lord's presence. He is concerned that
{354}
this dignity is maintained, and He honours us by giving us this, but it is not enough. That we possess certain resources does not mean we can do without spiritual exercise. We need to cultivate our spiritual taste and sensitiveness, so that we know how we ought to receive the Lord in a way that is becoming.
Abraham had his name changed and he became, so to speak, ennobled. His spiritual distinctiveness and sensitiveness showed itself at the tent door by the way he received the three visiting men and refreshed them. He had his name changed after he had been circumcised, which corresponds to Colossians, and then it is wonderful how Abraham could receive the divine visitation of the three men. He presented a proposal to the Lord and the two who were with Him, and *they* said, "So do as thou hast said". It was God Himself who was there, and it was as if He said, 'Your proposal is quite right; go and do so', and Abraham was able to do so. It is one thing to tell the Lord what you wish to do, but it is another thing to be able to perform it.
This took place at a certain place, by the oaks of Mamre. I thought that something similar came to light at Bethany. Those that dwelt there were like these oaks of Mamre. There was spiritual stability and mutual fellowship in the little company in Bethany. Oaks give us the thought of stability and fellowship.
The Lord did not go to Lot, but sent the angels to him. There was distance between God and Lot. The visitation to him was more like what we read earlier in Revelation.
The Lord moves in grace to His people in the various sects in christendom, but maintains at the same time a certain distance, as he desires that they should come out of them.
He therefore knocks on the door. But it is quite another matter when the Lord comes to such a man as Abraham, as he sat by the tent door, a man who maintains the Lord's interests and is a pilgrim here.
Ques. In @Matthew 18: 20 it mentions "two or three".
Have these, through divine help, come to understand what it is to be gathered to the name of the Lord Jesus?
{355}
What we find in Matthew is, firstly, that the assembly is acknowledged as a kind of court of appeal; then it says, "Again I say unto you", which means that other circumstances could arise wherein all the saints in the assembly are not available. Therefore it says, "If two of you shall agree on the earth concerning any matter, whatsoever it may be that they shall ask, it shall come to them from my Father who is in the heavens. For where two or three are gathered together unto my name, there am I in the midst of them", @Matthew 18: 19, 20. The assembly maintains discipline and exercises administration down here, and if the circumstances are such that the saints are not available, and there are not more than two who agree concerning a matter, they are heard, and what they ask they receive. Then when they are assembled, they will find that the Lord is with them, and not only that He comes personally, but He is with them to give them His support as those that act in the light of the assembly. Thus we can maintain discipline, even if out of necessity we are only two.
Ques. Does @Matthew 18: 20 involve the Lord coming personally?
We must read it in its context. It is a question of exercising government and discipline in the assembly. It is more a question of the support the Lord in His power gives us, than the blessing and favour which Abraham participated in when the Lord came to him at the tent door. We can therefore always count on the Lord's support, even if we are only two gathered to the name of the Lord and we will find, especially when it concerns dealing with evil, that the Lord will give us His support and His help.
Let us now turn to @Acts 21. It is interesting to notice the many different events which are in this chapter. Paul was on his way to Jerusalem, and in a certain sense he represents the Lord. Of course, he was a believer like ourselves, but he occupied a special position. He found fruit in Tyre. It says in verse 4, "And having found out the disciples, we remained there seven days; ... But when we had completed the days, we set out and took our journey, all of them accompanying us, with wives and children, till we
{356}
were out of the city. And kneeling down upon the shore we prayed. And having embraced one another, we went on board ship, and they returned home". This is an example of assembly conditions in a certain place. Men, wives and children were all in one and the same spirit. They had the mind of the Spirit, and they returned the love they had all been given to share in. In this company we find a wonderful picture of what God had intended that christianity should be. This company is like those in Bethany, and the apostle and his followers remained there seven days.
Where Christ has found a place in the heart, Paul will also be received there.
{357}
THE LORD'S SUPPER
@Luke 22: 1 - 24
What has chiefly occupied us during these meetings is what the assembly is to Christ. The most prominent feature is that the assembly should be the companion of Christ for eternity, as we see in Eve as a type, and then we have different features in other types, presenting the assembly as His companion in connection with the testimony. The way the truth of the assembly has been recovered means that it is the Lord's mind that these features should be found with us, so that he still may be able to "drink of the brook in the way". So we saw how the assembly in Philadelphia, although in weakness, corresponded to God's original thought, and how the Lord, as a result of the decline that had come in, must clothe Himself as a judge and in this manner walk in the midst of the seven assemblies, which refers to the whole professing body. From @1 Samuel 7: 16 we saw in type how the Lord as judge examines the different features in the assembly, and yesterday we saw how the Lord in His love comes to us to receive that which He longs for. We see this especially at Bethany, and likewise in the local assemblies which were found in Tyre and Caesarea (@Acts 21). We considered Caesarea, where Philip the evangelist lived. An evangelical feature came out in the assembly at Caesarea, and the Lord desires in these last days to awaken our interest in the gospel. Particular memories are linked together in this meeting in Caesarea. It was there that the gentiles were first received through Peter (@Acts 10) and in chapter 21 we read that Philip had four daughters who were virgins and prophesied. Then it mentions that the prophet Agabus came there, so we find in this place two very important features of the Spirit's operations in the assembly, namely, an evangelical spirit and a prophetic spirit. There came out in the assembly in Caesarea a very important side of the assembly's place in the testimony down here. Last evening
{358}
we had before us the thought of the Holy Spirit as looked at in the gospels of Luke and John, and how He operates in different localities.
Before we go on to our subject of the Lord's supper, I would like to ask if we can say the candlestick remains, although the Lord spoke in @Revelation 2: 5 about removing it out of its place. Does the Lord walk now in the midst of the seven candlesticks? I believe that what the Lord says of the candlestick in the letter to Ephesus involves that it is now taken away. It would be removed out of its place if they did not repent, but we have no further allusion to it; therefore I think that the assembly is no longer recognized as a public testimony for God. This position was lost in Thyatira. Since that time only a remnant is recognized and the testimony is thereafter linked with a remnant. Although this remnant ought to be characterized by the features which marked the assembly at the beginning, yet it cannot claim to be the assembly as originally presented.
Distinction should be made between a candlestick and the light it gives. A candlestick cannot be of any use if it does not carry a light. The assembly should be a light-bearer here for God, but it is no longer so publicly, and, as it does not in its character represent God any longer publicly, we must in all humility take the place of a remnant. We cannot claim to be the assembly as in its original position. A candlestick conveys the thought of public testimony for God here, and therefore we find that the assembly in 1 Timothy is called "the pillar and base of the truth".
In @Philippians 2: 15 it says, "among whom ye appear as lights in the world". It is said of the saints as looked at individually, and this principle remains always. We are looked at in Philippians as the children of God in this world. There was a remnant in Thyatira which God had regard to, and since then the work of God has always been linked with a remnant. The remnant stands out clearly in the assembly in Philadelphia, because the light of the assembly had a place there. Those who seek to follow righteousness, and at the same time take the place of the
{359}
remnant in all humility, understand what this is. They desire to be governed by the same principles that governed the assembly at its beginning. We are in the light of the heavenly city, which corresponds to @Haggai 2: 9, where we read of the "latter glory of this house". We find ourselves thus between both glories. The first come out at Pentecost and in Ephesus, and the principles that governed the assembly at the beginning are still the standard for us. We do not expect a revival like what took place at Pentecost, but we await the heavenly city, and its glory is even greater, as comes out in Revelation. All this helps to strengthen our souls in the midst of the decline which has come into the assembly publicly. Thus we see how God reaches His end and we do not need to lose courage. The light God gives us is to be as a support to our souls, and we see how God will reach His end, and it will not go wrong. He operates today with this end in view. The believer is therefore sustained and strengthened as he sees he has a place in this city, and he is concerned to be in agreement with it.
Let us now go on to our subject. I proposed that we should read @Luke 22, because Luke especially supports Paul's ministry. Matthew and Mark have more the ministry of the twelve apostles in view. Therefore we find that Luke clearly distinguishes between the passover and the Lord's supper. The difference between them is not followed so clearly by Matthew's and Mark's gospels, as the truth of the assembly was first fully presented by Paul. Before this the Lord's supper was more or less connected with Jerusalem. The apostle Paul makes a clear distinction and speaks of the Supper as something he had received direct from the Lord. In @Acts 2 it says that they broke bread in the house, but in @1 Corinthians 11 the Lord's supper is clearly distinct from the believers¬ houses. "Have ye not houses to eat and to drink in?" If anyone was hungry he would eat at home. The Lord's supper is not to be connected with an ordinary meal at home. The Supper can surely be held in a brother's house, but then it is not in any way connected with that brother, but depends upon no other place being available for this purpose. We read in Philemon of "the assembly
{360}
which is in thine house". When order and administration are wholly in the Lord's hand, we can say that it is the Lord's supper. Therefore we see in Luke that the Lord Himself inaugurated the supper. It is *the Lord's* supper. In Matthew and Mark the proposal comes from the disciples, but here in @Luke 22: 7 it says, "And the day of unleavened bread came, in which the passover was to be killed. And he sent Peter and John, saying, Go and prepare the passover for us, that we may eat it". Therefore we see that the thought of the Supper has originated from the Lord Himself. "With desire I have desired to eat this passover with you before I suffer", verse 15. The thought is that He had them so much upon His heart. It is not just His suffering which is especially brought in here -- because we know that Luke does not mention that He was abandoned by God -- but the thought is more that His suffering lay before Him.
But instead of being occupied with His suffering, the Lord had the disciples in the thoughts of His heart. He said, "With desire I have desired to eat this passover with you".
It was not just that it was usual for a Jew to eat the passover at this time, as the Lord said this, but because the Lord wished to eat this passover supper *with them*. I believe that the Holy Spirit in Luke's gospel emphasises the great place the saints had in the Lord's heart as He gave them the Supper. Therefore He says, "This is my body which is given for you". In Matthew He says only, "This is my body". He does not add there, "which is given for you", neither do we get there the thought of remembrance; thus I believe that Luke in his gospel especially has Paul's ministry in view. Paul says that he had received the Supper from the Lord. His ministry was not for the Jewish remnant, but for the assembly, and so we have the inauguration of the Lord's supper in Luke's gospel, and the Lord's own feelings in connection with it mentioned.
Ques. Has the passover any connection with the Lord's table in @1 Corinthians 10: 2 1?
We have the passover in @1 Corinthians 5. Chapter 10 speaks of the Jewish altar: "are not they who eat the sacrifices in communion with the altar?" But one wishes that all
{361}
should tarry over this wonderful matter, that the Lord on this occasion gave expression to His feelings, so that we might see how the Supper promotes love in the assembly. The high priests sought how they might kill him, and the Lord knew their murderous schemes. Then we read of Judas that Satan entered into him and "he went away". The high priests and the captains are mentioned here, and Judas entered into agreement with them. How well the Lord knew all this, but, instead of being hindered, He sent Peter and John with instructions to prepare the passover "that we may eat it". The Lord set aside the outward conditions and occupied Himself wholly with the disciples in order, as He said, "that we may eat", and, when he placed Himself at table with them, He said, "With desire I have desired to eat this passover with you before I suffer". Thereafter He says of the bread, "This is my body", and of the cup, "This cup is the new covenant". These features are specially connected with Luke's gospel, and they are suited to awakening a response in love to the Lord, as we come together to partake of His supper. And the Lord adds, "This do in remembrance of me", thereby referring to what He had done. He had given thanks for the bread and broken it, and therein lay the remembrance of what He had done. Eating speaks of fellowship. We have no allusion to the Lord Himself eating the bread, but what He ate and drank stood connected with the passover. He broke the bread, and it is in the breaking of bread that remembrance chiefly lies. To break bread involves a mutual fellowship; we commit ourselves wholly to this fellowship. Therefore it says, "For as often as ye shall eat this bread and drink the cup, ye announce the death of the Lord, until He come". We have previously thought of the breaking of bread in connection with the first day of the week. That brings in the Lord in such a way that we remember Him and He becomes known amongst us as Head, and as we do so He leads us into that which is eternal. The first day of the week means that nothing has preceded; it is a completely new beginning. The first three evangelists, Matthew, Mark and Luke, all refer to the sabbath, which speaks of Christ in resurrection
{362}
connected with the preceding testimony in the Old Testament, whereas John takes us to a completely new sphere. He speaks of resurrection as a new sphere, where no one before had entered. In Eve we have a type of the assembly as in the thoughts of God before sin had come in, and it is this side John has in view. He therefore begins his gospel thus: "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. *He* was in the beginning with God". It was thus before creation. The first evangelists speak of the resurrection in connection with the prophetic and historical side, whereas John is occupied with it as that which is eternal.
The first day of the week is mentioned twice in @John 20, and it is between those two times that the Lord sent His message to His brethren, "Go to my brethren and say to them, I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God". Through this we are brought into family relationships with God as linked with Him who should ascend. It is in this connection that we enter upon our privileges which belong to us according to God's eternal purpose. I wish to link this with the thought of Eve in @Genesis 2, while the first three evangelists more take up other types, for example, Rebecca. It is, however, good to be able to distinguish between the breaking of bread and the Lord's supper. In John the Lord is occupied with the inward side and not with that which is public. We do not once have the expression "assembly" in John's gospel, nor the title "apostles". The Lord says in this gospel to Mary, "Touch me not", as He would have her understand that His position was completely heavenly. The breaking of bread gives us the thought that we come into what is eternal. It is perhaps difficult for all to understand this thought, but it is important to distinguish between the breaking of bread and the Lord's supper. It is, naturally, one and the same thing, but in Acts the breaking of bread is linked with the first day of the week, and chapter 20 shows us the proper position of the assembly in accordance with Paul's ministry. He said to the elders in Ephesus that he had not shrunk from announcing to them all the
{363}
counsel of God. @Acts 20 and @John 20 go together. The breaking of bread provides us with the opportunity of calling the Lord to mind, and as the Lord in this way gets His place amongst us, He will lead us into our assembly privileges. But it is the Lord's supper which is spoken of in @1 Corinthians 11, and, while the breaking of bread is certainly recognized there, yet we get mainly this thought: "As often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink the cup, ye announce the death of the Lord, until he come", which has in view the public testimony.
Ques. Can one break bread without eating the Lord's supper?
In that case we have stopped only at the outward literal side. "As often as ye shall eat this bread" -- it is not any bread, but this bread, which is blessed and broken, and with which is connected the thought of "my body". It refers therefore to the body and blood of the Lord. Misuse of this is linked with the body of the Lord and comes under judgment, @1 Corinthians 11: 27. I do not believe any of the systems around us have the Lord's supper. One cannot recognize the state necessary for the Lord's supper as being less than the recognition of the Lord's rights. As we call the Lord to mind by the breaking of bread, He comes to us in the assembly and we get the power proper to the sphere He will lead us into.
Ques. Is it not possible that it could be said of us that we do not eat the Lord's supper?
Suited conditions are required for eating the Lord's supper, and therefore it speaks of the upper room being "furnished", and of "the master of the house", all of which have to do with the conditions that are necessary.
It is serious to think that we could break bread without eating the Lord's supper, because it would seem the Lord had left us.
The apostle says, "it is not to eat the Lord's supper" (@1 Corinthians 11: 20), for the rich ate by themselves and left out the poor, and it was not the Lord's supper, and he therefore continues to show them what it was, and it would
{364}
be difficult to have a love-feast first. It emphasizes that it is the *Lord's* supper, and when it really is so, it becomes a love-feast, as it shows how the Lord had the disciples in His affections, and if we respond, love to Him will flow.
{365}
ORDER AND LOVE
@1 Corinthians 11: 17 - 34; @1 Corinthians 14: 26 - 40
I proposed these scriptures, as chapter 11 gives us order in the assembly in connection with the Lord's supper, and chapter 14 the order which becomes us in the meeting for ministry, as a guide to those who serve the saints.
This morning we considered how the Lord sent Peter and John to prepare the passover. It is only Luke who mentions this. He says, "And he sent Peter and John, saying, Go and prepare the passover for us, that we may eat it". Then the Lord says in @Luke 22: 12, "And *he*" (that is, the master of the house) "will shew you a large upper room furnished: there make ready". "A man", "into the house", "master of the house", are expressions which agree with Luke's presentation of the truth, as he is much occupied with order and what becomes the house of God. He therefore emphasizes that the upper room would be furnished, and that the passover should be prepared *there*, as well as indicating that "the hour was come". I think also that Peter and John present the thought of brotherly love. Order and love go together. In @Acts 3, Peter and John go together to the temple. Some of us have noticed recently that @Acts 3 and 4 could be called 'the chapters of Peter and John'. They form together a lovely picture of order and love in the assembly.
Ques. Do the ministries of Peter and John go together? I think it was the Lord's mind that they should go together, because too much authority without a corresponding measure of love leads to something less than what God has in His thoughts for us.
When the prophet Jeremiah speaks of recovery, he says that God would take "one of a city, and two of a family", @Jeremiah 3: 14.
Ques. Does that correspond to Peter's and John's ministry? "One of a city" Peter's ministry, and "two of a family" John's ministry?
{366}
I think that is right.
Ques. Does the reference to the disciples being in the upper room speak of the power of resurrection they should arrive at?
The upper room is characteristic of christianity. It is above the plane of the natural man's life. The house of God has a variety of features and among them that of which the upper room speaks. In @1 Chronicles 28: 11 mention is made of the upper chambers and the inner chambers of the house of Jehovah. The upper chambers give us the thought of what is exalted, and the inner chambers refer to what is hidden. I think moral dignity is what corresponds to the upper chambers. The Corinthians had degraded the Lord's supper. There is a constant tendency with us to degrade what is divine.
It requires spiritual power to be in the upper chamber, because it says "they went up to the upper chamber, where were staying both Peter, and John", @Acts 1: 13. It was a place where such men as Peter and John were. It was fitting that they should be there, so that during the ten days the disciples awaited the sending of the Spirit, they did not return to the cares of daily life. When we are together in the assembly we can withdraw from the cares of life and, the more spiritual power we have, the longer we will be able to remain in the upper chamber, that is, remain in this morally dignified realm. Later it says that it was put in order. I think the ministry of Peter and John together produce such a state.
Ques. What does it mean to come together in assembly? It has often been likened to the calling together of Parliament. It comes under royal authority, and a definite order must obtain, for example, speakers, etc., before laws and other matters can be established. To come together in assembly involves that we come together in the light of being God's assembly. The Lord's rights and God's rights are consequently acknowledged, and we are there as fully governed by the principles of the house of God.
I trust therefore that we all understand what is typified in the Lord sending Peter and John to prepare the passover.
{367}
Peter represents the principles that govern the house of God, and John the love that is fitting. Peter from the beginning was a leader, but we read of John, in his gospel, that he was the disciple whom Jesus loved. The only thing he relates as to the Supper is that the Lord laid aside His garments and washed the disciples¬ feet. He did this as an example, so that we might wash each other's feet. This brings to light the family conditions which we have spoken about before. The Lord said, "By this shall all know that ye are disciples of mine, if ye have love amongst yourselves", @John 13: 35. We see thus that John brings in love amongst us as something abiding; Peter on the other hand represents government and order in the assembly.
Ques. Please say something about @1 Corinthians 11: 19, especially regarding the word "must". Why does it say there must be sects?
"That the approved may become manifest". When the saints begin to form themselves into parties, those who are faithful must keep themselves at a distance from this.
Ques. Is that said as thinking upon the state which we find in chapter 3?
Yes. How serious it is that this party spirit should come out as they were gathered together. The state of christendom is only an extension of this, and many of the people of God think that such conditions are unavoidable. It is therefore of special importance that we judge all party thoughts, because sect conditions can exist without any public break being apparent. There was no public break in Corinth, and it is because of this the apostle speaks of parties among them. He says, "When ye come together in assembly, I hear there exist divisions among you, and I partly give credit to it. For there must also be sects among you, that the approved may become manifest among you".
Ques. Is this word "must" the same as "unavoidable"? It means that it is necessary in the government of God. It says in verse 18, "there exist divisions among you" -- that is the responsible side; but in verse 19 it says that "there must also be sects among you, that the approved may become manifest". The word "must" is not the same as
{368}
"unavoidable". It is more something that is necessary in the government of God for our education. We know from experience that parties have arisen amongst the people of God, and we have tried to prevent this, so that those who have become involved in this might be liberated. But if such party feelings are not judged, then God in His government allows parties to arise, and those who fear God keep themselves from such, whereas those who bring about divisions lose their way. The approved are those who keep themselves aloof from parties.
Ques. Such as the house of Chloe, for example?
Yes. To judge party feelings involves your withdrawing from such and not having anything to do with them. It says, "that the approved may become manifest". If there are parties, their behaviour is dishonouring to the assembly and is a denial of the truth of the assembly, because a great and important principle regarding the assembly is that it is *one*, as it says, "we, being many, are one loaf, one body", @1 Corinthians 10: 17. We must be on the alert, so that different groups do not rise up amongst us, and that we do not have special friends we cling to, for what is special and confined to a few spreads out more and more.
Paul's word to the party-minded was very good; "Has Paul been crucified for you?" When he came to Corinth, he did not judge it well to know anything among them save Jesus Christ and Him crucified, @1 Corinthians 2: 2. "Jesus Christ, and him crucified" should be the only point of gathering, as the Lord Himself said, "And I, if I be lifted up out of the earth, will draw all to me", @John 12: 32.
All this has to do with our behaviour as we sit down and partake of the Lord's supper, so that in our hearts we might be separate from all party-mindedness. The Lord says of the passover in @Luke 22, "that we may eat", which is a mutual thought, and so Luke says in @Acts 20: 7, "And the first day of the week, we being assembled to break bread", which means we are all on the same ground. We are there on the ground of redemption, as it says, "The rich shall not give more, and the poor shall not give less than half a shekel", @Exodus 30: 15. Every one of the redeemed cost
{369}
the Lord the same price. Therefore the truth of redemption has a balancing effect, and there are also other features which show this, for example, that we are all brethren, all levites. Every levite was a firstborn, and we are thus by redemption put on the same plane, and are all equal in worth. This produces wonderful and joyful feelings, and it is marvellous that the Lord says, "that *we* may eat", and after supper they sang a hymn. The Lord would thus give us an impression of how we should be together in mutual brotherly feelings towards each other. If there is something not clear between me and my brother, we learn from @Matthew 5: 23, 24 that if I come to the altar with my gift and there remember that my brother has something against me, the call comes to me: "leave there thy gift before the altar, and first go, be reconciled to thy brother". Matthew places great weight on the recovery of a brother, because we cannot be without our brethren and their love.
We are speaking now of that which is outwardly beautiful and attractive. Luke pays great regard to that which is outwardly beautiful and attractive. We have also considered the brotherly unity which ought to be seen amongst us. The psalmist says, "Behold, how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity!", @Psalm 133, and then he speaks of the oil, in which lies a suggestion of outward beauty, for oil make the face of man to shine, and it is so when brethren dwell together in unity. We might think of the oil on the head of Aaron, and how it ran down upon his beard, and down to the hem of his garment. This forms the thought of the psalmist on what it is when brethren dwell together. Further he says, "As the dew of Hermon that descendeth on the mountains of Zion". This is another type. "There hath Jehovah commanded the blessing". Notice therefore, dear brethren, how important it is to have unity amongst us, and to dwell together in unity. I have drawn your attention to this because all this has to do with the outward side. In this way the emblems of the Supper, the bread and the cup, have a moral correspondence in the brethren as they sit down around the emblems. This is the thought connected with the cup of blessing, as
{370}
it says, "The cup of blessing which we bless". It is spiritual blessing which obtains there. God has brought this to pass through the gift of the Spirit. The bread also speaks of unity according to chapter 10. We understand, therefore, that it is under such conditions that the Lord comes in amongst us. "The Lord Jesus, in the night in which He was delivered up, took bread, and having given thanks broke it, and said, This is my body, which is for you". I do not think there is anything, in a moral sense, in the whole universe which can be compared with that. As we eat the Lord's supper, we partake of the same bread and drink of the same cup; the original thought was that they should drink out of one and the same vessel, which means that we should be in the same spirit, as we all belong to the same family. We have what corresponds to this in @John 20: 22 when the Lord breathed into His disciples. He breathes into us this family affection and it is this that lays the basis for the exhortation, "Salute one another with a holy kiss" (@1 Corinthians 16: 20), which is something quite distinctive, and involves that everything which stands linked with natural feelings is excluded.
Our subject is the order becoming to the saints. How do we eat? "The eater and drinker eats and drinks judgment to himself, not distinguishing the body". To eat unworthily refers to the manner in which we do it.
Ques. If there are unsettled matters between brothers, would that be to eat unworthily?
Yes; but that is not just what the apostle had in mind here, but more the manner in which we take the Supper.
Ques. It ought to be taken in a right spirit?
Yes. The apostle emphasises that it is the body of the Lord, and the blood of the Lord. In the Lord's supper we have to do with the most serious and holy things, and they are not to be taken up lightly. If we take it unworthily, it becomes a witness against us, and God must deal with us in His government, but if we eat of it worthily, then it will be for our good.
Verses 29 and 30 show how serious it is: "On this account many among you are weak and infirm, and a good
{371}
many are fallen asleep". At the end of the chapter we have this confirmed. Verse 33 means we should have respect for each other: "So that, my brethren, when ye come together to eat, wait for one another. If any one be hungry, let him eat at home, that ye may not come together for judgment". I think that we have enjoyed the Supper for many years as it is presented in this chapter. It is distinct from an ordinary meal and ordinary family circumstances, and it is not a literal meal, but a remembrance feast. Then there are other things to be set in order, but this of which the apostle speaks here is specially important. "But the other things, whenever I come, I will set in order".
Ques. Is it not so, that there can only be order if we are in right relationship with the Lord? No apostolic authority could put the Corinthians right, but only the Lord's love. But the apostle gave them instruction.
Yes. In chapter 14 we have the order which is becoming, and which is for help and edification.
Ques. I would like to ask regarding the so-called 'open meeting' and how we could have such a meeting in our days, as it has been said that we cannot have this?
I do not think it is right to say so. This kind of meeting is mentioned in this chapter, and why should we turn aside from it? I hardly think there is another meeting which reveals our weakness more than this, and therefore I would commend the foregoing part of the chapter to your careful consideration. This should actually help us to the conditions whereby we could have such a meeting. The open meeting is an occasion whereby room is made for gift. I think the foregoing part of the chapter prepares us under the Lord's leading for this. When the saints are together and the gifts speak one after another, it is an open meeting.
If we cannot have such a meeting, we must be in a low state, and ought to turn to the Lord in prayer regarding this matter. The main thing is that I have a desire to be able to edify the people of God, and then that I might use my gift with understanding. The principle that applies here is that it will be "five words with my understanding". All ought to come together as feeling this. It says, "Whenever ye
{372}
come together, each of you has a psalm, has a teaching ... . Let all things be done to edification". Perhaps I have something from the Lord to bring forward, but I do not bring it forward merely because I have received it, but I wait for a suitable occasion. Perhaps there is a brother present who is more spiritual than I, and, if I am in exercise and subject to the Lord, I make way for him. If I stand up to say something, I need to be concise; I do not speak because I like to speak. The principle is to be able to keep quiet, in order that others may have an opportunity to speak. The number is at the most three, which is a merciful arrangement, so that our meetings do not become tiring.
Ques. But the thought is not that we literally should only say five words?
The principle is "five words". It mentions ten thousand instructors and ten thousand words, but it speaks also of "not many fathers" and "five words".
Rem. Here in Gothenburg we have previously had both the preaching and an open meeting on Lord's day evening, but as it was too tiring for some to be present at both meetings, we now have the preaching only.
It ought not to be tiring to have two meetings on Lord's day afternoon. Nearly everywhere I have been, the saints usually have a Bible reading in the afternoon followed by the preaching later.
Ques. But if some prefer the preaching and others prefer a ministry meeting?
If someone in the assembly in Caesarea had said, 'We do not want the preaching', then Philip the evangelist would not have agreed to that, and, if Philip had said, 'We will not have a ministry meeting', then his four daughters would have opposed that, for they prophesied, although not in the meeting. But they certainly could judge "five words" in the assembly.
Ques. What does it mean to prophesy?
The thought is that a prophet presents the thoughts and mind of God. To prophesy according to this chapter (@1 Corinthians 14) is for edification, and if a simple person came in, he would fall upon his face and acknowledge that God was
{373}
amongst them. If God is not amongst us, then it is of no use.
Gifts cannot be limited to a locality. A gift does not belong to a certain locality, but to all. The question is, What is of most help for us? According to my way of thinking, we get the greatest help from a Bible reading on Lord's day afternoon, and thereafter the preaching. An open meeting is suitable when we come together with brethren from other parts, such as on this present occasion.
Ques. What kind of speaking with a tongue is it that is mentioned in verse 27? It says, "If any one speak with a tongue, let it be two, or at the most three, and separately, and let one interpret".
Well, we are doing just that at the present moment, when one, of us must speak a language and another interpret. But it does not call for such gifts now as in the early days of speaking with tongues. These gifts were not for the believers but for the unbelievers, and they are like the church bells which call the people together. But now when the assembly is together, we no longer need bells. Christianity involves that all are assembled -- millions are assembled.
{374}
THE ANOINTING IN CONNECTION WITH THE TESTIMONY
@2 Corinthians 1: 21, 22
We had before us yesterday Christ's anointing seen from three different aspects, namely as Priest, as King and as Prophet. We see Christ represented in Aaron as Priest and in David as King. We see a prophet's anointing in Elisha. Our thought was to draw attention to what God has before Him in connection with the anointing when He puts forward His testimony in the world. Those who are used in the testimony must be worthy before God. In this scripture which we have before us we read that God has anointed us. So we also see in @1 Corinthians 12: 12 that this thought is connected with Christ. That is, as we have on our hearts in connection with this subject, that we, who through grace are brought into the light of Christ and the assembly, should be lifted up in our souls out of the conditions by which we are surrounded in christendom. The purpose of the anointing is that God should be represented here on earth in a worthy way. Therefore it is necessary for us to understand that we have received the Holy Spirit, as a fact and also as a reality, so that we might stand out, adorned with the grace of the Spirit, and that the power of the Spirit should appear in every one of us both personally and as gathered.
In the verses we read there are three things, namely anointing, sealing and the earnest. The anointing is therefore so that we can continue here for God and represent Him. By setting His seal on us God has taken possession of us. The earnest means that we also have something for our own hearts; we can only answer to God's purpose in anointing us and setting His seal upon us in the measure in which we live and avail ourselves of the earnest in our hearts. It does not say here what the earnest is but in @Ephesians 1: 14 we see that it is of our inheritance.
The first epistle to the Corinthians points out the working
{375}
of the flesh amongst them. The working of the flesh will always shut out the working of the Spirit, but as a result of the first epistle they were brought to repentance, so that now there is a condition in their hearts receptive to the truth of the anointing. In @2 Corinthians 1 we see what the apostle had undergone. In the following chapter he speaks of the restoration of the one who had sinned. He had himself been near to death so that he was in a position to write with deep sympathy. The Corinthians were in need of comfort, and the apostle himself had been exceedingly comforted of God so that he could encourage them. The second epistle is therefore full of stimulation and encouragement. He begins by speaking to them of God's faithfulness, that all His promises are yea and amen in Christ Jesus unto the glory of God by us. The apostle and those who were with him were in the blessed consciousness of these promises. Indeed he was himself faithful to the Corinthians in that his word to them was not yea and nay. The apostle's action stood in conformity with God; he had not gone forward thoughtlessly ("light-mindedly", cf. verse 17), so he could write "Now he that establishes us with you in Christ, and has anointed us, is God", @2 Corinthians 1: 21.
How clearly can God's action be seen in that! God in His faithfulness establishes us in Christ and so we receive the consciousness of the anointing. In connection with this I come to the thought of David when he had seen the place where God's house should be built. He prepared iron in abundance for the nails. First we read that he set masons to hew wrought stones, then he prepared iron in abundance for the nails that would be used to strengthen the building and hold it together. In @1 Corinthians 15 we see what the nails allude to. That is the longest chapter in the epistle to the Corinthians and the object of it is to bind us together as it says in the last verse, "So then, my beloved brethren, be firm, immovable, abounding always in the work of the Lord, knowing that your toil is not in vain in the Lord", @1 Corinthians 15: 58. We also read in @Ecclesiastes 12: 11, "The words of the wise are as goads, and the collections of them as nails fastened in: they are given from one shepherd".
{376}
The whole of professing christendom lacks what the nails allude to, and christendom will soon come down. It is not joined together in the power of resurrection and it is also quite clear that there is no anointing in it. We have through grace received part in the great work God has wrought to establish His own in the truth of Christ and the assembly. We see in this His faithfulness, as we read in @Romans 16: 25 - 27, "Now to him that is able to establish you, according to my glad tidings and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the mystery, as to which silence has been kept in the times of the ages, but which has now been made manifest, and by prophetic scriptures, according to commandment of the eternal God, made known for obedience of faith to all the nations -- the only wise God, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever. Amen". We also read in @Hebrews 12: 28 about a kingdom not to be shaken.
We see therefore that David prepared iron in abundance for the nails. Iron alludes to strength and that is what is first spoken of in @2 Corinthians 1: 21, that we are established one with another, and after that the anointing is mentioned. It is God's faithfulness which thus attaches us firmly to Christ. The tabernacle was first set up and afterwards anointed. All is founded in the power of resurrection. So we see in Isaac that God established His promises in resurrection, for Abraham received him, as it were, back from the dead. "Wherein God, willing to spew more abundantly to the heirs of the promise the unchangeableness of his purpose, intervened by an oath, that by two unchangeable things, in which it was impossible that God should lie, we might have a strong encouragement, who have fled for refuge to lay hold on the hope set before us", @Hebrews 6: 17,18. We find that Abraham had this strong encouragement. He went and dwelt at Beersheba. Beersheba means 'the well of the oath'. By living there he would continually be reminded of God's unchangeable faithfulness. When Jacob received word from Joseph to come to him, he had a certain doubt in his soul in connection with leaving the land of Canaan and going down to Egypt, and we find that he
{377}
comes to Beersheba. God appeared to him there and said "I am God, the God of thy father", @Genesis 46: 3. Note that it is his father Isaac's God, not here the God of Abraham, for Isaac is a type of Christ as risen from the dead in whom all God's promises have their yea and amen. So we see in @Acts 4: 33 that the apostles gave witness to the resurrection of the Lord Jesus with great power.
Perhaps we will all here remember that when Elijah fled from Jezebel he left his servant in Beersheba, while he himself went out into the wilderness a day's journey and sat under a broom-bush and requested for himself that he might die. But why should anyone ask to die that knows Christ as risen? If Elijah had remained in Beersheba and turned to God in the understanding of His unchangeable faithfulness, which is so clearly shown in the resurrection of Christ, he would have experienced God's power on his side. We also find the same principle in our scripture in @2 Corinthians 1. When everything that is of man comes down, we find a refuge in God's eternal faithfulness. But instead of standing fast, Elijah went out into the wilderness and asked God to take his life, but God showed him His faithfulness. He showed him He would even be faithful towards the prophet personally and gave him food which strengthened him for forty days and forty nights, and when he comes to Horeb the Lord's word comes to him "What doest thou here, Elijah?" @1 Kings 19: 9. Horeb was not a place where God's faithfulness comes into view. It was indeed where God put forward His claim. What was Elijah doing there? He had not himself answered to the divine claim. If he had remained at Beersheba, God would not have spoken to him like that. Beersheba is not a place where God puts forward his claim upon us but where we get His help. Elijah should have been at Beersheba where he had left his servant.
Afterwards we find that the Lord speaks to him in His faithfulness when He says "Go, return on thy way to the wilderness of Damascus; and when thou comest, anoint Hazael king over Syria; and Jehu the son of Nimshi shalt thou anoint king over Israel; and Elisha the son of Shaphat
{378}
of Abel-Meholah shalt thou anoint prophet in they stead. And it shall come to pass, that him that escapeth the sword of Hazael shall Jehu slay; and him that escapeth the sword of Jehu shall Elisha slay", @1 Kings 19: 15 - 17. From this we see that God was able to deal with His enemies in the power of the anointing. The principles of Beersheba are brought to light in connection with these three anointings, for God cannot be limited. He can anoint three. These three anointings are a perfect witness to God's faithfulness and power. The two first indicate that the sword will be used in the power of the anointing against all that is evil, but the third is the grace which can bring forward the good. It is therefore wonderful to consider Elisha as the one that comes first, and he is a minister of grace. The ministry of grace comes first, then that of judgment. It is just that principle which is seen in 2 Corinthians. Instead of reproof the apostle comes out in grace. But he also says that he was ready to avenge all disobedience when the Corinthians¬ obedience had been fulfilled (@2 Corinthians 10: 6).
The object of Elijah's ministry was therefore that there should be restoration through grace, but yet we see that Jezebel does not escape. I believe we see the way God works in these three anointings (@1 Kings 19: 16, 17).
We find ourselves in a time when resurrection has taken place, and it is indeed a great privilege to have part in the Spirit's service in this time of grace. The Lord says to the assembly in Philadelphia, "thou hast a little power, and hast kept my word, and hast not denied my name", @Revelation 3: 8.
In the earnest God gives us the enjoyment of our own portion, and it is for every one of us to experience the reality in our hearts of what the Spirit is as the earnest. Then we can stand in the testimony in the power of the anointing and of the sealing. To take up everything in connection with the testimony in a dignified way should be the exercise of us all before God. In @Galatians 6: 1 we see that if a man be taken in some fault he can be helped to get right by those that are spiritual. To be spiritual is the same as being full of the Holy Spirit and therefore independent of the flesh,
{379}
as we see in @Romans 8. In the understanding of this a believer can sow to the Spirit in his practical life and reap eternal life from the Spirit (@Galatians 6: 8).
We had before us yesterday that Elisha put a great value on the oil, and we should, in the same way, value the Spirit who is given as the earnest in our hearts. Elisha could say to the widow, "Go, sell the oil, and pay thy debt, and live thou and thy sons on the rest", @2 Kings 4: 7. How independent the believer is of everything here as one who has the Holy Spirit! He can pay his debt and live on the rest. God has anointed us and set His seal on us whereby He has taken us into His own possession. Therefore we should now be here for Him as it says, "Glorify now then God in your body", @1 Corinthians 6: 20. As those that are anointed we are also completely independent of the teaching of men. John says "the unction which ye have received from him abides in you, and ye have not need that any one should teach you; but as the same unction teaches you as to all things, and is true and is not a lie, and even as it has taught you, ye shall abide in him", @1 John 2: 27. Christendom is marked by the teaching of men, but the believer should be marked by what is spiritual, for in this way alone can we please God.
We will see from the scripture that we have read that these things are presented from God's side, and so it is the anointing, the sealing, and the earnest. God shows us first His side although the earnest comes first in the experience of our souls. That is what we are liberated by, so that God can take us into His possession as those that are free. God wants us to take up these things in a real way, and thus few experience what He is in His faithfulness towards us.
The reality of all this is seen in the apostles, and I have thought of what Paul's cloak means. He says to Timothy, "The cloak which I left behind me in Troas at Carpus's, bring when thou comest, and the books, especially the parchments", @2 Timothy 4: 13. Elijah's mantle indicates what he personally was marked by in his ministry in an outward way. Elijah cast his mantle on Elisha (@1 Kings 19: 19), and it was that that fell from Elijah when he went
{380}
up into heaven. It says that Elisha took hold of his own garments and rent them in two pieces, and then took up the mantle of Elijah which had fallen from him and went back and stood by the bank of the Jordan. He smote the waters with it and said "Where is Jehovah, the God of Elijah?" @2 Kings 2: 14. It shows that Elisha fully recognized how God had been with Elijah. God had helped Elijah in the testimony he had borne, and Elisha, in that he took Elijah's mantle, had an understanding that it was necessary to take it up in connection with his ministry.
It was at Troas that Paul made his last great discourse (@Acts 20). It is the last oral ministry direct to the assembly. We all remember that on the first day of the week they were assembled to break bread and Paul prolonged his discourse till midnight. Then we read that Eutychus was overpowered by sleep and fell down from the third story and was taken up dead. But he was brought to life by Paul embracing him. Then Paul broke the bread and after he had long spoken until daybreak, he went away. Think of Paul's cloak in connection with this. Think of the way he continued in the ministry God had entrusted to him. So he says to Timothy, "The cloak which I left behind me in Troas at Carpus's, bring when thou comest", @2 Timothy 4: 13. Just as Elisha took up Elijah's mantle, I believe we can see that Timothy took up Paul's cloak. He had just said to Timothy, "For I am already being poured out, and the time of my release is come. I have combated the good combat, I have finished the race, I have kept the faith", @2 Timothy 4: 6, 7. This is the position which we have now. We will be kept in humility by looking on such a cloak. I believe that the books indicate that which Paul wrote that shows his teaching, and the cloak his life. He had learned, so to say, greatly to appreciate Elijah's spirit, and he understood that his own ability in the ministry lay in that spirit. He had seen the spirit which came out in the great and wonderful testimony of Stephen and the striking likeness between Stephen and Christ.
{381}
SPIRITUAL DIGNITY
@Proverbs 30: 21 - 33; @Psalm 104: 14 - 18
Our subject this evening is spiritual dignity. God's thought is that His people should be here on earth in spiritual and heavenly dignity. @Psalm 104 shows us what God has wrought to give us the means to go on in dignity. The psalm is a consideration of the manifold riches of God's creation. An observer cannot fail to note that it is the physical creation which the psalm speaks about. The creation does not witness only to God's might but also to the divine taste for beauty and adornment. In the psalm we see that man is set in the midst of all this. God set man in His creation to represent Him there. When God created the universe He said on the sixth day, "Let us make man in our image, after our likeness; and let them have dominion", @Genesis 1: 26. Man should thus represent God in His creation and in order to represent God rightly he needs great sources of help. Therefore we find that the earth brings forth "grass, herb producing seed after its kind, and trees yielding fruit, the seed of which is in them, after their kind", @Genesis 1: 12. We see also a reference to this in @Psalm 104: 14. God has thus provided man with the great means necessary for him to maintain dominion. In the beginning there is no reference to the fact that man should eat his bread in the sweat of his brow. The psalm shows the creation as it first came from God's hand. God made grass and herb grow for the service of man, to bring forth bread out of the earth. It also says, "And wine which gladdeneth the heart of man; making his face shine with oil; and with bread he strengtheneth man's heart", @Psalm 104: 15. Therefore the psalm goes on to read, "The trees of Jehovah are satisfied, the cedars of Lebanon, which he hath planted", @Psalm 104: 16. Jehovah's trees, beloved brethren, are satisfied, the cedars of Lebanon are of Him. We find ourselves in the midst of a world full of dissatisfaction. Men have striven to bring about a mutual condition but it only
{382}
developed into mutual embitterment. What is most outstanding in the world at the present time is discontent; dissatisfied men irritate one another, for they are full of hate and contempt for one another. Whereas God's thought for His people is to bring about a condition of spiritual satisfaction. With this before Him, God has given us an abundant supply of help. He has given us wine to gladden our hearts and oil to make our face to shine, and thus has put us in a position to continue worthily as Jehovah's trees about which it is said they are satisfied, the cedars of Lebanon which he has planted. The Canaanitish woman who came to the Lord when He went into the land of Tyre and Sidon was satisfied. The Lord had gone into those borders and the woman sought after Him for her daughter. She cried and said, "Have pity on me, Lord, Son of David; my daughter is miserably possessed by a demon", @Matthew 15: 22. But He said "It is not well to take the bread of the children and cast it to the dogs". But she said "Yea, Lord; for even the dogs eat of the crumbs which fall from the table of their masters", @Matthew 15:26,27. She could now be considered as a cedar and numbered amongst those which Jehovah has planted. She would be satisfied. The Lord satisfied her when she recognised her true place before Him. If we are to continue here as cedars of Lebanon, as Jehovah's trees which are satisfied, it is well for us to begin like this woman. He said to her "O woman, they faith is great", @Matthew 15: 28. From this word of the Lord we understand that she is now a cedar. She bowed to the truth that she had a low place in connection with her nation, instead of trying to assert her national status. She took the position the Lord gave her, namely that she was a gentile dog, and she was content with that. Beloved brethren, what the Lord wants to work out in us is spiritual contentment and so we should be as lights in the world.
This 30th chapter of Proverbs has a special character and was written by a man who was an accurate observer. He did not take a teacher's place but he was ready to be taught. That is a good position for every one Of us to take. There are only a few who can teach with authority. I do not
{383}
mean by that that we should be amongst those who do not have any knowledge, but it is safest for us to be of those who observe and search out the things of God and so have before us a spiritual path. We read in verse 5, "Every word of God is pure", and in verse 6, "Add thou not unto his words". That is a safe way to go on. He recognises that every word of God is pure, and I want to mention, beloved brethren, that the more we study the Scriptures the more we shall find how true this is. Notice that every word is pure, and do not let us add anything to it. God is wiser than us and if another word had been needed He Himself would have put it there. Let us therefore accept the word just as we find it in the Scriptures, and we can be sure that we will not need to add anything. It says of the Lord Himself, who was called "The Word", that if everything in connection with His ministry should be written even the world itself could not contain the books which might be written. From this we see the divine fulness in everything. Therefore we do not need to think that there is anything missing in the Scriptures. Nothing shall be added, and if we add anything we make ourselves liars. This man Agur was one who searched and observed and was therefore on a safe path. By such a path we can consider the different phenomena on earth. He does not only see evil things; he also sees the people of God. He speaks of them with words that show complete admiration. He divides his observations into six different groups and each group into four different things, and we can be sure that we find the real conditions on the earth in these six different groups.
My intention now is not to occupy you with the evil things which are spoken of, but only to refer to them so that we can see the contrast when we consider God's people as they are described here, and so that we may come more into agreement with God's thoughts for His people.
We read "Under three things the earth is disquieted, and under four it cannot bear up", @Proverbs 30: 21. It can be plainly seen that we have now come to a time in this world's history which answers to the description in this verse. Circumstances are now so evil that the end is near.
{384}
So it says that the earth cannot bear up. As already mentioned the earth was created with the end in mind that man should represent God. The earth was not created for wicked men.
In our scripture we find a servant when he reigneth, a churl when he is filled with meat, an odious woman when she is married, and a handmaid when she is heir to her mistress. A great change has taken place in the way in which the world is ruled in these so-called modern times. Divine principles have been quite overlooked and, as we see from this scripture, "Under three things the earth is disquieted, and under four it cannot bear up". As christians it is necessary to be on our guard in our own circle against this principle that a servant should reign. God has His own King. "When he brings in the firstborn into the habitable world, he says, And let all God's angels worship him", @Hebrews 1: 6. He is an object of worship, for He who is the Son of God is the One who is worthy. The wise men from the East worshipped Him as King and brought forth from their treasures gold, frankincense and myrrh.
Then we read of a churl when he is filled with meat. We see therefore that the churl has subjected to himself the crops of the earth, as it says in @Psalm 37: 35, "I have seen the wicked in great power, and spreading like a green tree".
We read then of an odious woman when she is married. That answers to Jezebel. The earth groans under the weight of her odious wickedness (see @Revelation 2: 20 - 24).
We see further that a handmaid is heir to her mistress. In other words that which should be subordinate has raised itself, and begins to rule so that the earth is disquieted and cannot bear up.
We can therefore be certain that the earth is nearing its end, for God Himself has everything in His hand. As God's people we ought to separate from all these evil things and not seek to change them. Our right attitude is to await the coming of our own Lord.
Now we come to the next group of four and here we have a striking picture of the people of God here upon the earth in humility. The ants are a people not strong. As the people of God we do not want to have a prominent place in the eyes
{385}
of this world. We do not try to win adherents to ourselves and so expand in a visible way, but the Lord says, "Fear not, little flock, for it has been the good pleasure of your Father to give you the kingdom", @Luke 12: 32. We can be satisfied with the position of the little flock, for we know the Father has chosen us for His kingdom. We are not a strong people. The Lord says to Philadelphia, "Thou has a little power", @Revelation 3: 8. It does not say 'No power'. We see that the ants have wisdom. They provide their food in the summer. They understand how to make use of the time when there is an abundance of food. So it is in the summertime that we can prepare our food. Christ exalted in heaven is the Sun which shines down on us, He who has made known to us the Father's name. Now is the time to provide our food. Those who answer to the character of ants will not miss the meetings.
Then it says that the rock-badgers are but a feeble folk, yet they make their house in the cliff. We also see from @Psalm 104 that the cliffs are formed for them; it says in verse 18 that the cliffs are a refuge for the rock badgers.
In a land like this rocks are not unusual; the land is full of them; but should it not move our hearts that God has made all these rocks? Nothing is left to chance. He created the cliffs for the rock-badgers; that has a spiritual meaning, that God has, in His thoughts for us who are here in weakness, prepared a place of strength where the wicked are not able to be and which is outside of their influence. You will find that they do not seek the cliffs. It says of the rock-badgers that they are but a feeble folk but they have a place of refuge. We can be sure there is no place of refuge with men in general. In their haunts there is the devil who influences all. The rock-badgers, on the other hand, make their house in the cliff. It would be good for the young people to pay particular attention to this and to be cautious where they build their house.
Then we see in verse 27 that the locusts have no king. To want to have a leader is a thing which specially concerns men. That is, they so much want a visible leader whom they can look up to, a hero, so to say. It can even be
{386}
Paul, Apollos or Cephas. When Israel was dissatisfied with Jehovah the people wanted a king like the other nations, but believers do not need one. The locusts have no king, yet they go forth all of them by bands. They possess great wisdom. One could well ask. 'How are they kept together? Who is leading them? On whom do they depend in all their affairs?' The answer is that they are dependent on the wisdom of God. That is sufficient for us. We who are believers have no king here, and yet we are like the locusts who all go forth by bands. We have a King but He is concealed. Our Lord Jesus is concealed in the heavens and we are waiting for His coming. He is up there as our Head and we have this knowledge secretly in our hearts.
Then it says that thou takest hold of the lizard with the hands. It can easily be touched by others. A believer is thus of little account in this world. He does not stand up for his own rights. It seems that others can do what they like with him. He is of no account here, but still it is a wonderful thing that he is in kings¬ palaces. Men know nothing about his movements and what his privileges are. We often feel that the world does not know us, but think what a revelation it will be when one day the true state of affairs will be made known, when everything will be different. It will then be manifest that those who now are of no account live in royal palaces. In these four things we have instruction as to what character we should bear now here on the earth.
Then it says that there are three things which have a stately step, and four are comely in going. Mark that. John saw Jesus as He walked. How comely His going was! As Peter says, He has left us a model that we should follow in His steps (@1 Peter 2: 21). The lion is an animal which is first said to be comely in going. A christian does not stand up for his rights when he is wronged personally, but when it is a question of the glory of the Lord he is as bold as a lion. It says of the lion that he turneth not away for any. At the same time we personally will suffer here for righteousness¬ sake, as it is written, "But for thy sake are we killed all the day long; we are reckoned as sheep for slaughter", @Psalm 44: 22. On the other hand the lion's boldness should
{387}
mark us in connection with everything which concerns the glory of the Lord. The lion is mighty among beasts and turneth not away for any. A former servant of the Lord whom we all know, said 'Here I stand, I cannot do otherwise'. We cannot yield an inch when it is a question of the glory of God or of Christ. As we are marked by the wisdom which is seen in the four small things we can then stand firm for the truth's sake.
The horse girt in the loins is the next which is said to be comely in going. The horse is an animal well known for its dignity. In @Psalm 147: 10 we see as a contrast that the Lord delights not in the strength of the horse, but here in the proverb we see it in connection with dignity. It has a stately step. We should not only stand firm like the lion, but attack, when it is a question of the glory of the Lord. In @job 39: 19 - 25 we read God's own description of the horse. He does not only stand firm but he smells the battle afar off. He goeth forth to meet the armed host. What I want to point to in connection with the horse girt in the loins is that he is quick to attack. We see that these features come out in the Lord here on earth. Like those who were anointed with the Spirit, He was marked by the lion's firmness and the horse's speed. In Acts the same features are brought to light. So we see that Peter stood up with the eleven on the day of Pentecost and spoke to the people. Peter was as bold as a lion then; he could stand up and say that they had crucified and slain Jesus by the hand of lawless men. We also see in Paul that he had the character of the horse, for his loins were girt about and he allowed nothing to hinder him in his service for the Lord. The man who wrote @Proverbs 30 saw in all this a stately step. The apostles represented the Lord in the power of the anointing and they stood up on the same power in testimony as the Lord Himself. It could be said of them, as it is said in the psalm, that wine gladdeneth their heart and their face was made shining with oil. God wants to work the same thing in us now. That is something we ought to lay on our hearts. In an outward way we should be small and of no account, and at the same time live in our souls in the enjoyment of
{388}
divine wisdom and privileges. So we will be in a position to represent God.
Then Agur speaks of the he-goat and of the king at the head of his people. It is a characteristic of goats that their custom is to be withdrawn and in separation. That is a characteristic which is necessary for us in walking both amongst God's people and in connection with other men. We should be on our guard against coming under special influences. A goat can keep itself separate. Nehemiah says that he consulted with himself. Even if he stood alone he could defend divine principles, and he reproved those in high places.
Then we read of a king at the head of his people. Such a one has spiritual strength; and it is said of Judah, which was the royal tribe in Israel, that he prevailed among his brethren. I believe that separation which marks the goat leads to the kingly character. The one who keeps himself from all special influences here and lives under God's influence is in a position to lead and bring the people of God under His influence. While Moses was on the mountain, Aaron who was down below in the camp came under the influence o the people and let himself be led away by them to idolatry. Moses, on the other hand, who had been alone with God, comes down from the mountain in the spiritual power of a king and he completely suppresses the idolatry in the camp. He was like a king at the head of his people, and we ought to value such a brother amongst us who has moral power. What we are speaking of now is not that any should arise in outward show, but of the kingly character which we see in our Lord Jesus. He Himself is the rightful King but One who is concealed in the heavens, and yet what an influence He wields! When He shall arise and be revealed as king He will rule in the power which He has in Himself. The character of the goat is therefore to be separate, and we see the great moral power the Lord had over the disciples. Moses, who was indeed a type of the Lord Himself, comes into the camp in spiritual power and none dared to raise himself up against him. He was able to stand up against millions. Agur contemplated this characteristic with wonder.
{389}
Then it says in verse 32, "If thou hast done foolishly in lifting up thyself, or if thou hast thought evil, lay the hand upon thy mouth". Here we see the conclusion the writer comes to in connection with the thing we have had before us; and if we have behaved thus, beloved brethren, as it is put in this verse, then let us lay the hand upon our mouth. When we lay our hand upon our mouth, as Job did, we give God the opportunity to come in. In the last verse we see that it is well for us to be careful and not press anything. "The pressing of milk bringeth forth butter, and the pressing of the nose bringeth forth blood". If there is any question of strife amongst us we should lay our hand on our mouth. God will then come in Himself to help. Let us not upbraid one another. How often disturbances arise amongst the people of God, things which eventually develop into mutual embitterment, and the reason is that we press personal things. It may be such a thing as a nose. A brother might for example be hasty, but should I press such a thing? We should beware of irritating one another, for we should be for our mutual edification. We should consider God's people as those who bear the character of Christ and then we will come to look on them with wonder.
{390}
"THE LORD OF GLORY" AND "THE GLORY OF THE LORD"
@2 Corinthians 3: 1 - 18
I thought that on this occasion we could consider together "The Lord of glory" and "The glory of the Lord".
This chapter which we have read speaks of the glory of the Lord, while in @1 Corinthians 2: 8 we find a reference to the Lord of glory. These two expressions are very near akin. Glory must necessarily proceed from God. He is called "the Father of glory", something which we can see agrees with the presentation of the truth in Ephesians. Stephen saw the glory of God. That I believe stands in connection with God's way of acting on earth, whereas "the Father of glory" speaks of God's counsel, so we find this presentation in Ephesians. The God of glory appeared to Abraham. It does not say that God's glory was revealed to him; but Stephen saw the glory of God and Jesus. God's glory can now be seen in the face of Jesus Christ. Moses asked to be allowed to see this glory, but he could only see the Lord from behind. He could not see the Lord's face; but in Christ, anointed of God, was the glory seen in His holy service.
None of the princes of this world knew anything of this glory. Had they known they would not have crucified the Lord of glory. The glory is no longer concealed but revealed in Him in connection with the ministry of the new covenant. What Stephen saw was the glory of God and Jesus, and this glory makes an impression on our hearts. The apostle Paul had that before him when he wrote @2 Corinthians 3: the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ had shone into the apostle's heart and he had therefore been made competent to be a new covenant minister. From this chapter we understand that the presentation of this service of the Spirit is in order that it should be a reality in our hearts.
I believe that the thought in the expression "the Lord of
{391}
glory" is that the Lord personally is in possession of glory and that it is seen in Him. He has demonstrated the love of God in Himself in going into death. God has now made Him Lord and as the Lord of glory He makes glory a reality in the hearts of men. Paul was therefore a minister of the new covenant, not of letter but of spirit. The letter kills but the Spirit quickens. The Lord is the Spirit, so that the apostle's service was under the Lord. The proof of his competency was that the Corinthians were written in his heart. He loved them whatever their feelings were towards him, as he says in @2 Corinthians 12: 15, "Now I shall most gladly spend and be utterly spent for your souls, if even in abundantly loving you I should be less loved". From this we see how the apostle was like Christ. Christ died so that God's love might be a reality for us and Paul was in this way, as was given to him, an expression of this love. Whatever the Corinthians¬ thoughts were about him he still loved them. What a great service the apostle had in connection with the new covenant! How much richer it was in glory than the old covenant!
When we come into the reality of glory as it is presented in this chapter, we will also apprehend "the Lord of glory". This title brings in that the Lord Himself is above all glory and He is able to make it a reality for us. But from the expression "the glory of the Lord" we understand that He personally expresses things in Himself. So the thought of glory should be introduced into every service at this time. Glory should mark everything which we touch in the service of the Spirit. So it is no wonder that the apostle says, "Therefore, having this ministry, as we have had mercy shown us, we faint not", @2 Corinthians 4: 1, and "But we have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the surpassingness of the power may be of God, and not from us", @2 Corinthians 4: 7. The Lord wants to lead us into the understanding of how great this ministry is.
In the second epistle we see that the apostle puts himself side by side with the Corinthians, and we can be certain that no one who does not love the saints can really serve them, for it is a ministry of the glory. The glory is that God is
{392}
shining out in His nature, so that it certainly is of the greatest importance for all who take up any service to represent Him. It is not only to have something to bring out, but they should be marked by that which the new covenant ministry brings in. Paul was, as we see from @1 Corinthians 1: 17, sent out; but what we have before us in @2 Corinthians 3 is his competence. To be sent out and to be competent are two different things. The apostle says, "Our competency is of God", @2 Corinthians 3: 5. He had received his competency from God and was in his ministry marked by the character of God. A true servant is thus not only sent out but he is conscious in himself that God has made him competent to carry out the service. That is of great importance.
"The letter kills, but the Spirit quickens", @2 Corinthians 3: 6, and all ministry should lead to life. We read in @John 20: 22 that the Lord "breathed into them, and says to them, Receive the Holy Spirit". He wished not only to send them out but to make them competent to witness. Then the Lord speaks of remitting sins and of retaining. We are put in a position to go forward in the character of God, and the first thing is remitting. In this way we shall find there is much to forgive and little to retain. Yes, the Jews¬ great sin in rejecting Christ is forgiven, but how serious to think these people also rejected the testimony of the Spirit, and that sin is retained.
There is a certain dignity upon everyone who has part in the ministry of the new covenant, and no one should take up any service unless he is anointed with the Spirit. The fact that the Lord breathed into the disciples shows that they partook of His spirit. In John's gospel the Spirit is also typified as water, which means that those who partake of the Spirit have an inner consciousness of it. I believe we see this principle of competence in Moses, when he came down from the mount with the tables of the covenant in his hand. Jehovah had said to Moses on the mount that the people had sinned and that He would destroy them and make him into a great nation. I wonder what man ever had such an opportunity to act selfishly.
{393}
But Moses did not take the opportunity to exalt himself. No, on the contrary, he entreated the Lord his God for the people. He loved them so much that he was prepared to renounce his own blessing. How wonderfully the Spirit of Christ comes to light in his word, "And now, if thou wilt forgive their sin ... but if not, blot me, I pray thee, out of thy book that thou hast written", @Exodus 32: 32. God took great account of such a spirit and in reading Exodus we shall find that after this Moses proceeded in moral dignity. When he entreated for the people Jehovah said to him, "I will do this thing also that thou hast said; for thou hast found grace in mine eyes, and I know thee by name", @Exodus 33: 17. God wished to show that Moses in his experience with Him had acquired a name for himself. He had gained a name when he renounced that opportunity to make himself great. It is by proceeding in the same spirit that a brother receives a name among the saints. Onesimus was such a one. The apostle speaks of him as a faithful and beloved brother. Moses proved his faithfulness in destroying the golden calf, but his love is seen in that he was willing to be put on one side for the sake of his brethren. We see this principle set out in the lion and the king, in @Proverbs 30: 31. The lion is mighty and the king stands at the head of his people.
After this time we also find that Moses had acquired for himself a name with God which became greater and greater as the wilderness journey proceeded; and in Deuteronomy his renown is to be seen clearly. However much the people opposed Moses, it became obvious that he loved them. In Deuteronomy one chapter after another witnesses to his great love for his people. His name had become glorious and we see his own glory shining out in that book. Deuteronomy begins, "These are the words which Moses spoke to all Israel". It does not say there that it was the word he had been commanded to speak. Had the people's position been in keeping with what is written in that book it could have been said that they were Moses¬ letter, just as Paul could speak of the Corinthians. Restoration had taken place after his first letter to them and in the second epistle
{394}
he has in mind that the fellowship of the Holy Spirit should be with them. The fellowship of the blood of Christ shuts out fleshly activity and makes room for the fellowship of the Holy Spirit. We can understand from Moses¬ song in @Deuteronomy 32 and his blessing of Israel in chapter 33 what he had in his heart. He says, "My doctrine shall drop as rain, my speech flow down as dew, as small rain upon the tender herb, and as showers on the grass", @Deuteronomy 32: 2.
It is a great help for the Lord's servants to get an understanding of Deuteronomy. There we shall find what spiritual ability really is. Paul was personally in keeping with what he wrote and he puts himself with the saints in 2 Corinthians. This third chapter is the Spirit of the covenant. He had already referred to the new covenant in @1 Corinthians 11: 25 where he quotes the Lord's own words, "This cup is the new covenant in my blood", so that in considering @2 Corinthians 3 we should have the Lord's supper before us, for the Lord's glory shines out there.
In @Deuteronomy 33 Moses looks at the people as those who typically have the Spirit. It is in the light of that that he utters the blessing. In chapter 32 in his song he speaks on the other hand from a historical standpoint and points to the people's way of acting during the journeys. In this connection he had to say that they were a wicked and perverse generation. They had not the character of children of God. Faithful servants like Moses and Paul do not omit to point out the working of the flesh among the people of God. But we see that Moses also looked at the people in the light that they had the Spirit. Se we understand that Moses speaks in chapter 32 of the people in their practical walk in the wilderness, while we can see that in chapter 33 he looks at them in an abstract way as those who have the Spirit. We can therefore link the first epistle to the Corinthians with @Deuteronomy 32; but after that epistle they were restored, so that the apostle has in mind the fellowship of the Spirit in the second epistle. As already remarked, the fellowship of the blood of Christ shuts out the working of the flesh so that there is room for the communion of the Holy Spirit.
{395}
In @2 Corinthians 1, Paul speaks of God's faithfulness in connection with the anointing, his seal upon us, and the Spirit as the earnest in our hearts. Then he brings forward the ministry of the new covenant, which is not of letter but of spirit. What he had before him to work out was that God's love should be a reality in the hearts of the saints by the Spirit. He speaks in the first epistle of a building which was not yet finished. He shows us the framework of the building there; but from the second epistle it is plainly seen that they should be filled with glory as it says in @2 Corinthians 4: 4: "The radiancy of the glad tidings of the glory of the Christ, who is the image of God". The covenant is undoubtedly a personal thing for every one of us; every single one of the saints has the love of God shed abroad in his heart by the Holy Spirit. We therefore come into a scene which shall be filled with glory. The people of God should thus be here on earth, representing Him in glory. Even in such a thing as sending help by brothers, it is seen in @2 Corinthians 8: 23 that they are "deputed messengers of assemblies, Christ's glory".
When the apostle in @2 Corinthians 3: 6 brings in the truth that the Spirit quickens, he interrupts with certain comparisons between the old and the new covenants until verse 17. Verses 7 - 16 are a parenthesis, so that verse 17 is a continuation of verse 6. The Lord Himself is the Spirit, therefore He quickens. Those who are brought into this glorious scene are quickened by Him. The apostle says that the Corinthians were written in his heart by the Spirit of the living God. He is the Spirit of life who makes us free. We need spiritual freedom in our meetings and freedom is only found where the Spirit of the Lord is. Note that it does not say here the Spirit of Christ; but the Lord is the Spirit. Christ is the anointed; but as Lord He has rule in His hand and He alone is powerful to direct us into freedom. That was something which Moses was not able to do. If the best things in the universe are to be brought into our hearts by His rule, it is clear that the more we come under His authority the better. The Lord's authority uses all its power and might to bring the hearts of the saints into the
{396}
love of God. It is His glory that He is able to do this. It is as it were a heart matter with Him. "But we all, looking on the glory of the Lord, with unveiled face, are transformed according to the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Lord the Spirit", @2 Corinthians 3: 18. It is divine love which has the life-giving power, something which we see distinctly in the way in which the apostle sets out his ministry. To be changed from glory to glory is to be lifted higher and higher in spiritual realms. The saints are placed on a high level, and it is remarkable to see that the thought of glory has such a prominent place in this epistle. It is undoubtedly because the Corinthians had earlier been occupied with the splendours of the present world. Even the glory of the old covenant had no glory compared with the extreme glory of the new covenant. How then can we regard the splendour of this world?
The apostle says in @1 Corinthians 15: 41 that "star differs from star in glory", and it is God's intention that every single one of us should so look on the glory of the Lord that we should be completely changed. We are lifted up into a spiritual and elevated scene separate from the world. It is certain then that we will be marked by glory to the degree in which we have looked on the glory of the Lord. It is thus that we make ourselves a name as we have seen that Moses did. The Lord knew him by name. "He counteth the number of the stars; he giveth names to them all", @Psalm 147: 4. Astronomers have not yet got names for all the stars but God knows them all by name. The psalm undoubtedly speaks of the people of God. He gives them all names to show the particular glory of each one. @Psalm 19, I believe, can be looked as a type of the new covenant. It draws attention first to that which is above, and the result of being occupied with heavenly things is seen in the next part of the psalm, which speaks of the praise of the Lord.
When Jesus came to this world He brought the glory here in His own person. He taught His disciples to pray thus, "Our Father who art in the heavens, let thy name be sanctified, let thy kingdom come, let thy will be done as in heaven so upon the earth", @Matthew 6: 9, 10. That was
{397}
a reality here in Jesus, He who completely did the Father's will. The ministry of the new covenant is to bring us into this glorious position. The Lord Jesus not only did all God's will, but He revealed the nature of God, as it says, "The radiancy of the glad tidings of the glory of the Christ, who is the image of God", @2 Corinthians 4: 4. The Lord gave Peter a name in @Matthew 16 because of what he was, whereas he got his name in John's gospel for his appearance. "Jesus looking at him said, Thou art Simon, the son of Jonas; thou shalt be called Cephas", @John 1: 42. The thought in Matthew's gospel is what Peter was in his confession, and in John what he was in the Lord's sight. What we now have before us is in connection with the side we have in John, our appearance. We can understand from Deuteronomy what Moses looked like spiritually. What would an upright Israelite, like Caleb for example, have said when the people at the end of the wilderness journey were encamped by the Jordan, if anyone had asked him what he thought of Moses? Would he not have spoken of the patience, power, wisdom and love which Moses showed in the journey through the wilderness in the course of forty long and tiring years? Deuteronomy does not close without saying what a man he was. "And there arose no prophet since in Israel like Moses, whom Jehovah had known face to face", @Deuteronomy 34: 10. He was then in the last year of his life and even if he was 120 years old he was working untiringly to the goal that Israel should come into the promised land.
{398}
THE FIVE GENERATIONS
@Proverbs 30: 11 - 14; @John 1: 11 - 13; @Isaiah 44: 3 - 5
It will be seen that a generation is spoken of in each scripture we have read. There are four generations named in what we read in @Proverbs 30, while only one generation is named in the verse we read in John's gospel. My purpose is to speak to all who are here and especially to the young. I would like to ask this question: To which of these generations which are described in the scriptures we have read do you belong? It can be plainly seen that the one whose words are written in @Proverbs 30 was an exact observer, and among the many things which he saw he speaks of four different generations on the earth. The thought of a generation has its source in God, for He is the Father; but these different generations of which we have read in Proverbs have nothing of God's character. They represent man at a distance from God and begotten of a father other than God, as the Lord Himself said to the Jews, "Ye are of the devil, as your father", @John 8: 44. The devil has got a footing in the world, and he has become a father, not only to demons, but to men. The apostle Paul met a man whom he called a "son of the devil, enemy of all righteousness", @Acts 13: 10. It has become thus with men who have shut God out of their knowledge. Do not think that I mean that all men, women and children in the world are of the devil, far from it; but nevertheless it is a serious truth that if any despise the testimony of God in Christ, and continue in that despising, he will at length, if he is not already thus, be marked by the devil. So the young people should be on their guard and not neglect God's precious light in Christ, which has come so near to them, even maybe in their own parents. If they continue to neglect and refuse this blessed light, it may result in their coming right under the control of the devil. We have often noticed the particular denial of God and unbelief that marks those who were born and brought up by
{399}
christian parents and who have despised the grace of God. In Elisha's time it was the sons of the prophets who said to him after Elijah had gone up into heaven that after all it might not be so. They were the sons of the prophets but nevertheless they were unbelieving as to Christ's resurrection and ascension. So we see that they pressed Elijah to let fifty men go and seek after him and make it clear that it really was true that he had gone up to heaven. So we find afterwards in the same chapter, a generation whose children, when Elisha comes by, mocked him and said to him, "Go up, bald head!", @2 Kings 2: 23. From this we can understand that when unbelief comes into the heart, there is quickly opposition to God's servants. That is why these children came under the judgment of God, and it says that two she-bears came out of the wood and tore forty-two of them. That is a solemn warning to the young people not to despise the truth and not to give room for unbelieving thoughts in their hearts. If we withdraw ourselves from the influence of the Spirit of God and the influence of Christ we shall come under the influence of the god of this world, he who blinds the eyes of the unbelieving, so that the light of the gospel of the glory of Christ should not shine forth for them. They have opposed the testimony of God and are thus a generation which is exposed to the judgment of God.
In these four different generations we can see how opposition to God arose in the world. It says first that "there is a generation that curseth their father and doth not bless their mother". It is not hard to see the great inclination that is found in a child to be indifferent to its parents. Disobedience to parents is something which specially marks the last time. Anyone who has travelled a little in the world will have noticed that, and I have no doubt that you have also noticed the same thing here. Think of being indifferent to your parents, and yet they are your best friends! God has entrusted you to your parents¬ care. As parents they represent Him. Fathers are exhorted to bring up their children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. God has therefore set authority there where it will be least felt.
{400}
Authority which is exercised in love should not be despised but coveted. Think of the great advantage to be children of God-fearing parents. God has not only given your parents authority but they have received light from Him and know His grace and love. Everything is brought near to you; you have blessing within your range every day. When you are obedient to this authority you will come directly under God's authority. Thus you will learn to know the Lord Jesus as your own Saviour in the same way that He is your parents¬ Saviour. You will then be able to say, 'He is my God and my father's God'. But we have read of a generation that curseth their father, and doth not bless their mother. What a serious thing that is, dear young friends, for in verse 17 we see the result, "The eye that mocketh at a father, and despiseth to obey a mother, the ravens of the valley shall pick it out, and the young eagles shall eat it". Then we read "of a generation that are pure in their own eyes, yet are not washed from their filthiness". This generation includes a very great part of mankind, namely those who are satisfied with a religious position and yet it says that they are not washed from their filthiness. There are thousands, yes millions, of people who are only christians in name. They say that they are following their fathers¬ religion. They observe outward customs or forms. They may be entered as church members and it might be that they are elders of the church, it is even possible that they are gospel preachers, but it may be with them, as it says here, that they are not washed from their filthiness. As I have already said this generation includes a great proportion of mankind and if there is anyone here who is resting in his own religious activity or form I would earnestly ask you to consider this scripture. It says, "A generation that are not washed from their filthiness". It may be that it has never struck you that you are filthy, but if you are not converted and born anew, if your sins are not forgiven by reason of the blood of Jesus, whatever you might be in this world, you are not washed from your filthiness; yes, even your own righteousness is filthy, as it says, "All our righteousnesses are as filthy rags", @Isaiah 64: 6. What use can
{401}
God have for such clothing? Even we would not use such.
Put aside therefore every thought you might have had of being pleasing to God in your own righteousness. God Himself has righteousness for you; for the righteousness of God is revealed. Put your righteousness and pride aside and confess that you are a helpless sinner before God. Then you will receive God's righteousness as your portion, as it is written, "But now without law righteousness of God is manifested, borne witness to by the law and the prophets; righteousness of God by faith of Jesus Christ towards all, and upon all those who believe", @Romans 3: 21, 22. The most wicked man in this place can have this righteousness, yes, the most religious can also have it if he bows himself in confession before God, for His righteousness is for all, but it is only upon all who believe.
As we go on we see in verse 13 another generation. It is not now one which has a religious appearance. It is possible that they can have children who are obedient but they are full of fleshly pride. They may be proud of their descent, of their training, of their riches and of their friends. The eyelids of this generation -- how are they lifted up! They are like the rich man the Lord spoke of who lived every day in splendour and cheer. He despised Lazarus, the poor beggar. But the day came when the rich man died, and we read that he lifted up his eyes in hades. Humble yourself therefore before God, for otherwise the day will come when you will be forced to humble yourself. The rich man would fain have his tongue cooled by Lazarus¬ finger. We also read that Lazarus was comforted, but the rich man suffered. Let us therefore watch that we do not belong to this generation, this proud generation.
Then we read of "a generation whose teeth are swords, and their jaw-teeth knives". These are the covetous and self-seeking men who do not hesitate to take the life of their fellow men in order to get their profit; those who have not the least sympathy for the wretched and poor among men. If there is such a person here, this is your opportunity. Cast from you your greed, for evil lust and unbridled desire are said to be idolatry, @Colossians 3: 5. I believe that
{402}
these four generations give us a description of the whole race of men, with the exception of the children of God, and we come now to them in our scripture in John. John was himself a family man. He speaks of "the only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father", and he shows us a generation who are brought into this blessed position. The Son of God has come out to us, dear friends, to declare the Father. He was seen here by men as the only-begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth. He was presented to His own after the flesh as it says, "He came to his own, and his own received him not", @John 1: 11. Think of what grace it was that He should come to them. He came Himself; He did not send another. He went about amongst the Jews as the Father's beloved Son, full of grace and truth. I appeal to everyone here who has not yet received Christ. He is presented to you now in the gospel so that you might receive Him. In @Luke 19 we read of a man called Zacchaeus who received Jesus into his house with joy, and when Jesus was in that man's house He said of him that he was a son of Abraham. He was set amongst those belonging to the family of faith and the house of God, and you are invited now to come into the circle of the family of faith. It says therefore that he was a son of Abraham. But to be a son of Abraham is the same as being a believer. John says, "But as many as received him, to them gave he the right to be children of God", @John 1: 12. You may say that you understood that to mean that we were the children of God because we were born of God, but notice that it says that to all those who received Christ He gave the right to be children of God. They have thus the right to take that place. Think of having the right to take such a position. Think what it is to be the children of God. Leave for ever the four generations we have spoken about. You have the choice. Most here have made their choice; they have received Christ, and God has given us who have received Christ, the right to be His children. John says, "See what love the Father has given to us, that we should be called the children of God", @1 John 3: 1. Notice that it says, "We should be called". Think what an
{403}
honour is shown us even now while we are on earth that we should bear the character of the fifth generation. The others are marked by Satan and the world, but this generation which John speaks of is marked by Christ. After John has mentioned this truth that we have the right to be children of God, the further truth comes forward, namely that we are born of God. We read, "Who have been born, not of blood,, nor of flesh's will, nor of man's will, but of God", @John 1:13. What a generation that is, dear friends. This fifth generation bears the mark of God's nature, for it is born of God.
I would very much desire to be able to show how the children of believers can come into this glorious position. @Isaiah 44 throws some light on it. It says there, "I will pour my spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine offspring", @Isaiah 44: 3. This is a distinct word to parents and this remarkable word, which was said to the jailer, comes particularly before me, "Believe on the Lord Jesus and thou shalt be saved, thou and thy house", @Acts 16: 31. God knows that a man loves his house and therefore when God saves a man or his wife He also wants to save their children; but how great is the responsibility they have. The question is whether they will belong to this world or to God's world. We read that Heman had fourteen sons (@1 Chronicles 25: 5) and these fourteen sons were under their father's leading in the song in the house of Jehovah. What a great blessing God had given him in so many sons who represented him in the house of God. "Happy is the man that hath filled his quiver with them. They shall not be ashamed when they speak with enemies in the gate", @Psalm 127: 5. This psalm refers to the house of God. The gospel does not only include you who are parents but also your children, but how often we see the opposite amongst believers as it happened with Abraham and Lot. God knew that Abraham would command his children and his household after him. Abraham lived in communion with God, and it says that he lived in tents with Isaac and Jacob, heirs with him of the same promise. He lived in tents and had no connection with this world and did not let his children have to do with this world; they walked in it as strangers
{404}
and pilgrims. But Lot took up a position in the gate of Sodom. The angels who came to Sodom to liberate him from it said to him, "Whom hast thou here besides? a son-in-law, and thy sons, and thy daughters, and all whom thou hast in the city -- bring them out of the place", @Genesis 19: 12. They were come to get Lot, his wife, family and relations out of Sodom, but when Lot went out and spoke to his sons-in-law he was in their sight as one that jested. That one should speak of destruction, who held a high position in the city, was certainly incredible and therefore his sons-in-law perished in the destruction of Sodom. We read that the angels urged Lot, and said, "Up, take thy wife and thy two daughters who are present, lest thou perish in the iniquity of the city", @Genesis 19: 15. But, dear friends, notice the serious thing: his wife looked back from behind him. What a word of warning to those who are wives. The Lord Himself said, "Remember the wife of Lot", @Luke 17: 32. It is sad to think that she looked back from behind her husband, and she became a pillar of salt. It is the mother who particularly influences the development of the child's character and if she looks back from behind her husband so her children will also look back. They will prefer Sodom; that is, they will prefer this world to the house of God, but, beloved parents, this word in Isaiah is for you, "I will pour my Spirit upon thy seed", it is God's promise, "I will pour my Spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine offspring" (@Isaiah 44: 3), and then it says that they should spring up among the grass. How much grass is there in your house? The grass is a type of spiritual life. After the dry land appeared in @Genesis 1 we see that the earth brought forth grass. Grass is, as I said, a type of spiritual life. That should be seen in the houses of God's people. When God's word and God's Spirit are given room in our houses there will be holy conversation and our children will thus spring up there as among the grass. The fruits of this will show themselves, for it says that they will spring up as willows by the watercourses. We shall find that such young men and women will quickly interest themselves in the word of God and
{405}
search out the people of God. I say that to encourage the young people who may have begun to interest themselves in the meetings. They have begun to show the character which is referred to in the willows by the water-courses. I believe that the water-courses speak of the activity in the testimony through the Spirit. The young must have something which attracts them to become free of the world, and nothing is more powerful to that end than the Spirit's living water. A young believer, who is thus drawn, begins to accept responsibility in the Lord's things and can say, "I am Jehovah's". What a day that is for a young man who lives in the happy surroundings of his parents¬ house, when he steps out and says, "I am Jehovah's". Have you, dear friend, come so far? Have you said, "I am Jehovah's"? You belong to Him because He has gone down into death for you. He has rights over you and He wants to hear you say, "I am Jehovah's". So it says, "Another shall call himself by the name of Jacob", @Isaiah 44: 5. You come to the understanding of what a God you have and that you have a service for Him. We read further, "Another shall write with his hand: I am Jehovah's, and surname himself by the name of Israel", @Isaiah 44: 5. As one who has received the Holy Spirit you will understand that you belong to a spiritual fellowship, for the name Israel has a spiritual meaning. When you write this with your hand you have given yourself to Him for time and for eternity. You are the Lord's and your name is Israel. God said to Jacob that his name should be called Israel for as a prince he had wrestled with God and with men. So you belong to an honourable family. All this world's glory becomes dark when you come into an understanding of your calling and that you belong to the fifth generation of which we have spoken. What a position this generation has before God! They are already His children here on earth and God has Himself given them a name of honour.
I appeal now to the young. These wonderful things are presented to you in the gospel. By accepting Christ and believing on Him you come into the possession of all these great things and they are yours for all eternity.
{406}
THE LORD'S SERVICE TO HIS OWN
@John 13: 1 - 38
What is written in this chapter took place when the Lord first introduced the Supper. It shows us what a glorious scene it was. It stands in the same relation to the Lord's supper as @2 Corinthians 3 stands in relation to @1 Corinthians 11. @2 Corinthians 3 shows us the Spirit who would fill the assembly in connection with the Lord's supper. The cup which we drink sets out the love which was revealed in the Lord in His service here.
In @2 Corinthians 3 we read that the Lord is the Spirit and this truth comes forward plainly in @John 13. There we have before us a realm where He is Lord and yet He performs His service of love in humility. I believe that the apostle Paul was moved by the same spirit when he wrote the two epistles to the Corinthians. The first epistle can be linked with the water with which the Lord washed the disciples¬ feet and the second epistle can be linked with the linen cloth with which He wiped their feet.
It says that the Lord laid aside His garments. His garments have an allusion to His outward dignity. When Paul wrote to the Corinthians he maintained his apostolic authority because it was necessary; nevertheless, he took the position of a servant of the saints in humility. So when we consider @John 13 in relation to 2 Corinthians we shall get an understanding of the ministry which is in agreement with the new covenant. Whatever the position in any assembly might be, the Lord's love never fails. It never failed in the apostle Paul. We see in @John 13 the object of the Lord's service to the disciples. His aim was that the disciples should have love among themselves. "By this shall all know that ye are disciples of mine, if ye have love amongst yourselves", @John 13: 35. When this is a reality among us we shall behold the glory of the Lord as the apostle says in @2 Corinthians 3. The love will then shine out from us, not only on the Lord's day when we are
{407}
assembled to break bread, but in our daily pathway. We can understand that the Corinthians came short in this, for the apostle had to describe love for them in @1 Corinthians 13. If love had been a reality among them it would not have been necessary for the apostle to describe it so accurately.
In @2 Corinthians 3 we read of the surpassing glory. The path which the Lord trod in love here upon earth where He never considered for Himself, led to the surpassing glory. He Himself went to glory, yea He is the Lord of glory.
"Jesus, knowing that the Father had given him all things into his hands, and that he came out from God and was going to God, rises from supper and lays aside his garments, and having taken a linen towel he girded himself: then he pours water into the washhand basin, and began to wash the feet of the disciples, and to wipe them with the linen towel with which he was girded", @John 13: 3 - 5. He was fully conscious of His great position. The glory was there in His own person. In John's gospel what is in heaven is brought down to us. We can understand how necessary it was for the disciples to be liberated by the Lord to have part with Him.
It is of great importance to see that the Lord laid aside His garments. Our tendency is to want to carry out our service in a public way. It lies so near to us to want a prominent place, like the official clergy who stand out in clothes which mark them out from laymen. The Lord on the other hand laid aside His garments and thus displayed His loving service to His disciples. But He was fully conscious of His personal dignity. The fact that He laid aside His garments took nothing away from Him personally. The sorrow with many who are now active is that their dignity depends on the service. The Lord was Himself far greater than the service He carried out. It is a poor thing if we have to be dependent on our clothes to uphold our dignity. The apostles had a high position but they carried out their service in humility, as Paul writes, "For I think that God has set us the apostles for the last, as appointed to death. For we have become a spectacle to the world, both
{408}
to angels and men. *We* are fools for Christ's sake", @1 Corinthians 4: 9, 10. It was not that Paul was complaining about it, but he shows us God's way of acting.
What a wonderful and great position Jesus had as One who stood as Mediator between God and men. He carried out His wonderful work as Mediator in humility; but His moral glory shone out for those who had spiritual sight. Moses, who was a type of Christ, was very meek, more than all men on earth.
"When therefore he had washed their feet, and taken his garments, having sat down again, he said to them, Do ye know what I have done to you? Ye call me the Teacher and the Lord, and ye say well, for I am so. If I therefore, the Lord and the Teacher, have washed your feet, ye also ought to wash one another's feet; for I have given you an example that, as I have done to you, ye should do also", @John 13: 12 - 15. The scripture we read in @1 Corinthians 4: 9 shows that the apostle followed in His steps. Judas could not bear to be in this glorious scene. He went out into the darkness. "When therefore he was gone out Jesus says, Now is the Son of man glorified, and God is glorified in him. If God be glorified in him, God also shall glorify him in himself, and shall glorify him immediately", @John 13: 31, 32. The Lord looked on to the glory but death lay directly before Him. All that shows us the spirit in which He went into death. What humility!
It says in the beginning of chapter 12 that it was six days before the passover, and here in chapter 13, "Now before the feast of the passover", verse 1. That this feast is named is a reference to the fact that He must die. It was thus just before the feast of the passover that He carried out this service of love. In chapter 12 they made a supper for Him but in chapter 13 we see God's side. God's claim was that the passover lamb should be slain and the Lord knew that fully when He laid aside His garments. How His moral glory shines out in this! It is by taking up everything in humility and following the Lord that we get a sight of His glory. "Now the Lord is the Spirit, but where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. But *we* all, looking
{409}
on the glory of the Lord, with unveiled face, are transformed according to the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Lord the Spirit", @2 Corinthians 3: 17, 18. It is only by following in the Lord's footsteps that it will become a reality to us, as we sang:
<blockquote>Thou wouldest that we should rejoice, And walk by faith below; <br>Enough, that we have heard Thy voice, And learned Thy love's deep woe <br>Thy glory, Lord: this living waste To us no rest can give; <br>Our path is on with earnest haste, Lord, in Thy rest to live. </blockquote>
The Lord used a linen towel to wipe the disciples¬ feet and from that we understand His tender care for His own. Linen naturally attracts water to itself very easily. It has been said that when we wipe one another's feet we are inclined to leave them wet. When therefore it is a question of carrying out this service -- and this service is a necessity -- it is of the greatest importance that the person concerned should have a feeling of grace; otherwise bitterness can arise. The ministry of the new covenant introduced the love of God. When therefore it speaks of removing pollution, let it be done in love. Such a soul should be brought into reconciliation and made conscious of God's favour. So we do not only use water but also the linen towel. I believe that that which the linen towel alludes to is something which we should have on our hearts. For we must remember that the use of the water is the first part of this service. If this is not paid attention to we may damage the brother who has failed. When a person has judged himself he can be comforted. We see from 2 Corinthians that Paul laboured that mutual relations of the assembly in love should be restored so that the apostle and the assembly in Corinth together with the person who had sinned could be together again in mutual holy relations. How easily the
{410}
working of the flesh can disturb the mutuality of love. When there are some who must be corrected things often come up which have been concealed amongst us.
The apostle had the Lord before him as his model, as he wrote 2 Corinthians. He had before him the Lord's wonderful pathway in humility to the death of the cross. It is in the death of Christ and His resurrection that we have the power for restoration.
{411}
AVAILABILITY
@Luke 10: 38 - 42
In coming into a locality for the first time, the question comes up in one's mind as to the ear that there may be for divine things. This, of course, is coupled with the exercise that divine things may be rightly presented for, if one is to serve aright, there must be in some sense a representation of Christ; this gospel presents Christ in the attractiveness of His ministry. Throughout the record which Luke gives, there is an avoidance of any unnecessary irritating elements, any features in the presentation of the truth that would arouse prejudice. So the Lord is presented in His first public ministry as turning to the Scriptures and then, in His comments, it is stated of Him that gracious words proceeded from His mouth. He reserved the truth for later application, but He began His ministry with gracious words and He says, "This day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears", @Luke 4: 21. He raised no question, at that time, as to how they heard but He does raise this question later on in His ministry; and so, beloved brethren, the thought comes into one's mind in entering a locality as to how things that one may have to say are heard, because however much may be presented, if any fruit is to be borne, things have to be heard aright.
The Lord indeed gives us a lead in this as in all else. In Spirit He said "Mine ears hast thou opened", @Psalm 40: 6. Coming into manhood as He is presented in this gospel, He is in the attitude of hearing. We read of Him at twelve years 'hearing' in the temple, in keeping with the lead which He would give us according to the word which I have quoted, in which He says, "Mine ears hast thou opened". So again He says, in beautiful dependence on God as a Man here -- "He wakeneth morning by morning, he wakeneth mine ear to hear as the learned" -- that is as the learner or disciple (@Isaiah 50: 4); wonderful expression of dependence! It was not only that He had become Man and had in a
{412}
general way taken man's place toward God, for man should hear, but there was the daily wakening and opening; "The Lord God hath opened mine ear", He says. So the Lord thus gives us a lead as to hearing, as in all else. We have to learn everything from Him, and not the least is how to hear the things of God.
Now I have selected this passage because it speaks of one who had learned to listen to Christ; Mary's ear was available to Christ, and in using the word, one is reminded of the availability of persons in Luke. From the outset he presents us with person after person who is available to God and to Christ. Nothing in a way is more important than that one should hold himself as available to God. We see in chapter 1 how Zacharias and Elizabeth were available -- he was serving in the order of his course as a priest, and she was of the daughters of Aaron, and they were both righteous and blameless before the Lord. They were thus fit vessels to be used for the purpose of God. They were available, but what we are to be reminded of is that, whilst there may be in a general way availability to God, there may also be defects in detail, and Luke does not pass over these. Zacharias had a serious defect in detail, notwithstanding his general availability; he was defective in faith in the angel's announcement, and he suffered the penalty of a considerable time of silence, until the time came about when the word of the Lord, by the angel, was fulfilled. It was not a very serious penalty, but it was in a way serious to be silenced. In the ways of God, some of us have to become silent, not that we are not perhaps priests or generally righteous but because we are defective in faith in regard to the point immediately on hand, immediately pressed. He was defective in faith and was not prepared for the immediate heavenly message and so he suffers silence -- a serious matter surely, but not irremediable. I mention it because we have to be, according to Luke, on the look out for detail in the history of our souls and see that we are ready for the immediate word of God, whatever that may be. Zacharias missed the word for the moment, and so was silenced, but as his mouth was opened, beloved, he utters beautifully the mind of God,
{413}
not only in regard of his own son, John, but in regard to Christ -- the Dayspring from on high.
You have set against Zacharias, his wife, Elizabeth, and Mary, her cousin. What is said about Mary is "Blessed is she that believed", @Luke 1: 45. She believed, she was open to the immediate communication for the moment. She was wonderfully favoured and she was ready for the immediate communication from the Lord, and the comment of the Spirit through Elizabeth is "Blessed is she that believed". It is beautiful, beloved, to be wholly available that there may be faith. There is no possibility of a work of God in men's souls apart from faith; there is no possibility of any of us making any headway spiritually apart from faith, so the beautiful comment of the Spirit in regard to Mary the mother of the Lord is "Blessed is she that believed", and so as you proceed in this narrative you find the shepherds are available. There was no room for the Lord in the inn in Bethlehem; no, beloved, the inn was not available: the manger was, and then the shepherds were occupied with what was legitimate, what was according to God, and they were available and as available they got the light. "Unto you" -- how precious, beloved, as you are available and ready for a divine communication, "Unto you is born this day in the city of David a Saviour". Think what that must have been to the shepherds and how they set out for Bethlehem to see the Babe, and they saw the Babe. Then as He is brought into the temple by His parents, Simeon is available in the temple. He is in accord with the moment; you see as we travel with God in the histories of our souls, we are always in accord with the moment, we are not behind what God is doing, we are abreast of God, so to speak. And so Simeon, it says, came into the temple by the Spirit. Had he come in under any other influence at that time he would have missed this -- he would not have been available. It needed a spiritual man in the temple to take that Babe. He had come, as it were, specially into the temple. None of the high priestly family of Jerusalem at that moment was capable of receiving the precious Babe that came into the temple, but Simeon came in truly a priest. He was
{414}
available, beloved. He came by the Spirit into the temple. You see he was in accord with the movements of God and as he came into the temple of God he had the great honour of receiving the Son of God, receiving Him into his arms. It was a wonderful moment for Simeon. You see the advantage of being available, and so Anna came in the same hour. She was also in keeping with the divine movements. She was not behind and she was available to God at that moment, and it says that she "spake of him"; she had been occupied with Him beforehand, and she spoke of Him to all those that looked for redemption in Jerusalem. And so as you proceed in this book, Peter's boat is available to Christ. If Peter had resented and refused the Lord's request that He should have the use of his boat then Peter would have been at a great disadvantage. The boat was available and through the availability of the boat, Peter himself became available to Christ, so that it is said of Peter and his partners, James and John, that they left all and followed Jesus. The Lord had said, "Henceforth thou shalt catch men", and they left all and followed Jesus. I want you to notice, beloved, how the initial idea of following the Lord in Luke's gospel is the idea that marks the dispensation -- that is, one has to leave all, even the draught of fishes and the boats and the partnership. All is left behind to follow Jesus.
In that same chapter He calls Levi sitting at a tax-gatherer's office; he left all. I do not know how much money may have been on the desk. He left all. There must be a complete break -- politically, religiously, and otherwise, if we are to fall into line with this wonderful movement of God in Christ. There must be a complete break and leaving of all that we have been attached to. They left all and followed Him. Ah, look what they came into. They are now available to Christ; in the next chapter, He prays a whole night and then He appoints all these men, the apostles. See what they become, the authoritative representatives of Christ in this world. He appointed them after a whole night of prayer.
I have referred to that because it leads up to this passage in which you see Mary of Bethany; the ear and the heart
{415}
of Mary are available to the Lord, and so, as I said, if one comes into a locality, one of the most important of questions that comes up in one's mind is what ear there is It enters into what I may call 'local furnishings', of which chapters 10 and 11 of Luke deal. You will observe that in the earlier part of chapter 10 the Lord had sent out seventy, two by two, into every city and place to which He was about to come. He was about to come to one city after another, and one place after another, but ere coming or visiting these places, He sent seventy out, thirty-five pairs of men representative of Himself, into these cities; so that as He came into any of these cities or places, He would look for results of the previous ministry. Has the previous ministry satisfied you? Are you content with what you have got or are you prepared for more? He comes into a certain village as we have here and a certain woman received Him into her house; her house is available. We may thank God for that, but your house is not so important to the Lord as your ear. If one had all the money of a millionaire, one's money would not be as valuable to Christ as one's ear.
What He seeks is one's ear, and so whilst He entered into the house of Martha, He found as He entered it that she did not hear. Her ear was not available to Him, but over against her is her sister, Mary, and it says she sat at His feet and was listening to His word. I can understand Mary considering what may have come to her during the visit of two of these seventy men, if indeed they came to Bethany. I suppose the thought is that Bethany is a representative village and I can understand how Mary would go over the things that she heard from these two, precious things, doubtless; they could have told her much about Christ, but now He has come Himself. He has come Himself, beloved. At the present time, the Lord Jesus is speaking to His people; it is what marks the dispensation, as the apostle, the writer of the Hebrews says, "God, who at sundry times and in divers manners spake in time past unto the fathers by the prophets, hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son". The Son is the speaker and He continues to speak to us -- it is a wonderful time, the present time.
{416}
I am now seeking to exercise our hearts, not simply to hear ministry but to hear Christ, because if the voice of Christ is not recognisable, then it is not ministry from Christ. It is a question of hearing what He has to say. Peter says, "Going he preached". See the immense link backward. He went and preached to the spirits now in prison which were sometime disobedient in the days of Noah. Coming He has preached. He has come to us gentiles. He has preached the glad tidings of peace to those that are afar off and those that are nigh. It is the ministry of Christ and it is a question of how you hear -- whether you are looking for His voice or whether you are simply occupied with some person or persons whom He may be using. The Corinthians were occupied with the ministers -- they were setting one over against another, whereas a truly exercised ear is listening for Christ.
And so, as I said, Mary was sitting down; she was restful, she sat at His feet and was listening to what He was saying -- listening to His word. And oh, what a fountain there is, beloved, of divine thoughts in the heart of Christ! He has many mouths through which He speaks now, but He speaks. The ministry is His. The apostle Paul spoke of himself -- and others -- as new covenant ministers, that means that he was employed by Christ. He was taken into the service, but the ministry was Christ's -- the ministry is Christ's. It is a question of disclosure of what is in His mind. She was listening to His word.
Well, now, in closing I do not enlarge on what He said to Martha, but I would just remind you of another word later in this gospel, in chapter 19, where the Lord has been speaking to Zacchaeus, pointing out that He was a son of Abraham, and it says, "As they were listening to these things, he added and spake a parable". There you have another touch -- that is, if there is continuity of attention to Christ, He will add. How much there is before us, and what I have in mind is the availability of our ears, how we hear. And then the ministry will be added to as hearing and interest as to what the Lord is saying at the present time to the assembly are sustained. May God bless the thoughts to us.
{417}
REPRESENTATION
@John 20: 21, 22; @Genesis 48: 12 - 22; @Genesis 49: 1, 2, 28
I wish to speak this evening about representation. God intends to be represented, and I apprehend that the gospel of John has this specially in view. Coming in, as it does, at the end, it brings about life. It brings in conditions of life, for God is the living God, and therefore He must be represented by those, and by those only, who are living. So that in order to have the idea of representation, which is conveyed in the word "image", we must have first the idea of likeness. It is said in the first chapter of Genesis that God created man in His image, but in the fifth chapter it is said: "In the likeness of God made he him". This comes in, as you all remember, after the dark history recorded in the fourth chapter, a chapter full of disaster. It is a chapter in which, after the death of Abel, you look in vain until Seth appears for any person qualified to represent God. But on the birth of Seth, who himself became the father of Enos, we have the element of recovery, for in naming his son Enos, Seth indicated that he had light. He discerned that his son was born to die; that he was a failing mortal man as the name given indicates. And so it is said that men then began to call on the name of the Lord. "The name of the Lord" -- what did that mean in those days? It meant what it means now, only that now we have it in a fuller way. It meant in those days that God had come in and met in grace the situation that Adam and Eve had created by their disobedience. God had come out and He had provided a covering, or clothing, and in the light of that Adam calls his wife's name Eve, meaning that she was the mother, not of all *dying*, but of all *living*. Light had come into his soul, obviously, and he saw that there should be a living line, so that as men began to call on the name of the Lord they would have in mind how He had come in for Adam, and for Eve.
And then, again, as Cain had slain Abel God had again
{418}
spoken; He was concerned about man's life, if Cain were not. Perhaps human life has never been so cheap as it has been in our own time. In the eyes of Cain the life of a brother was of no value, but the life of Abel was of great value to God. Abel had light, and his light led him to worship God, to call upon God, to bring Him a suitable offering; and so God valued the light of Abel. "The voice", He says, "of thy brother's blood crieth unto me", @Genesis 4: 10. And so it is that God values the life of a believer, the life of a brother. In that life there was indeed a representation of God, for God was represented in some sense in the offering of Abel. How precious was that blood! He says: "The voice of thy brother's blood crieth unto me from the ground". And earlier, in speaking to Cain, He had said: "If thou doest not well, sin [a sin-offering] lieth at the door". God had thus by Him the means of meeting even a Cain. Such was the grace of God, beloved friends, even expressed in those early days, and that grace all entered into the name upon which men began to call. Seth brought this about in the naming of his son; he brought in light, and it was as if he sounded out for all, that to be brought into the world after nature is to be born to die.
God had said to Adam: "In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die", @Genesis 2: 17. Seth said, in effect: 'I own that'; and so men called on the name of the Lord. It is indeed what the gospel announces at the present time, that death is passed upon all men, for that all have sinned. But the name of the Lord involves that God has found a means whereby men may live and not die, so that Enoch, who is said to be the seventh from Adam, lived.
He represents a spiritual development; a complete answer to Adam's name given to Eve -- for she was Enoch's mother -- and Enoch was not, we are told, for God took him. Before he was translated he had this testimony that he pleased God; he walked with God, not as a dying man surely, but as a living man, and so he was translated that he should not see death. He was the "seventh" you see, meaning a spiritual development. Adam had conveyed the light in calling his wife's name Eve, and that light developed
{419}
through Seth, through whom men began to call on the name of the Lord. It had its fall issue in Enoch who had, before his translation, testimony that he pleased God. How restful was the recovery in such an issue as Enoch, the seventh from Adam; but, as I remarked, it was Adam as set up in the fifth chapter of Genesis -- in which we have Adam's history after men began to call on the name of the Lord. It is God taking the thing up again in the light of recovery, and so we have the history of Adam, not now the history of disaster but a history which culminated in what pleased God. Enoch pleased God; and so, beloved friends, in the first verse of the fifth chapter it is said that God created man in His *likeness*, not His *image*. We must have likeness now before we can have image, and I apprehend that John's writings, particularly his gospel, are to bring in at the end of the dispensation the likeness of God in His people. It is also said of Adam that he begat a son in his own likeness, after his image, for Seth was in accord now with Adam, who had spoken about life in naming Eve. Seth named his son not in relation to life but in relation to death, for with Seth it is a question of death and life; with Adam it would be a question of life and death. These two things are true. In Christ it is life and death -- "In him was life" -- in the believer it is death and life; these two things run through Scripture. Of the Lord Jesus Christ, in the second verse of the gospel of John, in almost the second statement after His deity is stated, it is said: "In him was life", showing how prominent the idea was from John's point of view. We have in the Word become flesh life absolutely in a Man. It was there in Him from the very outset; it does not say that the Word became man. John's gospel contemplates the incarnation in its completeness, from infancy onwards, that the Word became flesh and dwelt among us, and in that blessed One there was life. So that in Christ it is life and death, and in the believer it is death and life for it is life out of death.
Now, I have been saying all these things, beloved friends, having in view to show that God intends at the present time to have representation of Himself in His people in a
{420}
living way; and in remarking on @John 20 I would just refer for a moment to the opening verses. In these verses you will remember that Mary Magdalene brought tidings to the disciples about the grave -- that it was empty. She ran, and then it says that the two disciples ran, and one of them outran the other. Now I mention that because of the tendency with us to haste, to fruitless haste. There is in Scripture *fruitful* haste, and there is *fruitless* haste. There are those who take up a thought and run, and after they have run they go to their own homes; they return to the natural. Now Mary Magdalene ran too but she did not return to her own home. It is right surely, when you see a divine thing, to go in for it with all your might, but it is not right, after having gone in for it apparently with zeal and zest, to return to your own home, to what is natural. You are saying, in going to your own home, that after all what seemed so precious to you did not prove to be so, and you misrepresent the truth. I see John and Peter in their own homes on that day, and I say: 'Why were you in such a hurry? I saw you running!' They reply: 'Oh well, Mary Magdalene told us the grave was empty and we went to see'. 'Yes, you went to see, and you saw something; what did you see? The grave was empty! Do an empty grave, the empty tomb of Jesus, and your homes agree? If His tomb is empty He is *somewhere*, why not keep up the pace -- have you found Him? He is somewhere, and you will not find Him in your homes!' Well, what can they say? Nothing! How many of us ran at the outset and we failed to find the Lord, and yet we knew the tomb was empty for we had been there. What about Mary Magdalene? She ran too! It was the running of her love, beloved friends, for she loved the Lord. After running she waited, and instead of going to her own home she remained without at the sepulchre weeping. In her heart she said: 'He is somewhere', and so she turned around and she sees one whom she supposes is the gardener. She says: "If thou have borne him hence, tell me where thou hast laid him, and I will take him away", @John 20: 15. She knew He was somewhere, and I want to say to everybody here tonight, if you have
{421}
started on a good pace keep it up. It is a question of patience, and if you truly love Him you will find Him. As the bride, in the Canticles, sought earnestly after the bridegroom -- where was he whom her soul loved -- and in a little she found him -- so with Mary Magdalene. You see she remained without and she found the Lord alive. She looked into the sepulchre and she saw two angels sitting, "the one at the head, and the other at the feet, where the body of Jesus had lain". John and Peter missed that in their haste to go home, but there was light in that for Mary. She is now becoming spiritual, for angels (Luke says they were men) are apprehended only spiritually; they are spirits. "Are they not", it says, "all ministering spirits?" @Hebrews 1: 14. Becoming spiritual is progressive. And then she turns around; that is a spiritual touch. She turned away from the tomb and she saw Jesus, but she did not yet know Him. He says to her: "Mary!" Now, He is going to make a representative of her, she is to be a qualified representative and message bearer for Christ. And so He says: "Touch me not; for I am not yet ascended to my Father", @John 20: 17. He is bringing fight into her soul as to Himself, for He is going up. He is ascending, even to the Father, for, as you will observe, it is not here that He is *going* to the Father, as in chapter 13, but He is *ascending* to the Father. She is to understand what that means. And then it says she went to the disciples and told them these things. It does not say she ran now. Spiritual things, as presented in testimony, require deliberate and careful steps. She went to the disciples and told them these things. They would all have to sit and listen to a sister, a remarkable thing; not indeed that she should teach them, or preach to them, for such service is forbidden to sisters. However, although sisters may not preach or teach, they may *speak*, and they may make *communications*. Those who received the Holy Spirit on the day of Pentecost, the hundred and twenty, apparently all spoke, and there were a good many sisters among them including the Lord's mother. "We hear them speaking in our own tongues the great things of God", it says (@Acts 2: 11), but then when it came to preaching
{422}
Peter stood up with the eleven. Nevertheless, you see the disciples had to listen to Mary Magdalene, and I suppose it was one of the most precious occasions, for who, that loves the Lord Jesus, would not be touched as one came fresh from Him with a message conveying the greatest possible dignity as conferred upon them. She could tell them, Peter, John, James, Matthew, that He said, "Go to my brethren". She could convey to them the sense she had of the message, for she told them "these things". She was a representative of Christ, a sister. Let no sister assume that she has nothing to do. It is within your range to be a representative of Christ, to be a messenger for Him.
Well now, I have said all that chiefly because I wish to point out the danger of undue haste, especially in young people, catching up things and not going the whole way; not waiting patiently for the development of light that has come into one's own soul. So I come now for a moment to the passage I read, and the Lord puts things on a very high basis. He says: "As my Father hath sent me, even so send I you". You will observe here there is no official title.. The person who has the greatest light is a woman, and those who are to represent the Lord, as He represented the Father, are not said to be apostles, but just disciples; but what kind of disciples are they? There are classes of disciples in Scripture. These are disciples who have light in their souls about their relation with Christ as His brethren. They belong to Him, and they are the brethren of a Man who is ascending into heaven, the Son of God; His Father is their Father, His God is their God. He has just spoken to them, shown them His hands and His side, and spoken peace to them. You say: is that all? No, not at all; all that is light and precious light, but light in itself is not enough, however great. We must have life. And so, having said these things, "He breathed into them"; a most intimate transaction, and He says: "Receive the Holy Spirit". As if to say: 'You must have My Spirit if you are to represent Me, and you must be like Me before you can be My image'. Likeness is in nature, and the image is consequent upon that. We are to be the representatives of Christ, as like
{423}
Him in life and in nature, and in dignity too, for we are not anything less than brethren of Christ.
Now, having said all that about the passage in John, I want to show the confirmation of it in the Old Testament. I always find it effective to see confirmations, and amplifications indeed, of New Testament statements in the Old Testament. It is thus that we have things new and old combined. And so in Jacob you have a remarkable exemplification of the principle of representation in life. I understand that Jacob represents in the Old Testament a believer in the development of life. What marks one in whom God has begun a work, according to John's gospel, is that he begins to disallow the flesh, and so Jacob in his infancy, we are told, took hold of Esau by the heel; that is, he was a supplanter of the man born after the flesh. And then again he wrestled with God and he prevailed. He is marked on the one hand by the endeavour to set aside the man born after the flesh, and on the other by energy with God. He prevailed over the angel, it says, and he wrestled in his strength; he wrestled with God. He is a representative thus of the believer in the energy of life. He would have blessing. He says: "I will not let thee go except thou bless me", @Genesis 32: 26. I do not know of anything finer than that in the way of energy. God respects it, so Jacob got the blessing, and he is now in a position, at the close of his life, to represent God, for we have to view Jacob as typifying the believer, and as also typifying the Lord Jesus Christ as representative of God. So, relatively, with every one of us as we come into the full development of life -- in the possession of it consciously -- we are qualified to represent God. I want to dwell on Jacob because it is a unique passage, and he was an old man come to the end of his time on earth. He was already sick, as it says, and Joseph came to him, and it says as Jacob heard of Joseph's arrival that he strengthened himself and sat up. You see the energy of life as he is about to die naturally; he strengthened himself and he sat up. It does not say he was supported by anybody as an invalid would be, because the Spirit of God causes it to stand out, in its greatness, the energy of spiritual life,
{424}
so that in old age it remains in its lustre, as he sat up and strengthened himself. There was an inherent power in the old man, the power of life. But then I want to show that there was discernment, intelligence according to God. One of the greatest things, if we are to represent God, is to be intelligent. As John says in his epistle, "and has given us an understanding". Who has done that? The Son of God, for the apostle writes, "And we know that the Son of God has come, and has given us an understanding that we should know him that is true; and we are in him that is true, in his Son Jesus Christ. He is the true God and eternal life", @1 John 5: 20. And so Jacob corresponds, and as Joseph approaches him with Manasseh in his left hand opposite Jacob's right hand, and Ephraim in his right hand opposite Jacob's left hand, Israel although dimmed in his natural sight knew who was to be first. How often it is, dear brethren, we recognise the order of nature instead of the order of God and the Spirit. "The first man Adam was made a living soul; the last Adam was made a quickening spirit. Howbeit that was not first which is spiritual, but that which is natural; and afterward that which is spiritual", @1 Corinthians 15: 45, 46. It is the "afterward" we have to bear in mind. "The first man is of the earth, earthy: the second man is the Lord from heaven", @1 Corinthians 15: 47. And so Jacob, having light, guided his hands intelligently; he crossed them. Crossing the hands is a spiritual act; it is contrary to the order of nature, and what is spiritual is contrary to the order of nature. We have got to learn to do violence to the order of nature. If we are to represent God it must be that we do violence to that order, as God has done violence to it from the very outset. And so Jacob began as a babe to set aside man born after the flesh. He never gave up that principle, and now in his old age and about to die and in the energy of spiritual life, he sets aside the first man and establishes the second, and places Ephraim before Manasseh. Joseph said: "Not so, my father". This brings out the excellence of developed life in Jacob. Although Joseph stands out as a model (this is the only instance, I think, in which he falls behind) he has to take second place, spiritually,
{425}
in the presence of his father. Although God had made him lord over all Egypt and a father to Pharaoh, he was not a father to Jacob; he could not be. He was father to Pharaoh but he could not bless Pharaoh. Jacob blessed Pharaoh; he was representative of God. He was marked by spiritual life. It is as thus developed in life that we have the father here, and the son Joseph takes his relative position. He says: "Not so, my father" but Jacob refused to listen. How well for many fathers if they refused as their sons seek to have it otherwise! The father represents God in the family and his word must stand; God will support him. Joseph was the best son in the family but his word dare not stand against his father's. Jacob refuses, and how splendid is his position as he stands against the lord of all Egypt! It is an immense thing to be able to refuse. Jacob would not allow his great affection for Joseph to interfere with the mind of God. He says: "I know it, my son"; the father knew and the son did not. Jacob represented God in that act, as he guided his hands wittingly, putting the right one on the head of Ephraim and the other one on the head of Manasseh.
And so it is in this way that God would have representation at the present time. He would have likeness in life and nature, and He would have intelligence, and in this way you represent Him; there is to be the image of God. Jacob represents God in the energy of life. In chapter 49 you see Jacob has acquired the father's place. To be a father pleases the heart of God, and father and son suggest the primary thought of God, the family. Israel calls his sons, and Joseph has to take his place with the others. He is lord of all Egypt and a father to Pharaoh, but, nevertheless, he is Jacob's son in the family and he takes his place there. "Gather yourselves together", Jacob says, "that I may tell you that which shall befall you in the last days". And again: "Gather yourselves together, ... and hearken unto Israel your father". How fine it is that his name is changed: Jacob to Israel! and they are to hearken to Israel their father. He is going to address them now entirely in a spiritual way, laying aside all natural feeling; so he tells them what is to befall them and hides nothing. Their failures are all disclosed,
{426}
but, nevertheless, every tribe is blessed. "These are the twelve tribes of Israel: and this is it that their father spake unto them, and blessed them; every one according to his blessing he blessed them". Jacob blessed them with intelligence, as a representative of God; he placed every tribe in its position according to the mind of God. And so, dear brethren, as we love the Lord and think of His people and constantly desire to help them and be of service to them, we have a model here in Jacob; you cast natural considerations aside entirely. You think of the saints only as in the mind of God, and you think of them only as according to the Spirit. You unfailingly point out their errors, but at the same time convey to them that every true child of God is blessed according to the perfect wisdom of God.
It is thus, I believe, that we can be of service to our brethren: on the one hand faithfully pointing out errors, and on the other impressing upon them as true believers that there is blessing for every one. That is God's way, and thus we are God's representatives.
{427}
THE LORD SEEN IN HOUSES
@Matthew 2: 1, 2, 11, 12; @Matthew 26: 6 - 13,17 - 30
J.T. What came into my mind is that the gospels prepare us for the house of God. I thought of this gospel particularly because the Lord is seen in *houses*, seen acting or serving in houses perhaps more frequently in it than in the others. The last house mentioned in this gospel is that in which the Lord's supper was instituted, and a consideration of this house, I think, will enable us to apprehend the conditions under which the Lord's supper is rightly celebrated. The first house in this gospel in which the Lord is seen is in the passage read, that is in chapter 2 where the wise men find Him. Indeed it furnishes, I think, a key to this subject because the star rests over it. There is that which guides, as divinely ordered, to where Jesus is; so that no believer need be in the dark. If he is wise, if he is prepared for light, he will get light, and that light will guide him to Christ, and to where He is known and where He is.
Ques. Do you mean known in relation to the assembly?
J.T. That is it. That is where He is to be found now.
Ques. Is light from heaven directed there?
J.T. Yes, that is what I thought. No one should be in the dark as to where Christ is because there is light furnished for us. The wise men were able to discern it and they followed it.
Ques. Is that star always shining spiritually?
J.T. Well, I think there is what corresponds with it. The light from heaven always directs to where Christ is recognised on earth. Personally He is in heaven and the light comes from Him there, but it directs us to where He is recognised on earth. So that in the last house you have not a star, but as it says in Mark and in Luke a man carrying a pitcher of water directs them to the spot. That is, the man with the pitcher of water has reference to the operation of the Spirit, the guidance you get from spiritual ministry.
The star has reference to heavenly light. If you are exercised
{428}
as to where the Lord's supper is rightly celebrated, the man with a pitcher of water will *meet you*; follow him into the house that he enters. Indeed the light from heaven, as it says, stood over the house, the place where the little Child was; when the wise men saw it they rejoiced.
Ques. Would you say that in Matthew the star represents the character of the light, and in Mark and Luke you get the Spirit of God using human instrumentality?
J.T. I think so. The star is what is outside; it is the testimony of the heavens whereas the Spirit on earth is implied in the man bearing a pitcher of water; so you follow him. It is most interesting to see in Matthew how the first house mentioned suggests that the Lord is cared for -- "the little child with Mary his mother". It is not that personally He needs care now, for He cares for all things. He created everything; He upholdeth all things by the word of His power. But in regard to His interests on earth He is cared for, and it is the concern of every christian that He is cared for, and that His rights are looked after, and that conditions are suitable to Him. So in @Matthew 2 emphasis is laid on the mother, "the little child and his mother". He was then a little Child, our Lord Jesus, and He was in the care of one who was best suited for the service, His mother; but He is always mentioned before His mother. It is not the mother and the little Child, but "the little child and his mother". The mother served Him and cared for Him. So that these wise men are set up in Matthew as a model for us; they are governed by the light that they had, and when the star stood over the place where the little Child was they rejoiced with great joy. Then they came into the house, and when they came in they worshipped Him. I think that is a suggestion that the Spirit of God would expand and work out later in a spiritual way. It is mentioned in the very beginning so that we may understand what God values. It is not a mere historical incident, but an incident of great value to heaven, and God intends that it should be reached in a spiritual way.
Ques. Would that be why you get Mary represented in Luke's gospel in a priestly character?
{429}
J.T. Well, she qualifies in Luke to be the mother of Christ. More is made of her in Luke than in Matthew, and more is made of Joseph in Matthew because Matthew is occupied with the Heir. It is the "Book of the generation of Jesus Christ, Son of David", but in Luke it is the human side because Christ is connected with Adam there. You have not got this incident in Luke at all. It is the royal side in Matthew; we are specially reminded that we have to do with a great personage, who calls for respect and worship. It is the King.
Ques. What would answer to this light today?
J.T. Well, in the Acts you see heaven asserting itself. In @Acts 2 they were all together in one place with one accord and they heard a sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty wind, and it filled the house. It is not now to guide to the house but to fill it. The house was already there, as it were, in the saints, but it was not yet filled with the sound from heaven. So that heaven asserts itself in the Acts; first in the sound, so that there should be no room for human sounds. You see the modern so-called houses of God are filled with different sounds. Earthly music and choirs, and all that appeals to the flesh, are often found in modern so-called houses of God. Everything is intended to appeal to the flesh, but God intimates at the very outset that His house is not to be filled with any such sound. It is a sound from heaven. The sound from heaven filled the house where they were sitting. Then in chapter 9 we have a light from heaven. That light shines all around about Saul and he is directed to the saints. He is to go to Damascus and it would be told him there what he should do; so Ananias meets him in Damascus. The heavenly light puts the believer in touch with what owns Christ on earth. So that Ananias meets Saul and says, "Saul, brother, the Lord has sent me, Jesus that appeared to thee in the way", @Acts 9: 17. That is the greeting that met him. So that heavenly light guides to that on earth which recognises Christ. "The Lord has sent me, Jesus", Ananias says, "that appeared to thee in the way in which thou camest". So that Saul, the fruit of the light from heaven, is linked up with what owned Christ in
{430}
Damascus. Presently he is with them and preaches among them that Jesus is the Son of God. He was a great acquisition, but primarily he was connected with what owned Christ on earth.
In @Acts 10 heaven asserts itself in the sheet come down which had enclosed in it what should form the house. That may seem a very extraordinary thing to say because the sheet contained four-footed beasts and creeping things -- all kinds of beasts, they were all there. God intimated from heaven that what He would recognise upon earth would not take account of man's religious discriminations at all, but He was going to act universally, and that His house should be composed of persons from all nations; so He says: "What God has cleansed". The sheet comes down and goes up finally into heaven, as if God were to say: 'I am going to have all these up here; if you do not care for them down there they are suitable to me up here'. That excludes all human religious discriminations. Peter had prejudices but this voice from heaven dissipated them. It says: "What God has cleansed". There is great light in that. If God has cleansed a man, even although he be like a lion or a bear, we have to put up with him.
Rem. That is to show Peter that God is no respecter of persons.
J.T. So that we have to go outside the pale of human discriminations. It was making the way clear for Cornelius and his company. I only mention that because it indicates what the light from heaven is. As we observed in these three references in the Acts, we are prepared for the christian company spoken of as the house. "Whose house are we", it says, and there are no national discriminations recognised. The house of God is a universal suggestion; He first intimates what He is going to accept in heaven so that we might be prepared to accept it on earth. The sheet was drawn up into heaven again and it remained there. If you are not prepared to put up with certain people on earth you will have to put up with them there!
Ques. Who are the "we"?
J.T. All christians, all true believers, are of the house
{431}
of God. But then, it is one thing to be of the house of God but another thing to be in the recognition of the principles that govern it. We are not in the enjoyment of it unless we recognise its principles. The first thing, I think, is the light from heaven; it came and stood over the place where the little child was. That is the thing, for every christian to find out where Christ is and where He is cared for, where they are who care for His interests. The house of God is really a heavenly thing on earth, the sheet from heaven indicated that.
Rem. If we do not take account of the light from heaven we do not get into the house.
J.T. No. The heavenly light is available to all christians, but it is a question of following it now.
Rem. One who followed this light would not be found in a solitary pathway.
J.T. No, he would have a company: those who call on the Lord out of a pure heart.
The next house we find in Matthew is Peter's, where his wife's mother was sick of a fever. That will not do in a house. A woman sick of a fever will not care much for the Lord; she would be thinking of herself. So the different houses in Matthew lead up to a recognition of this great principle in the second chapter. It is obvious that feverish conditions are not compatible with what we get in chapter 2. There were no feverish conditions in the house in which the wise men found Christ; the little Child and His mother were there. But the Lord touched the feverish woman's hand and the fever left her, and she arose and served Him. She is ready to look after the Lord now. The Lord healed her and made her useful.
Rem. She would be in accord with the Lord's mother then.
J.T. Well, I thought so. She was brought into accord with what we find in the second chapter. "She arose and served him", @Matthew 8: 15. He is the King, the One to be served. So that we are thus far brought into accord with the second chapter. It is a word, I think, for every one of us as to what I am doing for Christ. She arose and served *Him*. He must have the first place in the house.
{432}
Rem. "He touched her hand", it says.
J.T. That means she would be eligible for service. There are many persons who are feverish, excited and flurried, and occupied with themselves. Well, that will not do in the house. Here she is in the house of Peter, one who was to be a great servant, and the Lord healed her, and she arose and served Him. I feel how fitting it is that a woman should thus be occupied in serving the Lord. It says in Luke: They "ministered to him of their substance". So we go on in the book and I think we find the next house is Levi's, in chapter 9: "And Jesus, passing on thence, saw a man sitting at the tax-office, called Matthew, and says to him, Follow me. And he rose up and followed him. And it came to pass, as he lay at table in the house, that behold, many tax-gatherers and sinners came and lay at table with Jesus and his disciples", (verses 9, 10). Now we come to another thing: the people in the house are such that you might not care for. They are tax-gatherers and sinners, and He lies at table with them. That is a test, whether we are prepared to lie down at table with the most disreputable people in the town; how are we going to surmount that?
Rem. I suppose there would be a change when Christ works in their hearts.
J.T. Nevertheless there are their reputations and we have to face that, whether we can sit down with the most disreputable people, but those whom God has cleansed. Their hearts are changed, but nevertheless their public history stands.
Ques. Is the answer found in verse 13: "I will have mercy and not sacrifice?"
J.T. Yes, that is what we have to learn, but it shows how testing it is. How we have got to be prepared to surrender our natural feelings and pride. The Lord is to determine who is to be in the house; I cannot determine who is to be in the house. It is a very great test, you know.
Rem. Those who object have to realise that they have to come in on the ground of mercy themselves.
J.T. Exactly. Saul of Tarsus had to find that out. He had to take his place with the most disreputable although
{433}
he had been the proudest man living. Everybody has to bow to the principles of the house.
Ques. I suppose we have to bow to the principles in the house when inside?
J.T. Yes, we have to "learn what that is -- I will have mercy and not sacrifice; for I have not come to call righteous men but sinners", @Matthew 9: 13. That is the principle. You have got to learn that, and of course there are other principles which have to be learned. As regards the people of God, Paul says, Consider your calling, not many noble, etc.; there are some. I suppose they become a test to the poorer ones, but those generally called are a humble people. "Consider your calling", it says. If we do take account of the christians of the world the apostle's thought is maintained. It is from the lower and middle classes, as we speak, that God calls. He does call some from the nobles, but not many. It does not say: 'not any', but "not many".
I do not know of anything that tests us more, in a way, than the generality of those with whom we have to walk, because we have to bow to God's will and learn this principle.
Rem. We are on the ground of death and resurrection; all mere human distinction has disappeared.
J.T. You have got to learn as Paul did. He fell to the ground and was thus on the one level of everybody, because we are all taken out of the dust. We have got to accept that.
Now, you will see in this chapter that the Lord is again found in a house -- that of the ruler, and here we come to a lot of noise, "flute-players" as it says in verse 23, "and the crowd making a tumult". Well, that will not do in the house of God. As I was remarking, the so called houses of God today have the flute-players and a lot of noise. It is not the noise from heaven.
Ques. Does that principle work in us individually? We may not have flutes outwardly.
J.T. Just so; mere hymn singing and anything that appeals to the flesh is of this kind. We want what is heavenly; the noise from *heaven* filled the house. The Lord put out all the flute-players and those making a noise, because they
{434}
only interfere with the power of the Spirit in the house. The little girl is raised after these are put out, showing that we have to put away all these things from our houses if our children are to be brought up in what is spiritual. These things that come in through the roof, that we "listen-in" to, they let in the noise and filth of this world. Using them, you are turning your ear to the filthy world instead of to heaven.
Rem. That puts it in a serious way. Sometimes we let these things in on account of the children.
J.T. It does, indeed. Here it is a little girl of twelve years; such are the ones who are affected by it. Children get polluted by these things. The Lord put them all out. He "saw the flute-players and the crowd making a tumult", and He said, "Withdraw, for the damsel is not dead, but sleeps. And they derided him". That is what you find. The Lord's word is derided where all these things are admitted.
Ques. Does it suggest that the believer's house should be in accord with God's house?
J.T. Surely.
Rem. This is a scene of death spoken of here.
J.T. It is a question of spiritual death for us. With this child it was literal but in our case it is spiritual. So He put out the crowd and "went in and took her hand; and the damsel rose up. And the fame of it went out into all that land". So that now we have a damsel alive in the house; we are making progress. There is a constructive line through this gospel preparing us for the house of God. Now we have a living girl, made alive by Christ; He links Himself with her. It is not simply a "touch" here; He took *her hand* and the damsel rose up. He is identified with her now, and you can understand, I think, that there is a link with Christ when He takes her hand.
Ques. Does it suggest liberty?
J.T. Quite. It is a great thing to get a personal link with Christ in the house.
Then, it says: "Jesus passed on thence", verse 27. "And their eyes were opened", verse 30. Now your eyes are opened so that you see things in the house; you feel
{435}
how suitable that is. Being made to live, and having a link with Christ, you have your eyes opened and see everything. You see the things of God now in their true relation.
Rem. You see that which is suitable to Him now.
J.T. Quite.
Rem. The first thing after getting one's sight is that one would recognise the Lord; the blind man recognised the Lord Jesus.
J.T. These men evidently had faith. The Lord put it on their faith. Now we have arrived at actual faith in the house, and things are put on that principle. We have got to learn these great things by faith, because the dispensation of God is in faith. In the little girl it was more the parents and the external conditions; it is a matter of great importance to have right conditions for young people. But after that they have to learn things for themselves. So He puts it on their faith: "Do ye believe that I am able to do this?" He knew what was there; He would bring it out. It is when they come into the house, verse 28.
Rem. He leads them into the house and that is where He opens their eyes for them to get light.
J.T. Exactly. Now there are several other instances, but the most notable, I think, is in chapter 13 where the Lord went into the house. He left one house (verse 1) and went into another (verse 36). The disciples are specially in view here, persons who have learned from Him; they see that He can expound things. So that the expositions of Scripture are all in the house. You get them as you recognise the house. "Expound to us the parable of the darnel of the field", and He did so; we are now approaching the assembly and it is important that we should have an understanding of the darnel: how that christians and the imitations of christians should be allowed to grow together. The Lord expounds the parable; they are to grow together, and the darnel is not to be rooted out. The time has not yet come for judgment; we have to be patient. But, before He finishes He brings in the truth of the assembly and the darnel has no place there, because it goes on to say: "The kingdom of the heavens is like a treasure hid in the field,
{436}
which a man having found has hid, and for the joy of it goes and sells all whatever he has, and buys that field. Again, the kingdom of the heavens is like a merchant seeking beautiful pearls; and having found one pearl of great value, he went and sold all whatever he had and bought it" (verses 44 - 46). Three parables about the assembly are opened up in the house. You see how we progress in this gospel. The true followers of Christ are with Him, and they seize their opportunity and ask for an exposition, and He gives them far more than they ask for. That shows us the richness of the house. Besides the exposition of the parable of the darnel, He gives them three parables of the truth of the assembly, according to what it is in His own eyes: the treasure, the pearl, and the fish. These are all private; they belong to the inner circle, so to speak.
Ques. Do you mean that it is only in the house that the truth of the assembly can be known?
J.T. Exactly. One who is not in fellowship cannot understand the assembly. They do not understand it unless they accept the fellowship which marks off God's people.
Rem. It is noticeable in the instances we have been looking at, that, if there is anything living, it is to be found only in the house.
J.T. Just so. Well now, after this the Lord says: "Have ye understood all these things?" Because, as He proceeds, He wants to carry His disciples with Him; He would not go ahead of them. So, "Jesus says to them, Have ye understood all these things? They say to him, Yea, Lord. And he said to them, For this reason every scribe discipled to the kingdom of the heavens is like a man that is a householder who brings out of his treasure things new and old", @Matthew 13:51, 52. That is as you arrive here you are a householder yourself; you have treasures and you bring out of these treasures things new and old. Notice it is a "scribe", because I think writing enters into this. We have got to learn to write if we are to get hold of these things.
Ques. In what way?
J.T. Writing puts things down accurately for reference. God shows the value of writing.
{437}
Rem. He wrote His law down.
J.T. Yes, He did. John specially emphasises the value of writing: "I have written to you", "I write to you", the past and the present.
Rem. If you have the truth you must let it out.
J.T. We have now the truth accurately on record; the thing is there to be referred to.
Ques. Do you mean actually writing things down?
J.T. It is well to get hold of the principle of accuracy; our minds are very treacherous. We are very inaccurate and God is absolutely accurate. The more you read Scripture the more you are impressed with its accuracy. Every word has a meaning; therefore the scribe would be accurate. Ezra is a typical scribe of Scripture. He was "a ready scribe in the law of Moses". You are not loose in your thoughts; you have things accurately. A scribe is accurate. Conference makes a ready man, but writing makes an accurate man.
Ques. Will you say a word as to the things new and old?
J.T. These are the things the Lord has taught you; you are discipled to the kingdom of the heavens. You have the new things first; they *must* come first. The question is of the Lord Himself. The old things are things referred to in the Old Testament; they are very valuable. The older and more antique a thing is the more valuable it is. How delightful the things of the Old Testament become as you see how they speak of Christ!
I think the next house is in chapter 17, where the question of the tribute was raised. Peter came into the house, and "Jesus anticipated him, saying, What dost thou think, Simon? the kings of the earth, from whom do they receive custom or tribute? from their own sons or from strangers? Peter says to him, From strangers. Jesus said to him, Then are the sons free", @Matthew 17:25, 26. That is, you get the knowledge of sonship in the house. All that follows in chapter 18 is based on this instruction; the sons are free. We are free in the house.
Rem. Sons are intelligent.
J.T. Quite. That leads up to the truth of the assembly, and our conduct in it, in chapter 18.
{438}
The next house is in chapter 26, the house of Simon the leper. Now it is a question of the kind of man whose house you are in. He has not got a very good public reputation. A leper is not a man the people would seek after: "Simon the leper".
Then the next house is the house in which the Lord's supper is instituted and that is perhaps the most interesting of all. I think it is the culmination of all because the Teacher is recognised there. I think we have arrived at the assembly as it is in Corinthians if the Master is recognised in it; it is a question of "the Lord's commandment".
Ques. Whom does the man with the pitcher of water represent?
J.T. That is the work of the Spirit as we were saying. Here it is: "Go into the city unto such a one, and say to him, The Teacher says, My time is near, I will keep the passover in thy house with my disciples" (verse 18). And it says that the disciples did as Jesus had directed them; there is no question about it. That is the test of every religious denomination on earth. Has the Lord Jesus the right of way in it? Has He to say the word and it is done, or is it the word of somebody else? Every christian in the world professes that Jesus is his Teacher, but the test is are you prepared to bow if the Teacher says so and so? That is the test.
Rem. We have to come back to the word to determine what is the Lord's teaching.
J.T. Well, you have: "If any man think himself to be a prophet, or spiritual, let him acknowledge that the things that I write unto you are the commandments of the Lord", @1 Corinthians 14: 37. 1 Corinthians is the Lord's commandment; it expresses His will and wish. It is the teaching which should govern the assembly.
Rem. Following the Holy Spirit would bring all into the position of one accord in one place.
J.T. It would.
Ques. You said, He meets you. In what way would you apply it now?
J.T. It is the present ministry of the Spirit. It is for
{439}
everybody, not for a certain class of christians, and if one is exercised that meets him, as it were. If he follows it to its source he finds where the Lord is. Many take a little water and stay where they are; they do not follow the man. The thing is to "follow him into the house where he goes in". The Lord has raised up a wonderful ministry during the past hundred years and that ministry is for the whole assembly, and anyone who follows it finds where the Lord is recognised.
Rem. No matter how ignorant we may be, if we are exercised He will lead us there.
J.T. Yes. In this house He is eating. There is something now for us for our souls: "As they were eating" is mentioned twice. First He challenged them as to who should betray Him. Then, secondly, as they were eating He institutes the Supper; in arriving at this house we come to where the Lord's supper was celebrated, where there is food, and it leads to the mount of Olives. After they had partaken of the Lord's supper they sang a hymn and went to the mount of Olives. It leads you out of the world into heavenly associations. The mount of Olives is, I believe, the link with heaven by the Spirit, so the way is opened to us. We are led right out of the world as we pursue this line.
Ques. Do you think that making ready on their part is similar to the suggestion of the right conditions to which He can come?
J.T. Quite. In Luke it is a large upper room furnished.
Ques. Would you say that as they eat in this house that which is opposed is exposed?
J.T. Just so; Judas is exposed. He does not even say "Lord"; he says "Rabbi". No one can say Jesus is Lord except by the Spirit. We are all exposed as to where we are in the light of this house. It is where the authority and teaching of the Lord are recognised and all that is contrary is exposed. But then there is food in it; they were eating. Our souls are nourished there; "Take, eat: this is my body". There is nothing said about remembrance there because it is a question of food -- "Take, eat: this is my body", and
{440}
so with the cup. Then they sing a hymn and go to the mount of Olives. It does not say that the Lord sang the hymn; they sang it. They are brought into accord with God in this house, and they sing together; it is a mutual thing, and they went to the mount of Olives, which is the link with heaven, as already said. He takes the whole company with Him, as we may say.
Ques. Would you say the house furnished would be our being complete in Christ?
J.T. Well, I think the furnishings are 1 Corinthians.
The assembly is regulated by the Lord's commandment.
Everything there is suitable for the celebration of the Lord's supper. You will see how much is said as to the order in which the saints are to be, in chapter 11 particularly. "The head of every man is Christ; and the head of the woman is the man; and the head of Christ is God", verse 3. These furnishings are necessary; also: "authority on her head, on account of the angels", verse 10. Then again we come together "in assembly" to eat the Lord's supper; that is another furnishing. We do not eat it at home; we eat it in right relation when we come together in assembly.
Rem. This would give the Lord His right place. When we come together in assembly He would lead us into the Father's presence.
J.T. Quite.
Rem. Matthew closes with the suggestion that these things are still here.
J.T. Yes. We have come back to the idea in chapter 2: Christ is *all* now. The wise men rejoiced with great joy when they arrived at where He was. What we find in chapter 26 corresponds.
Rem. It gives a fresh interest to the book of Matthew to look at it in that way.
J.T. I think it does; it greatly helps. It leads us up to the dispensation of God which is in faith, and that involves His house.
{441}
"AFTERWARD THAT WHICH IS SPIRITUAL"
@Mark 14: 26; @Mark 13: 1 - 5; @Acts 1: 12 - 14; @Judges 6: 17 - 24; @Judges 13: 19, 20
My exercise, dear brethren, in reading these scriptures is that the Lord may help us so that through what is said we may become more spiritual. It is said in @1 Corinthians 15: 46 that that which is spiritual was not first, but that which is natural, and *afterward* that which is spiritual. What is referred to is what is now established in our Lord Jesus Christ as risen up from among the dead and ascended up into heaven, therefore the "afterward" spoken of in the passage I referred to is now in effect. The spiritual order of things has come to pass and has supplanted the natural order. Our Lord Jesus Christ came into the natural and recognised it. "He came unto his own", as we are told, and as in the midst of His own after the flesh He recognised all that entered into that legitimately. But then there came a time in His ministry in which He said to His mother, when she intimated that she knew something which He did not know: "Woman, what have I to do with thee?" @John 2: 4. He announced in that remark to His mother that as His own had rejected Him He was now entering upon the spiritual order of things, and in that order of things the natural was superseded. It is the sense I have, dear brethren, that with us there is the need of being reminded of these facts, that has led me to read these scriptures, because it is God's thought that we should be brought into what is spiritual, and that we should be in it intelligently as judging the relative superiority of the spiritual to the natural.
Now, the apostle in writing his first letter to the Corinthians says that he could not write to them as unto spiritual, and I need not add that his remark thus addressed to the Corinthian believers could be as truthfully addressed to most believers at the present time. He says: "I, brethren, have not been able to speak to you as to spiritual". There
{442}
were the deep things of God which he was in possession of by the Spirit, and which he would love to unfold to the Corinthian christians, but he was hindered because they were not spiritual. It was not that they did not have the Spirit, because they did have the Spirit; they had not progressed for they were but babes, "babes in Christ". They were really christians and in possession of the Spirit otherwise he could not say they were "in Christ". We are only in Christ by the Spirit, but being in Christ thus is not to say that we are spiritual. It is one thing to have the Spirit, and another thing to be spiritual. But having the Spirit, beloved brethren, we have the means within us of being spiritual; so Elisha, in answer to the petition of the widow of one of the sons of the prophets, as she had to confess to him her bankruptcy, says: "What hast thou in the house?" It is a very humiliating thing to have to admit one's bankruptcy spiritually, but what came out was that she need not have become bankrupt. Elisha says, "What hast thou in the house?" Well, she says she had "a pot of oil", @2 Kings 4: 2. You see she needed fight, not credit; she needed light as to what she actually had. She had debt enough already piled up and her two sons were about to be sold to the creditors, but a real difficulty lay in the fact that she was without light as to what she actually had in her house. She did not know the value of the pot of oil, and so it is with christians; many christians are unable to discharge their moral liabilities because they do not know the value of what they possess in the Spirit, and they do not know how to make room for the Spirit. And so the prophet enlightens this woman, telling her she is to borrow vessels not a few, and as she poured out the oil, these vessels were all filled with the oil. The greater the number of vessels the greater the amount of oil, for the Spirit of God is infinite. God has not given His Spirit by measure; it is a question of your capacity, and the enlargement of the capacity is within your own range. It is a question of self-judgment, of the disallowance of the flesh, of learning to use the blessed Spirit of God instead of using the flesh, and of sowing to the Spirit instead of sowing to
{443}
the flesh. The Spirit in the epistle to the Romans, which is the great elementary epistle, is first presented to the believer as He who brings into the believer the love of God. Speaking reverently He does not come, as it were, empty. The first mention of Him as in the believer, in the epistle to the Romans, reminds us that in coming in He brings with Him the love of God. Think of the precious commodity that the blessed Spirit of God brings into your soul, the greatest possible thing, beloved friends, the love of God!
Is it not worth while making room for the blessed Spirit, not only on His account as here a divine Person, but because He brings into the believer's heart the love of God? "Hope", says the apostle, "does not make ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit which has been given to us", @Romans 5: 5. So that, as I said, there is every incentive for christians to make room by self-judgment and self-denial for the blessed Spirit of God. In chapter 8 He is seen to be present, and by His presence the believer is said to fulfil the righteous requirement of the law. That is, he discharges his moral liabilities, and he loves God. One of the first evidences of the presence of the Spirit is that one loves God, and then secondly you love your neighbour. The Spirit of God enables us to do these things, and so the prophet says to the woman, "Sell the oil, and pay thy debt, and live thou and thy sons on the rest". Living on the rest, that is to say, the blessed Spirit of God for He is not diminished at all. There is no such thing as diminishing what we have of the Spirit; there are infinite means whereby we live as we recognise the Spirit.
And so the passage in Romans goes on to say: "For to be carnally minded is death; but to be spiritually minded is life and peace", @Romans 8: 6. Such is, among many other things, the great result of the recognition of the Holy Spirit as in us. Think of the blessing that lies in being spiritually minded! It is said to be "life and peace".
Well now, I have selected these passages in the New Testament because each contains a reference to the mount of Olives. I understand that the mount of Olives suggests
{444}
the Holy Spirit, and I wanted to show from the first passage, @Mark 14, that after they partook of the Lord's supper they sang a hymn. Notice that the "they" includes the Lord Himself. It touches the heart to think that the Lord Himself, who is about to undergo the judgment of God alone, and who is about to be abandoned on account of our guilt, should join with His disciples in a hymn after He had instituted His supper. My thought in dwelling on this is to seek to show that we have to learn from Christ how to be spiritual. Were we present we should have had the opportunity of seeing how the Lord joined in the hymn. We should thus learn how to "sing with the spirit"; it is not merely being able to join in the tune and use the words. It is said: "I will sing with the spirit, and I will sing with the understanding also", @1 Corinthians 14: 15. You would see how the Lord was moved for He expressed holy emotions before His disciples. Perhaps there is nothing we know less of than holy emotions. We read of the Lord rejoicing in spirit, and one would have loved to have seen Him rejoice in spirit. We may be sure that the hymn employed at this time fitted the occasion. We are not told who selected the hymn because the Spirit intends to impress us with the great fact that the Lord, in His grace, could join in with His own in singing a hymn. We are not told what hymn it was; that is not needed. What is needed, and what we find, is that the Spirit of God records that He joined in the hymn, and having sung it they went to the mount of Olives. They had the opportunity of discerning how the Lord acted in this connection; it is a spiritual reference. We all know, I think, that after He arose, He charged His apostles *by the Spirit* (@Acts 1: a). He intended to impress them with the great fact that the Spirit was to be the medium in the establishment and maintenance of christianity, and so here He ascended Olivet with them; they all went. They would be impressed with the sense of the Spirit of God, for the Lord was about to inaugurate, as I said, a spiritual order of things; in chapter 13 we may see that from mount Olivet we get private communications from Christ, and I wanted to show in connection with these private communications
{445}
that if we understand that mount Olivet represents the Spirit, the link with heaven, we shall not ally ourselves with that which is accredited as the accepted religion of this world. The Lord has His attention called to the temple; what a structure it was! Primarily, as Solomon built it, I suppose it was the most imposing structure on the earth. It towered up from Mount Zion, the porch rising one hundred and twenty cubits. What an elevation it suggested then! Viewed from the heights of Olivet, even in the Lord's time, it must have presented an imposing sight. So one of the disciples called the Lord's attention to it: "See what manner of stones". How many there are at the present time who are held religiously by that which is materially imposing! The leaders of the accredited religions of the world go in for these things. They acquire silver and gold to rear up these great structures that stud christendom at the present time. I know of one of them for which fifteen million dollars have been recently subscribed for the *extension* of it; and as thus extended and embellished it is regarded as the temple of God. It is no such thing, beloved friends, it is not the "temple of God"! Those who have been to mount Olivet with Christ deny that it has any resemblance to the temple of God. It is a Babylonish temple, a "high place", and of no relation whatever to the temple of God; as the Lord said of this great structure, which indeed had divine sanction, so may it be said of these later structures: "there shall not be left one stone upon another, that shall not be thrown down". That is what He says. One of His disciples said to Him: "Master, see what manner of stones and what buildings are here!" The Lord answered him, "Seest thou these great buildings? There shall not be left one stone upon another, that shall not be thrown down".
I refer to this, beloved friends, so that you may see as we visit Olivet with Christ, as we are led into the light of the Spirit of God, these buildings are nothing to us; that they are wholly out of keeping with christianity. They have no relation to christianity; christianity is spiritual, it is not of sight, it is in faith, and these buildings are for sight. They
{446}
are intended for sight, being intended to influence men through their natural senses. They are Babylonish, as I said; they are marked by the wedge of gold and the goodly Babylonish garment that Achan stole from Jericho. The wedge of gold and the goodly garment go to make up these Babylonish systems around us, and, as I said, they have no relation whatever to what is spiritual. God is a Spirit; He dwells not in temples made with hands, and so the Lord says: "Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up", @John 2: 19. What temple? "*He* spoke of the temple of his body". God dwelt there, beloved friends. God was in Christ; His mind was there, the light of God was there, and now He is raised up into heaven and exalted and the light radiates from His face, radiates into the hearts of the people of God on earth. The light is in the people of God, as the scripture says: "Ye are the temple of God". The saints of God, not, these great buildings, are the temple of God. It is for the saints of God to know this, to have it plainly told to them so that they will not be held by these things. It is a religion of faith and not of sight; the dispensation of God is in faith and not in sight (@1 Timothy 1: 4), and as we recognise the Spirit we come to these things and refuse the religions of this world. As the Lord says, there shall not be a stone left upon another in all these great buildings that shall not be thrown down.
The Lord is on Olivet, and Peter, James, John and Andrew come to him privately. I just wish to point out that as the Spirit is recognised there are private communications, and we have to understand what these mean. The shut doors in @John 20 correspond with what I am saying. These closed doors shut out earthly religion and all its elements, and they enable us to receive private communications. The gospel is public, it is to all, but there are private communications. Think of the privilege of having such communications from the Lord! "The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him", @Psalm 25: 14. In order to have these private communications we have to put out the flute players and those that make a tumult (see @Matthew 9: 23). We must put all these things out; they but interfere with
{447}
the communications which the Lord would make to us by the Spirit.
Well now, from @Acts 1 I just wanted to show that being on Olivet with the Lord, as ascended into heaven, enabled the disciples to act on the words of these private communications. They were not deceived. The first communication is, "Take heed lest any man deceive you". You know the world around us is saturated with the lie. Every ¬ism that springs up is based on a lie. One knows the sources of some of the most potent of them, but all are based on lies. So the word of the Lord is: "Take heed lest any man deceive you". Let us be on our guard against deceptions. Many lie in wait to deceive. As they went back to the city of Jerusalem they were not deceived. They did not go to the structure which the Lord said would be thrown down. I quite admit that they went later, but that is in connection with another line of things. They did not go to the temple for their associations; they went to it in testimony, for God in patience bore long with the Jewish system. As coming from Olivet to Jerusalem, instead of going to the temple, they went to the upper room, and here there is light for anyone seeking it. If you have come to the recognition of the Spirit you will not go to any of those imposing structures; you will seek the upper room. But then it is not simply the upper room! We need more than the room; we need the people who are in the room. Who are they? "Where were staying both Peter, and John, and James", and all the apostles. Well, you say, there are none of these now! No, quite true, but their doctrine remains, and what you look for in the upper room is their doctrine, their testimony. The apostles represented the authority of Christ, and as you recognise the Spirit, as you come under His influence, you will seek the upper room where those are who recognise the authority of the Lord; you will not go elsewhere. I am not theorising, I am speaking of what I know exists. I know that of which I am speaking exists at the present time. There is the upper room and there are those in it who respect the authority of Christ; moreover, the women are there, including the mother of the Lord,
{448}
and His brethren, too, are there. What an interesting circle! We read, "The crowd of names who were together was about a hundred and twenty". Every name covered some variety of spiritual formation; for where the Spirit of God is active you are sure to find variety, variety in glory. "By his spirit", we are told, "he hath garnished the heavens", @job 26: 13. What variety there is as we look up into the expanse of the heavens, what variety of glory! Who is there that knows God that is not impressed with the greatness of the Creator as he or she looks up into the vault of heaven and sees those orbs shining in their glory? "By his spirit he hath garnished the heavens", and that Spirit is operating in this upper room; He is bringing about a variety greater than the variety of the stars, variety in life. Every name indicates some spiritual formation. What a world we are brought into as we recognise the Spirit! Every one of us, as we are sown in death, shall be "raised in glory". "It is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruptibility. It is sown in dishonour, it is raised in glory. It is sown in weakness, it is raised in power. It is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body", @1 Corinthians 15: 42 - 44. What wonderful variety there will be in that day as all the fruit of the Spirit comes up and shines with Christ; what a variety of glory! We may well indeed say again: "Afterward that which is spiritual". First that which is natural, and afterward that which is spiritual.
Well, I read the two passages in judges to point out that in a day of brokenness, such as the book of judges depicts, we have the idea of divine visitations. These things are written for our learning, as we read, and the book of Judges shows a state of things such as we have to do with, and notwithstanding the brokenness there are divine visitations. As the Lord says: "He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me: and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest myself to him", @John 14: 21. You see there that He promises manifestations to those who keep His commandments, who love Him, and so He comes to Gideon who was amongst those who loved Him and kept
{449}
His commandments. He was threshing wheat in the winepress to keep it from the Midianites. He was serving God in that way, and serving God's people, and so as the angel sat under the oak he saw what was going on. He saw the devotedness of this young man and he looked on him; "Jehovah looked upon him". What interest God showed in this man who was devoted! And so the passage goes on to describe how Jehovah was actually detained at the request of Gideon, who says: "Depart not hence, I pray thee, until I come unto thee, and bring forth my present, and set it before thee". It is very beautiful and touching, reminding us of what goes on at the present time. How the Lord takes account of those who are devoted, who love Him, think for Him, and keep His commandments; He manifests Himself to them.
Now I want to show you, just for a moment, with what beautiful intelligence Gideon comes out with his present. "Gideon went in, and made ready a kid, and unleavened cakes of an ephah of flour: the flesh he put in a basket, and he put the broth in a pot, and brought it out unto him under the oak, and presented it". How delightful to heaven all that was! Then the angel directs Gideon, and as he touches it with his staff the fire goes out of the rock and consumes the offering. What was all that for, beloved? It was to impress Gideon with what is spiritual. It was a spiritual matter; it was intended to form him and fortify him for the divine warfare which was ahead of him. "We wrestle not against flesh and blood", as we read, "but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places", @Ephesians 6: 12. And so we are to understand what it is to be spiritual to meet all these things. Gideon has this wonderful visitation, and then he saw the angel no more. It does not say here that the angel ascended to heaven, but when we come to chapter 13 we have a fuller thought. There is not time to go into it beyond calling attention to the fact that the angel "did wondrously", and doing wondrously he would impress Manoah and his wife with what is spiritually wonderful. And so at the present time
{450}
the Lord comes in and He does wondrously. Many of us have observed in our short experiences the wondrous workings of Christ in relation to the assembly. As the offering is presented the angel says, 'It must be presented to God'. Now we are on higher ground. If the Lord comes in in a spiritual way it is to lead us to God. We are to understand what it is to have a spiritual Leader, the Leader of our salvation, and He leads us to God.
So as the offering is made the angel did wondrously, "and Manoah and his wife looked on". I want you to take account of this, to learn to "look on" as the Lord acts wondrously, to learn to see things in a spiritual way. It is said that without holiness no man shall see the Lord; things are going on constantly and you do not see them because you are not holy. They are to be seen but they are seen by those who are holy. Manoah and his wife looked on, that is the thing to do, and in looking on they would be impressed with the spiritual wonders that the angel did; the last thing was that he "ascended in the flame of the altar". It points, I doubt not, to the end of the dispensation in which we are. We are to go out in the acceptability of the offering of Christ; we ascend with Christ as He descends and takes us up. The angel went up in the flame of the offering, a wonderful spectacle, but it is not as wonderful as that in which *we* shall have part, that which is about to take place. The apostle says: "The Lord himself ... shall descend from heaven", @1 Thessalonians 4: 116. He comes for us and takes us up. He descends with an assembling shout; "the dead in Christ shall rise first: then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be with the Lord". In the meantime we have part with Christ in heavenly relationships, as those who are raised up and made to sit down in heaven in Him.
As we see these wonderful things spiritually then we shall understand what the rapture means. It is a spiritual thing, and we are to be formed spiritually so as to understand it, and so as to be prepared for it, and so as to be looking for it.
{451}
CHRIST IN THE BELIEVER
@Romans 8: 10; @Judges 1: 14, 15; @Judges 5: 11; @Judges 15: 18 - 20
In thinking of what might be acceptable in the way of ministry the thought of enlargement came to me, and it occurred to me that for the christian it involves *life*. God intends that in enlargement there should be the evidence of life, and so I begin with the word in @Romans 8: 10"If Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin; but the Spirit is life because of righteousness", for it is obvious that if Christ be in us, it is incompatible that the motions of sin should, at the same time, be active.
He came to put away sin by the sacrifice of Himself and to take away the sin of the world. He that does that baptises with the Holy Spirit; so that is, in order to live in a christian He deals effectively with the members in which sin is active. In baptising with the Spirit He makes room for Himself. The Stone that smote the image in Nebuchadnezzar's dream filled the whole earth (@Daniel 2: 35).
At the introduction of the millennium Christ deals effectively with sin by removing it; He is now operating in the christian on the same principle, that there should be room for Himself. That is what is going on. "If Christ be in you the body is dead because of sin": that is, the vessels in which our wills were active are no longer available for our wills, but are presented to God a living sacrifice. The believer's body is to be a vessel for Christ; this is one of the greatest practical things, giving a wonderful place to our bodies. Then Christ baptises with the Spirit. To illustrate this I should like to refer to @2 Kings 4. Here we have a woman who was a widow of one of the sons of the prophets, which suggests inherited light, and not in the fruits of their own exercises. This woman is an illustration of many christians; though she had light she was in poverty; her sons were about to be taken as bondmen. Typically she was not able to understand the value of the Spirit. She comes to Elisha and he says, "What shall I do for thee?
{452}
Tell me, what hast thou in the house?" It is not what is in *heaven*, but in the *house*. The believer is "blessed ... with every spiritual blessing in the heavenlies in Christ" (@Ephesians 1: 3), but what I have in heaven is not in my house. The riches there are unsearchable, but the point is what have I got in my house. What is in heaven is secured infallibly to the believer. What hast thou in the house? A pot of oil. That was enough. That is the thing to see; the pot of oil was there. It is in the house, under your hand. The prophet says, "Go, borrow thee vessels abroad of all thy neighbours, even empty vessels; borrow not a few. And when thou art come in, thou shalt shut the door upon thee and upon thy sons, and shalt pour out into all those vessels, and thou shalt set aside that which is full", @2 Kings 4: 3, 4. She responded to the word. We find the importance of going by the word emphasised in 2 Kings. Naaman had to go by the word; the little maid said to her mistress "Would God my lord were with the prophet that is in Samaria!", @2 Kings 5: 3. Naaman had his own thought. He took with him ten talents of silver, and six thousand pieces of gold and ten changes of raiment, and went to the king of Israel. It was all useless; there was no value in it at all. He had to go by the word: "Would God my lord were with the *prophet*", not the *king*.
Here the woman acts on the prophet's word; she pours out the oil; every vessel is full. The more vessels, the more room there is available for the Spirit. He is in the house; the believer has Him. He is given to those who obey Christ. Get the vessels, pour out the oil. Every bit of room you make for the Spirit makes for enlargement. This involves discarding the things we cling to. The oil filled every vessel. Then the prophet says, "Go, sell the oil, and pay thy debt, and live thou and thy children of the rest". Thus the righteous requirements of the law are fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit (@Romans 8: 4). She lives on the rest; she is now a woman with means of spiritual livelihood.
Now this scripture speaks of a "great woman". She has room for Christ; "If Christ be in you". She is a wealthy
{453}
woman. The prophet passes by her door often. How the Lord shows Himself now, just to give you an opportunity to see how you have got on! She says, "This is a holy man of God". She has discernment now, not only wealth. She is a continuation of the woman with the oil. She has a house. As you go into this house there is no sign of poverty, and the Shunammite discerns that Elisha is a holy man of God. Nothing tests us more than the question of holiness, and without holiness no man shall see the Lord (see @Hebrews 12: 14). The clerical garb, the cloister, the monk, speak of an outward show of holiness; but do you see holiness in a man who goes to work every morning earning his living with his hands? It requires discernment to see this. This wealthy woman had discernment. The Spirit of God is the Holy Spirit, who sheds the love of God abroad in our hearts. Holiness discerns this in others as seen in Peter who said, "Thou art the holy one of God", @John 6: 69. You want a holy man in your house; the world does not, the true christian does. She invites this man into the house; she builds a room for him. She represents the believer in whom Christ is: "If Christ be in you". She had the prophet now in her house; typically there was room now for Christ.
We see how the principle is worked out in Judges. The key to the understanding of the book is in the first passage read. The book contemplates a broken state of things. Achsah represents the underlying spiritual element; mere light will not do. This underlying spiritual element may be found in a sister as in a brother. It is essential to the maintenance of the position.
The "south land" is a favourable land. It represents what is objective, what God has blessed us with objectively. The expression 'south' is favourable in northern latitudes. "By whom also we have access by faith into this grace wherein we stand" (@Romans 5: 2), but we need more than a favourable aspect. "Give me also springs of water". This is essential to the maintenance of the position in any locality. We must have the spring. Achsah had it; she "sprang" down from the ass. Everything has to be sustained in living spiritual energy. Caleb gave her the upper and lower springs. The
{454}
upper are mentioned first; this refers to Ephesians as presenting to us the truth of the Spirit in connection with the purpose of God in its heavenly aspect. Ephesians is the inheritance, but you must have the thing in *your soul*. We have in the presence of the Spirit the "earnest of our inheritance", the thing itself, not the title now (@Ephesians 1: 13, 14); the earnest of the Spirit is the thing itself in principle. "The earnest of the Spirit in our hearts" -- @2 Corinthians 1: 22 -- that is what you value. The upper springs which she got, give an example of receiving abundantly above all that we ask or think. The inheritance of God is brought into your soul, the thing itself in principle by the Spirit. "The nether springs" I believe refer to the epistle to the Romans; in this epistle the Spirit supports you in relation to your walk down here, independent of this world. He enables you to discharge every liability, and to live besides. The believer thus shows his independence of this world.
This passage in Judges gives the key to the maintenance of the position seen in the book. You get a terrible history in judges of man's will, but the idea of spiritual life is maintained throughout. We see Phinehas, at the end of the book, taking care of the ark. With him God had made a covenant of peace, and he corresponds in Judges with the springs given to Achsah.
The place that women have in this book reminds us of what sisters may be in the testimony. Deborah dwells under her palm tree between Ramah and Bethel. She was a sister who had acquired personal victory. There is an immense field for sisters who maintain relations with God in the secret of their souls. She dwelt under *her own* palm tree between Ramah and Bethel in mount Ephraim. These were wonderful surroundings. She had respect for the commandment of Jehovah. "Hash not the Lord God of Israel commanded?" @Judges 4: 6. Barak acts on the word and God gives a wonderful victory. In this another woman had a leading part, Jael. Thus the spiritual exploits of women are here remarkably illustrated.
Then we read of those who divide the spoil in the midst of the places of drawing water. Every bit of conflict for the
{455}
truth implies spoil, something gained; this is divided in the midst of the places of drawing water; there are rehearsed the righteous acts of Jehovah. The places of drawing water refer to the meetings of saints, which have the ministry of the word in view, and in which mutuality is experienced.
Chapter 15 confirms all this. We are now dealing with Samson's great exploits. We might have referred to other waters, for in the days of Gideon the people encamped beside the spring Harod (@Judges 7: 1). Samson becomes extremely interesting. The Spirit of God makes much of him in this book. At the outset of his ministry you have death and life. He slays the lion, and returning finds a swarm of bees in the carcase -- symbolical of the mutual spiritual relations and activities of the people of God. Honey is the product of many entities. They acted together in relation to death; it was life in death. Samson finds the honey; he got the actual product, something tangible, life out of death. He ate it and gave to his father and mother and they ate it. This brought out a riddle. True Christians are a puzzle or riddle to the world. Samson put the riddle to his companions. "Out of the eater came forth meat, and out of the strong came forth sweetness", @judges 14: 14. How can you solve it? The world cannot solve it. These Philistines could not. Philistines refer to big men, men of intellect, men who can dig into the bowels of the earth and read the stars. But they could not answer Samson's riddle. All the scientists of the world cannot answer this riddle. They have not the Spirit -- Christians are in the secret for they have the anointing which tells us all things. We understand. The world thinks us fanatics, extremists, perhaps they are sorry for us. But the truth is that they are not in the divine secret. Secrecy marks Samson's ministry. The disclosing of his secrets was his undoing; till then he was invulnerable. The secret of the Lord is with those who fear Him; it lies in the Spirit. The Philistines could not answer the riddle; they find out the explanation from his wife. The disclosure of his secrets was his undoing. The maintenance of divine secrets is necessary to our position here. Great men cannot solve divine riddles but the simple believer, who has the Spirit,
{456}
understands. That marks Samson's ministry. Life is found in a mutual way in relation to death. Honey was there for him, he ate it, his father and mother ate it. In chapter 15 he is in straits. He had been victorious in a remarkable way, yet he is in straits. The Spirit emphasises the thought of water. It is a fresh, or new, jawbone, meaning that death had just happened. It was there; he slew a thousand men with it. One who understands the secret of the death of Christ, knows its present bearing; not two thousand years old as a matter of history, but in its present bearing it is as if the death of Christ had just happened. That is what Samson indicates; that fresh things accomplish victory, not catechisms three hundred years old.
This is in accord with Deborah, but victory was not enough. Samson throws away the jawbone and cries to Jehovah. Water or refreshment of this kind comes only by prayer. The Lord clave the hollow rock which was in Lehi, and water came out. This became known spiritually later. The Spirit of God records: "God clave an hollow place that was in the jaw, and there came water thereout; and when he had drunk, his spirit came again, and he revived: wherefore he called the name thereof En-hakkore, which is in Lehi unto this day", @judges 15: 19. En-hakkore is "the well of him that cried". It acquired a place spiritually for it says it "is in Lehi unto this day". God answered a man's cry in giving him water. If He answered Samson, He will answer you. The believer has to learn that he gets the water by prayer. The Spirit comes in by prayer; and as having Him we learn by prayer how to use Him.
When the people were about to enter the land, instead of smiting the rock, Moses should have *spoken* to it (@Numbers 20). Aaron's rod, the rod of priesthood, blossomed, budded and produced almonds in one night. It speaks of Christ risen from among the dead.
It was *afresh* jawbone, that is Christ dead; the rod of Aaron is Christ alive. Prayer is a priestly act, and goes up effectively through the High Priest. Samson prayed and God clave a hollow place in Lehi and he drank. He is now ready again for the conflict. He judged Israel twenty years.
{457}
There is not a detail given as to how he judged Israel, but there is a lot of detail with regard to his conflicts with the Philistines. How can anyone judge according to God save by the Spirit? The secret of it, as with Samson, lies in the spring -- the Spirit typically. "The Spirit is life because of righteousness". How can anyone judge apart from righteousness! We are to judge now in righteousness by the Spirit.
{458}
APPEARINGS
@Judges 13: 1 - 25
J.T. In chapter 6 we have a divine appearing. The angel of God came to Ophrah and sat under an oak and then appeared to Gideon as he threshed wheat in the winepress, and said to him, "The Lord is with thee, thou mighty man of valour" -- God always gives us a record of the feature He is pleased to regard, or able to record in any person or locality. He takes account of willingness and comforts those who are thus engaged by appearing to them.
This book links up with the springs spoken of in chapter 1, and is parallel with John's gospel, in which the ideas of springs and of divine appearings are emphasised. Springs are for the energy of life. Appearings obtain for us that our energies should be according to God. The impressions of appearings should characterise us so that what is of God is maintained here.
Chapter 6 deals with Gideon, one who was to be immediately used, but this chapter treats of an appearing to the parents of a man to be used later, and therefore bears somewhat on the households of the people of God. Households and parentage necessarily have in view the continuation of the testimony of God. Children have always been regarded, potentially at least, as eligible for the testimony, and, in order that they should come into it, it is important that parents should have divine impressions, and divine impressions are by divine appearings, because the main idea in parentage is to pass on things. The great representative parent, Abraham, is one who had an appearing. He represents in Scripture the idea of a father. It is a primary thought that God would have passed on from generation to generation. The true idea of fatherhood is in Himself, but Abraham is said to have commanded his children after him, and in order to secure that he dwells in tents with Isaac and Jacob, heirs with him of the same promise, so that his own interests would be passed on to his children, not only
{459}
to Isaac but to Jacob. So I thought this chapter would help us in regard to household responsibility, with a view to the testimony being continued, so that what is in our hands should not deteriorate as we pass on, but be enhanced; every appearing is intended to increase our spiritual power.
Ques. Are the manifestations in John's gospel on similar lines? The Lord says "He that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest myself to him", and further, "If a man love me, he will keep my words: and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him", @John 14: 21, 23. He comes to such a one. There is a manifestation, a devotedness of affection.
J.T. Yes, quite; He and the Father come.
Rem. Are the manifestations conditional?
J.T. Chapter 14 shows that. They may also be corrective, you know, and so in the last chapter of John you have a third manifestation which was restorative and corrective. No doubt He took account of what underlay the hearts of the disciples, but they had gone astray, a very serious matter. The appearing was to bring about recovery. The appearings in @John 14 are normal manifestations, I think, contingent on love, and they accord with @Judges 6.
Ques. Do you think that we can make any real progress in our souls if we do not have these manifestations?
J.T. I think they are essential to bearing a divine impression. @1 Corinthians 15 gives us a record of six distinct manifestations of Christ after He arose; there were more than that if we compare the ends of the gospels and the beginning of Acts, but in that record we have six, and I think the number given is intended to be constructive. First He appeared unto Cephas, meaning that, as the name is given, the material of the assembly should be enhanced as the structure was in building; then he appeared to the twelve, meaning that the administrative vessels should bear His impress in their souls. There should be an immediate impress of Christ on the spirit in consequence of His appearing; and then He appeared to above five hundred brethren at once, conveying that the relationship of brethren should
{460}
not be a mere term, and not become hackneyed or stale without the spirit that underlies the relationship, and without the appearance or reflection of Christ. Gideon said as to those who were slain at Tabor, 'What were they like?' 'They were like you, every one as the son of a king'. They were like Gideon. That is the idea of brethren, and I think the Lord, in appearing to five hundred brethren at once, would impress Himself upon them.
"His countenance was like the countenance of an angel of God". She did not know it was an angel, but she observed his countenance that it was as of an angel. The reflection of God was discernible there, and so with Gideon's brethren; they were like him. So that the Lord's appearing to five hundred brethren at once would leave an impression upon them; they would all be like Christ -- there would be a reflection of Christ in the brethren. It would have a wonderful effect, promote affection one for another, for they would become increasingly lovable as they became like Christ.
Then there was the appearance to James, as if the Lord would remind us in that that one man can do a lot. James, I have no doubt, suggests the idea of what one man can do, like Elijah, who by prayer shut up the heaven for three years and six months and then prayed again and the rain came down, and the earth brought forth its fruit. One man can do that, so that even if you are reduced to yourself, you can do a lot, if you have a manifestation from the Lord. Then, so as to check any one man from becoming too influential among the brethren, He appeared to all the apostles. It might seem a repetition that at first He appeared to twelve and then to all the apostles. It is one thing to appear to an authoritative company, those who represent the authority of God, the rule of God. Having had such an appearing the apostles would assert His authority, but they would assert it according to Himself, as He would do it, by an immediate appearing. Then Paul says, "Last of all, as to an abortion, he appeared to *me* also" -- last but not least! But he says then, "Not I, but the grace of God which was with me". The Lord had appeared to Paul earlier and said, "for this purpose have I appeared to thee, to appoint thee to be a
{461}
servant and a witness both of what thou hast seen, and of what I shall appear to thee in", @Acts 26: 16. So apparently Paul had several appearing, and I think, therefore, in this record we have the constructive side coming out of the authority and the value of appearings; they must be looked for and arranged for. What do you say to that?
Rem. I think it is very good indeed; it is very instructive.
Rem. His appearing would give colour and character to the testimony of those to whom the appearing is made.
J.T. That is it. John gives us three distinct appearings after the Lord arose. He calls them "manifestations". He gives one the first day on which the Lord arose; the second was eight days after; and then he gives another without a date. He tells us it was the third manifestation.
Ques. Do you think that what you were saying was seen personally in Stephen? Those looking upon him saw his face as the face of an angel. He could be used to give them the history of the nation, showing that he had the mind of God for the moment: "As your fathers did, so do ye", @Acts 7: 51.
J.T. He would do it reflectively. He reflected heaven. Whether he had an appearing we are not told, but there could be no doubt that it was so, for they saw his face "as the face of an angel" -- a reflection of what is in heaven; his words, his address, his prayer at the end, and his remarks all wonderfully reflect Christ.
Rem. And when his levitical service was over, he could immediately take up his priestly function, which was eternal.
J.T. We see the moral power that actuated Stephen in that he could actually kneel down as he was stoned. I think these appearings of the Lord are intended to indicate His personal service to the assembly right up to the end when it is carried up to heaven.
I think the passage read has the rapture in view, for the angel "did wondrously", it says, and "ascended in the flame of the altar". Of course Manoah and his wife could not understand that, but we can understand. We know now if we have read Luke, and the Acts. We can understand that there is such a thing as going up in the savour of the offering. The Lord Jesus was carried up into heaven and
{462}
the assembly is to be carried up; "the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God: and the dead in Christ shall rise first. Then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up ... and so shall we ever be with the Lord", @1 Thessalonians 4: 16, 17. I think that Samson's ministry had that end in view. He is the last judge, and he judged Israel twenty years, during which the Spirit of God records his calling on Jehovah, firstly in relation to his asking for water, and secondly in his pulling down the Philistine house.
I think that Samson represents a dispensational idea. The angel appeared not to him but to his parents. It was prophetic -- the mind of God was indicated before he was born, and that is that there should be a going up in the savour of the offering.
Rem. Like Paul.
J.T. Just so. He is the type of the assembly going up. You see how the spiritual secrets of the assembly were divulged, and that spelt the ruin of the church. But then the abstract idea of the assembly remains; in fact, it has been seen somewhere in persons throughout the whole dispensation; so it says that Samson's hair "began to grow". That was the death knell of the world.
Ques. What do you think that answers to in the present time?
J.T. Development of life; it is development of life in the saints after the great failure, and then the thing to see is whether your hair is growing, whether there is the development of life. You cannot have development unless the hair is growing. It indicates the energy of life in me. Hence in the type, a great deal is said about the hair -- white, black or yellow, and the bald head, because it expresses in the most public way the energy of life -- vitality. It is visible and can be seen by everyone, and Samson had lost his by divulging his secret. But it says, "the hair of his head began to grow". That was a definite announcement before the world; the present movement of the Spirit is on that line. The revival of life amongst the people of God means the death knell of the world.
{463}
Rem. What do the Philistines represent?
J.T. They represent the world. You remember what an enormous building it was, holding three thousand people on the roof alone. We think we have everything nowadays, but they had big buildings in those days.
Samson's hair began to grow, and they did not know it; that means that what is developed now in the saints is power, by which the world will fall.
In chapter 15 it is said that he slew a thousand men with the jawbone of an ass. The great feature of his actual ministry is his secrecy. He began by proposing a riddle, but the very thing which he introduced himself is the thing in which he falls. He propounded a riddle, but he could not keep the secret himself, and so it worked out to his undoing. But then he began with life out of death, the swarm of bees in the carcase of the lion, then the riddle compounded on that, and then the slaying of a thousand men with the jawbone of an ass. I think that is the revival of the Lord's supper, by which the death of the Lord is maintained in freshness and power with us, and then alongside of that the Spirit typified in the water. He called on the Lord, and water came out of the rock. He drank of it and his spirit revived. It is a milestone in the testimony, the great principle that water is to be obtained by asking for it: 'The well of him that cried'. Then it says, "He judged Israel twenty years". We can understand that spiritually for if he has the Spirit of God there is the judgment of Israel, there is righteousness. It is in anticipation of the coming day when God will judge, not executive judgment but administrative justice, and that is only by the Spirit.
Ques. Is the spring the power of the maintenance of that -- following the victory by the jawbone of the ass?
J.T. That is what stands in Israel to this day.
Then the next chapter brings out another thing. He is imprisoned in Gaza and they beset the city to slay him in the morning. Here the enemy defeats himself in waiting for the morning, because Samson arose at midnight. Night does tend to weaken us, especially midnight, but he arose
{464}
at midnight and took the gates of the city, bars and all, and put them on his shoulder and carried them up to the top of a hill that is before Hebron. That is another thing -- it is the truth of resurrection; it is the knowledge of the Son of God, but it comes into our souls; it is the truth of Colossians following on the Spirit. Hebron was built seven years before Zoan in Egypt.
Samson in type leads captivity captive; he carried the bars and all up the hill. It is not simply that he escaped their influence, but he showed the stature, the power he had. What would they do with a man like that? That is what we come into. It is a dispensational scene come into light. The power of God will effect His purpose.
Then another thing follows: immediately after that you find that he falls under the power of Delilah and loses his strength. But then it says, "The hair of his head began to grow".
Ques. Do you think in connection with the carrying of the gates to the mountain top, that the centre of administration is heavenly now?
J.T. That is right. It says, "He led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men". The understanding of that leads you to see the power that there is in the power of the Spirit for the carrying out of the divine purpose.
Rem. Though Samson was unfaithful, and had to suffer for it, yet God was faithful to him, and the exercises God allowed him to pass through were the occasion of his gaining the "little strength".
J.T. Yes, so now you have "the Spirit and the bride say, Come" -- that comes in in Revelation. Revelation is the undoing of the world, but we know it. We are in the secret of it, and I think that the light that the angel sets before Manoah and his wife overshadows all this. It is God conveying His mind as to Nazariteship in the abstract, apart from the failure that is seen in Samson. The outcome of Nazariteship is in the savour of the sacrifice, what goes up from here to heaven, acceptable to heaven in all the sweet savour of the sacrifice of Christ.
Rem. Do I understand that the hair beginning to grow
{465}
on Samson's head again has its answer in what the Spirit is doing at the present moment?
J.T. I think the present time, the closing period of the assembly, is marked by a re-growth of nazarite hair, our taking our place in relation to the death of Christ, nazariteship in other words, and consequently there is growth of hair.
Ques. In regard to the slaying of the three thousand men, has that its answer in @Acts 2?
J.T. There it is grace. Here the pulling down of the world system is more in view; thus it marks the end of this dispensation. You are dealing with the shadow; he makes it very emphatic; it is not that *we* are pulling down the house for God, but it is the power that produces the life in us that does. The rapture of the assembly signalises the overthrow of the world. "Who shall change our vile body ... according to the working whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto himself", @Philippians 3: 21. It is power that works in us now.
Rem. The energy of life in the believer today is in a way the condemnation of the world.
J.T. The Lord said: "Now is the judgment of this world". Not that it is yet executed, but it stands. It is now.
The angel appeared on both occasions to Manoah's wife first. He realised that she had discernment.
Ques. Would you say that the woman represents the subjective side in the one, and that is in advance of what is seen outwardly, or do you look at it as two distinct things?
J.T. The angel saw a state in her that was not in Manoah but he is brought into it; he is brought into privilege. Although Manoah prayed that the man should be sent again, yet he appears the second time to the wife. The prominence given to devoted women in this book of Judges has a correspondence in our own times. How much is effected by the devotedness of sisters, and of mothers particularly, because they have more to do with the training and forming of the children than the fathers have.
Rem. So the appearing was really to Manoah's wife?
{466}
J.T. No doubt if Manoah was in a state for it, he would have got the manifestation. He is not opposed, he is really very interested, but nevertheless there seems to be a lack with him because the manifestations were to the wife on both occasions.
Rem. That is she arrived at things by intuition, as it were.
J.T. I think she had a certain spiritual discernment. She says: "A man of God came unto me". And then she says "his countenance was like the countenance of an angel". That denotes, I think, certain spiritual discernment. He was a man of God, and his appearance like an angel of God, and then it says, "Manoah said to his wife, We shall surely die, because we have seen God". But his wife said unto him, "If the Lord were pleased to kill us, he would not have received a burnt-offering ... at our hands, neither would he have shewed us all these things, nor would as at this time have told us such things as these". She is now making deductions. She has formed a judgment of things presented to her.
Rem. Like the apostle, who says, "Because we thus judge".
J.T. Quite so; in introducing the Lord's supper, he says "I speak as to intelligent persons; do *ye* judge what I say". It was for them to form deductions -- and here Manoah's wife is forming a right judgment.
Ques. And would you say that having a spiritual discernment or judgment would really show their spiritual state?
J.T. It is very important for fathers and mothers; if they bring up their children right, it must be as representing Christ, for He represents God. "Unto us a son is given" and then the "everlasting Father". He represented God here. Manoah and his wife not only had appearings and manifestations, but they are instructed how to train their children. This impression was to be passed on to Samson, that there is to be no element of defilement or what would tend to natural excitement in children. One thing is kept in view. The angel does wonderfully before their eyes, but he refuses to give his name. He is impressing upon them that God is to be the supreme Object, for everything refers
{467}
back to God. It is the service of Christ to bring everything back to God. God is the source of all, so that all goes up to God. We must have that in view in training our children, not for this world, but so that they will be for God. The assembly is going up, and we are to go up in the sweet savour of Christ.
Rem. Does Luke cover that ground?
J.T. I think Luke develops the oblation. He records that Jesus was carried up into heaven. It is not the question of His personal right, but His excellency. In John He ascends to heaven.
Rem. When they left Egypt the whole family had to be ready to move out. The Lord brings that about now; the whole household has to be ready to move out.
J.T. Yes; Joseph's bones have to go. Therefore it is a principle, everything goes out in the acceptability of the sacrifice of Christ.
You may depend upon it that our children are largely formed by what they see us do.
Rem. When the Lord wanted someone to carry Him He sent for the ass that was tied up.
J.T. It was under restrictive influences. The owner keeps it from evil until the Lord comes to take it, so that no one else has ridden on that back. The world has not ridden on that back. It is a dreadful thing to think of a young man brought up in a christian household being influenced by the world. It is a great thing to keep your child from worldly connections.
Ques. How is that done?
J.T. This passage helps us, and the parent works out in himself the thing that is to be worked out in the child.
Rem. I was thinking of Moses¬ mother; she hid him, but when she could not hide him any longer she put him into the ark.
J.T. Yes, that is the line exactly. She saw he was a proper child, and that is how we can take account of our children. They are all holy; they are all taken account of for God.
Rem. All in view of the testimony?
{468}
J.T. That is what comes out in Exodus. The enemy was eager to destroy the male children to cut off the testimony. Moses¬ parents saw that he was a proper child and that he must be preserved; he is consequently used for the preservation of the whole nation.
Rem. @Psalm 8: 2 says, "Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings hast thou ordained strength because of thine enemies, that thou mightest still the enemy and the avenger", and @Psalm 107: 41, "He ... maketh him families like a flock".
J.T. Very interesting that. He says elsewhere, "Happy is the man that hath his quiver full of them", @Psalm 127:5. You must see to it that the testimony shall be continued. If it is to be continued you must see to it that as far as in you lies there is material for the maintenance of it. That is what this chapter would teach us; God was affecting the parents in view of the continuance of the testimony. You must see to it that the source and spring are with God. God goes a long way up the stream as we see in Paul, a man who from his forefathers was separated for the work. God went a long way up the stream to bring out such a person as Paul. God takes account of antecedents in the forming of the vessel. We must take account of the vessel. God went a long way up the stream for Timothy also.
Rem. I think that is very important -- the vessel as well as what is put in it.
J.T. I think God watches over the vessel. God thought of Paul a long way back; He thought of his antecedents.
Rem. It is well to keep in mind the possibilities for God in our families.
J.T. Yes.
{469}
SPIRITUAL ENERGY AND THE VESSEL FOR IT
@John 4: 5 - 24; @Judges 1: 12 - 15
J.T. It occurred to me that it would help to call attention to this feature of life, that it is marked by energy. There is a correspondence between John's gospel and Judges in that we have at the outset of Judges this reference to springs, and it is as if this woman represents the underlying feature of the book.
In view of the breakdown the book contemplates that the springs of water would ensure the maintenance of what is of God; so that you have, at the end of the book of Judges, Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the high priest, with whom a covenant was made; this son was identified with the testimony at the end (@Judges 20: 27, 28). So I think John's gospel ensures the true priesthood at the end, that which shall stand by the testimony. The maintenance of this at the end is ensured by the principle of the springs.
The book of judges, as many of us doubtless know, makes frequent references to life in its energetic feature. For instance, those that divide the spoil do so "in the places of drawing water", @Judges 5: 11. And in chapter 14 we have a swarm of bees in the carcase of the lion, suggestive in a peculiar way of the energy of life in its results, that is, in the honey. Then in chapter 15 we have Samson thirsty, and he prays: "and God clave the hollow rock which was in Lehi ... And he drank, and his spirit came again, and he revived". It says then "he judged Israel ... twenty years", as if the secret lay there, in the spring.
Things are not complete unless there be the accompaniment of the spring; that is to say, we have not only to apprehend Christ as presented in the gospels but there is also the Spirit, so that there should be correspondence with the light, correspondence in an energetic way, because it is a principle that a state of things such as we have to do with requires spiritual energy.
{470}
We see that Achsah sprang off the ass; she had the energy already; she sprang off the ass, not simply alighted, to meet her father. She realised that he had given her a south land, but she wanted springs of water. And I think that is the principle underlying the whole book, that if there is to be enjoyment of the land there must be the springs of water. In travelling about the world one sometimes comes across a land that may be fertile and has abundance of sun and air but there is no water and therefore no growth.
Isaac was one who knew the value of water, and he dug wells but the Philistines stopped them. Stopped wells are equivalent to no wells at all. It is no use knowing what our fathers had if we have not got the water. Then finally the servants come to him and say, "We have found water", and he calls that place Beersheba, that is, the well of the oath. He is settled now, he has got supply in having the wells of water.
Energy is a great feature in Scripture; only in the young christians it is apt to be in the flesh; young people are apt to be energetic but in a mixed way, the flesh in some way harnessed up along with the Spirit.
In the offerings you have energy represented by the ram, but alongside the ram you find the oblation or meat offering. That is the check on the flesh. The energy is there in the ram, but there must be also that which the meat offering suggests.
Accordingly in John's gospel the beginning of chapter 3 makes it clear that "ye must be born again"; flesh is flesh, whether it is in the christian or in the unconverted, it is the same thing and it must be disallowed so that all must be born again. "That which is born of the Spirit is spirit". There is the suggestion that the man -- the whole being -- is affected in that way. It is not simply ye must be born again: "except any one be born of water and of Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God". The water, I suppose, indicates the entire removal of the flesh, so that what is of the Spirit may remain. After all, this chapter, @John 4, is but the continuation of the third; the third gives
{471}
you the origin of him in whom the Spirit is to operate. The water in the third is not for drinking, it is for washing -- it typifies death.
Rem. So there is nothing in the new vessel that is allied to the old one.
J.T. The Lord is typified in the meat offering (@Leviticus 2) of fine flour, which is *mingled* with oil and then *anointed* with oil. The mingling means that there is no flesh there, and the anointing means that there is power for energy. So that in the anointing the sovereign operation of God is intending to bring us, as vessels, into accord with Christ.
You see it in Jacob, I think. It is said of Jacob that he took hold of his brother by the heel. You may say Jacob was a supplanter, but you do not get that brought out there. *There* you have in the babe, that had not as yet power to sin, an instinct. He took hold of his brother by the heel, meaning that he was going to supplant that brother. I think the early instinct resulting from new birth is the disallowance of the man after the flesh. Esau was born first, the elder, but Jacob shows an instinct that that man must be supplanted.
It does not say that he took hold of his brother in his strength (@Hosea 12: 3), for he did not have much then, but he had the instinct. Later it says that *in his strength* he wrestled with God and prevailed.
Ques. Would you say he maintained that which he had been born into?
J.T. That is what we see, I think, in Hosea. Hosea brings in Jacob as a rebuke to the children of Israel. They were not doing that; they were going in for man after the flesh, so the prophet reminds them that their father Jacob did not do that.
The woman in @John 4 suggests one who has been born again, and now she comes into the presence of Christ. Yet she is weak; it is spirit, but it is weak, and until the believer sees redemption he is weak, he has no power.
Ques. Is the vessel typical in this way of the maintaining of what is for God here?
J.T. That is what chapter 3 brings out.
{472}
We have in chapter 2 six waterpots of stone. These are a suggestion of what is procurable. They are empty and vessels are not to be empty, so He says, "Fill the waterpots with water", and they filled them to the brim. Chapter 2 is a millennial scene undoubtedly. Chapter 3 is the beginning of the formation of the vessel so that there should be vessels suitable for the energy of the Spirit of God.
Ques. Is the vessel in view of eternity? We are said to be vessels of mercy for God.
J.T. Oh, I think so. If it were not so we should not be vessels for *glory*, should we?
We have in chapter 20 the Lord breathing into them, for the vessels are there. Adam was *formed* and then breathed into. Their being breathed into here involved morally a representation of God. There should be shining out of God in man; materially he could not be a representation of God. He (Adam) was created in the image of God. And I think John is on these lines; he would form the vessel and then fill it. The climax, I think, in chapter 20 is the breathing. We receive in that way His own Spirit -- His own breath. "As the Father sent me forth, I also send you", He says. He sends out as He was sent out. Now you are not going to have image without likeness! In John He breathes out likeness. The vessel is formed and then filled.
Chapter 1 of the Acts gives you the formation of the vessels; they are there, and then the Holy Spirit comes into them. It is the external aspect. The Lord has been working so that they are there. Every one of these vessels was formed for the Spirit to sit on it.
Ques. Is that why, in Genesis, image comes before likeness -- "God created man in His own image" -- "in the likeness of God made He them" (@Genesis 1: 27; @Genesis 5: 1)?
J.T. After the fall the order was transposed; Adam "begat a son in his *likeness*, after his *image*".
Before you can have representation you must have likeness. Enoch was said to be the seventh from Adam, that is the full development of the line taken up in Seth.
Adam is restored, you might say, in @Genesis 5: "Adam ... begat a son ... and called his name Seth". Then
{473}
Seth begat Enosh. Enosh means "mortal". Acceptance of the fact that man is mortal means that he is going to live. Enosh is a dying man, but Enoch is a living man; his name means "sprout".
Rem. I suppose that is why he could speak of the coming of the Lord.
J.T. I suppose Enoch's prophecy represents the product of his walking with God. What God saw was *life*; he was the seventh from Adam -- it was complete spiritual development. God has great delight in life. Before his (Enoch's) translation he had this testimony that he pleased God. He was there to breathe, as it were, for God. That is what God has in view. He walked with God for three hundred years, and he was under God's eye, so he must have been pleasing to God. What did Enoch get? He got the idea of *holiness*. He says, "Behold, the Lord has come amidst his holy myriads". One can understand the immense force of that in Enoch's time before the ark was a testimony, that God was coming with his holy myriads. But God delights in life, and we get holiness. You cannot walk with God without getting a sense of holiness.
Ques. Do you suggest that the vessel is the outcome of the holiness of God?
J.T. Christ was "marked out Son of God in power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by resurrection of the dead", @Romans 1: 4. You see in John's gospel that the vessel is holy. You see that the Lord was the Holy One of God; "We have believed and known", Peter says, "that thou art the Holy One of God".
In every book of Scripture there is a constructive line right through. If you begin with the woman in chapter 4 she has to do with a corrupt world. You have her continued in chapter 6 where you have the Lord confessed as the Holy One of God.
Rem. So John brings out that His praise filled the temple.
J.T. In connection with @Isaiah 6 "Holy, holy, holy", etc., so that the development of life is in holiness. And so Enoch prophesied, "Behold, the Lord has come amidst his holy myriads".
{474}
Rem. In the beginning of John it says, "The Spirit", but at the end it says, "Receive the Holy Spirit".
J.T. Yes, and in Romans the first mention of the Spirit is "the Holy Spirit", where the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit. Chapter 2 of John is a millennial scene: the water of purification is turned into joy.
Rem. You were saying that the vessels are to be filled. The widow said, "Bring me yet a vessel", and because there was not another vessel the oil ceased.
J.T. Yes, she had to get vessels, but they were to be filled.
Ques. Is that the way the holy myriads are secured -- by the Spirit?
J.T. I think so. It is very beautiful to trace out how in one way and another life culminates in Jacob. Isaac is Christ risen and operating so that there should be wells, the water springing up; but Jacob is energy that is in the believer in his varied exercises, first, somewhat mixed, as is to be expected. The believer's early exercises and energies are almost sure to be mixed, and the disentanglement of flesh and spirit is a most important process.
The Spirit works by the believer's exercises. Jacob in his strength wrestled with God; and more than that, Hosea tells us that he wept (@Hosea 12: 4). Moses does not tell us that, but the prophet does. I think the weeping is a condition showing how keenly he felt matters; if we have to do with God we cannot be light or trivial. The nearer you get to God the more sober you are; you cannot be otherwise with God. The prophet brings out these facts because they stand out in such contrast to what the people were going on with. This is the way to the house of God subjectively, and there he is until he stands in relation to God as a prince in Bethel. So that it was worth while taking this course. In Bethel you get the memorial. And the prophet says, "He found him in Bethel", and he says further, "Jacob fled into the country of Syria". Not into the town but into the country. "And for a wife he kept sheep". He did not get her for nothing. The principle is energy. One of the first things you have, on Jacob entering into Syria, was the
{475}
removal of the stone that lay on the well's mouth. So you see the believer at the outset comes into contact with springs of water.
Rem. So that in coming to the house you find there is a sphere where in a priestly way you find an outlet.
J.T. Yes. Jacob is found in Bethel, and he is found there as a prince. When we are in the house, it is with a sense of dignity; we are princes, God having made us so.
In Bethel, when God finds him there, God comes and stands by him. On the occasion of his first meeting with God at Bethel, God is at the top of the ladder, because holiness was not with Jacob. But the second time Jacob has buried the idols. He has learnt now that life is conditioned by holiness. He has had terrible experiences at Shechem and he has now learnt holiness. So God comes down to him and he sets up a pillar and pours out a drink offering.
Ques. Did you have a thought that a drink offering is communication with others as well as with God?
J.T. I think the drink offering is the sense in his soul of the delight he had that God came down to speak to him. God is pleased, and how could He be thus with us save in the sense that we are acceptable. He has delight in us. It is the portion God has in us in holy intimacy. Now you have here the thought of the Father; the Lord is pleased to speak to the woman about the Father. "God is a Spirit", He says. He was bringing light into her soul, so that in due time she would be able to understand worship.
Rem. The Lord did not speak to Nicodemus about worship.
Ques. Was the vessel filled in chapter 4?
J.T. I think in principle it is. She left her waterpot. She sees the Lord's idea, that she herself is to be the waterpot! John records that she left her waterpot. She might have taken it with her, but the Spirit of God mentions that she left it. That meant that she herself was to be the waterpot now. She carried the water in principle to Samaria.
Rem. That was, she realised what the Lord was to her.
J.T. The fact of the matter is, He had gone down to the secret of her soul. You see, we do not turn and allow the
{476}
light of God in. The word of God is like a searchlight; it discovers to us all the dark crevices and secret chambers, with the intent that everything shall be opened to us by the Spirit. "He told me all that ever I did". That means she would discard all that, to make room for the water. I apprehend that is what the vessels mean in 2 Kings; the vessel would have increasing capacity, by disallowing the flesh.
Rem. The result of our touch with the Lord is that it empties us of ourselves.
J.T. It does indeed. You will understand how this woman says: 'Well, if I am to be a spring, I want to get scope'. How she would turn over his word and say: 'Well, I must not have anything that is incompatible with this'. The spring is in me a fountain of water springing up into everlasting life. The spiritual energy is seen in her going to the men of the city. She has left her waterpot and is governed by the light.
Rem. Thus the activity and energy of the Spirit is in more than one direction; John gave it in its full sense, Godward and manward.
J.T. I think in this chapter it is given in its full bearing Godward, leading up to worship. In chapter 7 its bearing is manward, I think: "out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water". That is manward, obviously. "But this he said concerning the Spirit ... for the Spirit was not yet, because Jesus had not yet been glorified". It is consequent on the glorification of Christ -- flowing out manward in chapter 7; but it seems in this chapter you get the full bearing of it Godward, springing up.
Ques. What is the thought of the springing up?
J.T. I think it is the energy of the Spirit in the christian, the Spirit is controlling the flesh. The bearing of the Spirit is upward in the christian. Those of us who have the presence of the Spirit I think have verified that. He is to lead you out of the world. He has delivered you but He goes with you. Your affections are diverted into new channels, into pure, holy channels. Instead of flowing outwards, they flow upwards.
{477}
Rem. There is a return for God. Our souls return to God and overflow.
J.T. "My heart is welling forth with a good matter: I say what I have composed touching the king", @Psalm 45: 1. I will sing with the spirit and I will sing with the understanding also, so I will speak of the things of God intelligently. Speaking suggests intelligent lines. If you speak of the things, you have them intelligently.
God secures us in all the inner organs. They are spoken of in the types. The priest's work was to open them up, to dissect them. They are for God. How great it is that God secures us so that all these inner organs, our inner being, moves upwards!
It says "Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth". There you have the regulation of the inner man, a holy spring within. Foolish talking and jesting which are not convenient, so that nothing corrupt proceeds out of your mouth. God would have the man wholly for Himself.
{478}
THE WAY
@Mark 10: 17 - 22, 46 - 52; @Mark 11: 1 - 7
What one has noticed is that some lay hold of the gospel in a light, unrepentant manner, corresponding with this one who, as we are told ran into the way, but did not stay in it. There are many under this heading and, as having been into the way and left it, their case is serious indeed. They are unaffected as having come into the way, and having left it are on the high road to apostasy. The gospel is not intended to affect us lightly, it is intended to *affect* us solemnly. In order that it should come to us the Lord Jesus had to enter on this way, and He tells us it was at Jerusalem He should suffer. He had to undergo the judgment of God, in all that it meant as perfectly known to Him. It was a solemn way, but He had entered it definitely, not to leave it. It led Him to Gethsemane where, as we read in this gospel, He was "amazed and oppressed". Think of Him being oppressed as facing the awful consequences of having entered on this way, and compare that with the lightness with which we sometimes listen to the gospel, and perhaps turn away without being affected by it. He was about to face the wrath of God. Elihu spoke to Job of how the breadth of the waters is straitened by the frost, @Job 37: 10. The Lord was about to enter into these waters, the waters that were straitened by the awful blast of divine wrath. It was actual death. He was three days and three nights in the heart of the earth. He knows what death is as having tasted it -- it was death in its awfulness. The pangs of death are spoken of in regard to Christ; the waters were straitened by the frost of God, so that He was held in them. He was among the dead. He died as the Victim who offered Himself without spot to God.
The man here ran into the way, and presently left it; he had no understanding of what that way meant. Christ was on the way to make atonement for this man, and for every other man. The folly of the man asking what he
{479}
should do to inherit eternal life is manifested. He says, "Good Master"; He is religiously respectful. It is one thing to be religiously respectful, but another thing to be spiritually respectful as I hope to show the blind man was. The Lord says, "Why callest thou me good? there is none good but one, that is, God". Did this man know God? If he had to do with God he would not run into the way in this fashion. You can do nothing to obtain everlasting life. There is none good but God. The man was religiously respectful, but nothing counts if God is left out. The Lord takes the man up on his own ground, and if he is on the line of doing, there is plenty to do; he chose his riches in preference to Christ. Wherever you find lightness with regard to the things of God, there is self at the bottom of it. Think of a man turning his back on Christ. This man was not absolutely indifferent, but such interest is not enough. Some may say with a measure of regret, "I know christians have advantages", but why go away sorrowful, why not go in for them, seeing they are obtainable. The gospel proposes everything to you on the ground of simple faith. This man was not wholly indifferent, and one cannot but be drawn to young people who are in some respects interested. They turn away because of something which detains the heart. What really stands in the way? He would encourage us in the passage, He looked on the man and loved him, but he went away sorrowful. He had something that he regarded as of more value than Christ.
Bartimaeus did not run into the way, he sat by it. He was there for other reasons, he was blind and he knew it; he was in poverty and he knew it, but in the government of God he was by the wayside, and had no possessions. He had nothing to commend him in the world, he would find no place in society, he was but a blind beggar, and was by the wayside. Well for him! I take him to represent a young man or woman who is in touch with the light under the government of God. The government of God is one of the most wonderful things, for there is not a creature on the earth, a tree, or a blade of grass that was not taken into account in the government of God. It would force all into
{480}
the position of obtaining the blessing. Think of what a God is ours; before we know Him, He has blessing for us. Everyone of us can testify that the government of God has been on our side, not against us, it is not against you now, but it will be by and by. He commandeth. He retires, as it were, into His right to command all men everywhere to repent. He is exercising His right as Creator. Not only is the government of God valuable at the present time for each one, but generations preceding you have come under notice, with you in view. It is the one great interest of God at the present time to employ anything in His hand to force men directly or indirectly to receive the blessings of the gospel. When you look back on your own life you will verify what I am saying. Bartimaeus being by the wayside on this day may appear to be an accident, but there are no accidents with God. He saw to it that Bartimaeus was on the wayside that day when Jesus passed. How he would look back on this day! What a day in his history! He would not stop at that day, he would go back further, and would thank God for his blindness; so it is with most of us, we can thank God for what we have passed through, and that we are now found in the way of peace. It is a wonderful thing to come into contact with the Lord Jesus. Were we to know all about Timaeus, we would know that God had had to do with him -- something that bore on his blessing. So it is with many of you. God knows your fathers¬ and your mothers¬ names, not only for their account, but for yours, and it may be you are here because of your parents. Well for you then that you have believing parents! You are in the very precincts of the light of the blessings of the gospel. It was not his father who spoke for him here. It is a good thing for young people to know that their parents have been speaking to God about them since they were born, but the time comes when they have got to speak for themselves. He enquired who was passing by: do you? The Lord is here in the gospel tonight; do you enquire about him? "Jesus of Nazareth passeth by", @Luke 18: 37. Is he going to pass by you, it is now your turn to speak. The blind man spoke, he did not say "Jesus of Nazareth"; he was spiritual.
{481}
He was not like the man who ran in the way; he says, "Jesus, thou son of David". He had a spiritual exercise. Where did this come from, not from his parents. They cannot give the spiritual exercises. You get your spirit from God, and more than that, God is acting by His Spirit. The Spirit links on with your spirit and operates in you; as the Lord says to Nicodemus "Ye must be born again", @John 3: 7. That is the secret of the blind man's exercises. It may be you have got them and do not know, but what he said to Jesus showed that he had them. If I could hear you speak to Jesus, I could tell whether you are born again. If you are born again, and speak to Jesus, you will soon disclose it. He says, "Son of David", and the Lord stood still. The Lord stops, He called for him. The people say "Rise; he calleth thee". He discerns spiritual exercises. The young man who ran into the way was not born again, he had no spiritual exercises, but this man had. He casts away his garment. That indicates a certain unsuitableness -- there is that about you which is unfit for His presence, and you know it. It is equivalent to a confession or acknowledgment of your unfitness. The Lord says, "What wilt thou ... ?" Can you tell? God reads our hearts, but He would have us put it into words. With the heart man believes. He knows what you need, but loves to hear the outcome of the work of the Spirit in a soul. With what depth of feeling he said "that I might receive my sight". What is your trouble, put it into words. The putting into words is equivalent to faith. "Thy faith hath made thee whole". Faith is God's gift, but it is your responsibility. It is your own faith, not your father's faith. There is no salvation without faith in the Lord Jesus.
The colt in chapter 11 is now to be employed by the Lord. The evangelist brings his converts to Jesus. No child of man ever sat on the colt. You have not come under the influence of the world, you are not building up this world. They will quickly take you on, they have no objections to your faith in Christ as long as you join in with their enterprises; all they want is you. The world is bidding for you. This colt was tied where two ways met. This is not the
{482}
government of God, this is man's action. Someone who had a right to him had tied him and was near at hand. It is a question of his being employed by Jesus and in such a way as to carry him -- a service that was most honourable.
We are all Levites; from the moment you are converted, you belong to Him. The Levites were taken instead of the firstborn. Think of being taken up by God in that way for levitical work, and the highest thing is propounded. It is in advance of Bartimaeus; Jericho is a dangerous place.
You find that the colt is not at Jerusalem but at the Mount of Olives. Think of Jerusalem and Bethany. Think of the memories! It is well for you that you are in such an enclosure.
Think of the Spirit of God at Mount Olivet. You are hedged about by the Spirit; you are now within the range of the Spirit. Then there is Bethany with all the happy memories for Christ; He was loved there. It is well you are tied, for there are two ways, some person who has a claim on you has tied you, and now the Lord sends for you. You cannot have a doubt about it for He sends two. You were held there by those who were responsible for you, and one of your qualifications is that you have not been into the world.
They led him to Jesus. The Lord had need of him, and they allowed him to go. They take off their own clothes and put them on the colt. It is as if the brethren loved you, and would make you a fit servant for the Lord. The Lord would lay upon every young man's heart that He needs him, and as you recognise His claim over you, the brethren would hasten to help you that you should be fit, that you should be thoroughly furnished unto every good work, a dignified Levite; so I would say to every young person, the Lord has need of you!
{483}
THE HOUSE OF GOD (1)
@John 1: 35 - 39; @John 2: 13 - 22
J.T. I believe it will be found that the thought of the house of God is worked out in each of the gospels according to the point of view of each writer. John has it in view, I believe, but as is usual with him he assumes the thing is there without naming it formally. He does name the house in chapter 2, "my Father's house", referring to the material structure at Jerusalem, which now has to be regarded as a past institution, and then he also speaks of the Father's house in chapter 14, but that is regarded as future. So that the house in its present form is not formally named by him, but nevertheless the thought of it is worked out in a very definite way, and as is usual in his gospel there is a peculiar application to our own times. In His house we know we have the thing, the house of God, but we cannot point to anything that represents it formally; hence we have to be content with the enjoyment of it in obscurity without claiming it officially or formally, and so he begins in chapter 1, verse 14, with the reference to the Word becoming flesh and dwelling among us. That is, I think, something that has to be understood as having a present bearing. "The Word became flesh, and dwelt among us (and we have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father)", so that from the outset the house becomes a matter of apprehending Christ as having come to dwell amongst men, and whether we have learned or contemplated Him, because with John it is a question of acquaintance, not with a system, but with divine Persons and the persons with and in whom God works.
J.F. Being in connection with divine Persons there could be no change in any sense in what is presented.
J.T. The ravages of time and man's will and Satan's power cannot interfere with the Persons.
C.C.E. Will you please carry on the idea of God dwelling among His people?
{484}
J.T. John has that in view. The Word is 'tabernacled' among us. Although He came to His own they received Him not. Nevertheless He found a way of tabernacling and you can understand the force of that now, notwithstanding the very great departure there is. The Lord knows how to find a place in which to dwell, so that the subject there contemplates the state of our souls as to whether we apprehend that the Lord Jesus can dwell, notwithstanding the most adverse conditions. Chapter 14 shows how divine Persons can come in and dwell where the commandments and the word are kept.
W.P. Does that answer to the faithful men in Timothy?
J.T. 1 Timothy is in accord with Luke, where things are in order. 2 Timothy and John run parallel.
J. S. Does John dwell more on the family than on the structural aspect?
J.T. It is from the standpoint of the family. We have often remarked that the Lord sent Peter and John to prepare for the passover, and I think that this gospel is the family side, which stands, notwithstanding that the structural side may have been wrecked. As has often been remarked the Lord did not disclose to Peter what John would do. He says "If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee?" @John 21: 22, and that is in keeping with the word earlier, "He himself knew what he would do". He reserved John so that there should be a revival at the end and the enjoyment of the things that they had at the beginning without any pretension to the official or formal aspect of them.
J.F. You can contemplate the family apart from the place. I was thinking of what Stephen says, Jacob went down to Egypt with all his kindred -- seventy-five souls, @Acts 7: 14. Wherever they moved the family links were there.
J.T. Jacob sacrifices to the God of his father Isaac, as coming down into Egypt, meaning that he apprehended Christ risen; Abraham is not mentioned. It is not a question of the great patriarch to whom all the promises were made. There is a change so that he sacrifices to the God of his father Isaac, meaning Christ risen from the dead, and then
{485}
you have a formal recognition by the Spirit of God of all the children and grandchildren of Jacob because there is a turning to Joseph. In @Genesis 37: 2, it says: "These are the generations of Jacob. Joseph ...". None of the others are taken account of, but now that Jacob has turned towards Joseph and they are all restored as a family, the Spirit of God takes account of them all; that fits in with what we have here. It is a question of the Lord personally. "We have contemplated his glory", John says. Jacob had tidings brought up of the glory of Joseph and that is what dominates that section. Everything now hinges for us on our recognition of the Lord.
-.H. Do we contemplate Him as here on earth or in heavenly glory?
J.T. We contemplate Him as He is now. We cannot contemplate Him otherwise. We contemplate His glory as of the only-begotten of the Father. That is the key to the gospel. You see the Lord in His place with the Father and then the next thing is "Where abidest thou?" Where testimony has become effective it is in regard to the Person, that is how things stand nowadays.
C.C.E. Where He dwells makes a house for us.
J.T. We begin to find out the house by coming into acquaintance with the Lord.
A.A.E. How would you distinguish between God dwelling and where He dwells?
J.T. We shall reach that presently, for the moment it is initial, how a believer at the present time comes into the light of the house. It is a gradual development. We shall see in chapter 8 that the Son is over the house. The Son abides in the house for ever. In this chapter it is the Son in the bosom of the Father. We have to begin with the apprehension of the Son and His place with the Father, and we shall see later the thought of the house and His place in it. That opens up the place for us to come into it.
J.F. Is that why he mentions this first?
J.T. This dominates what follows. "John stood, and two of his disciples; and looking upon Jesus as he walked, he saith, Behold the Lamb of God!" Now you come to a
{486}
ministry that instead of drawing around itself directs to Christ.
-.H. Was it that which gave the two disciples the desire to know where He dwelt?
J.T. John conveyed in his remark that there was something very attractive in the Person and they profited by that and sought to know where He dwelt.
J. S. The family idea was in the mind of God before anything national came in.
J.T. It is a primary thought and it is the ultimate result of all His operations.
J.S. Would you say that up to the time of the deluge God dealt with families, and here the Lord is presented as recovering the family idea.
J.T. Joseph is a type of that. There are four different features of recovery. Joseph is the last and it is the family which God began with. The family is restored and set up again in relation to its head.
C.C.E. We find that the final eternal state takes account of the family.
J.N. Would you say the three divine Persons suggest the family thought too?
J.T. The Father and the Son suggest it.
J.N. Quite agreeable with the thought of God's nature, love.
J.T. "The God of glory appeared to our father Abraham", @Acts 7: 2. God intended to set out in Abraham the great patriarchal idea. The first mention of love you have is Abraham's love. It is attributed to Abraham. "Take now thy son, thine only son Isaac, whom thou lovest", @Genesis 22: 2. There we have the answer of the appearing. He appeared to our father Abraham.
J.N. Our fellowship is with the Father and the Son.
W.P. It is not so much in touch with a system as with the Person. Is that the thought we get in verse 37? They got in touch with the Person.
J.T. Yes. "Where abidest thou?" We have nothing said as to where it was. It is a question of going and seeing.
J.N. You have to get the Person before you get the house.
{487}
J.T. If this had been at Pentecost the house could have been pointed to as a concrete thing, but John does not present it from that point of view. It is a question of your coming to a Person and finding out through Him where He abides. It is not public now.
J. S. It says they abode with Him.
J.N. There is no place you can point to today.
J.T. It is a very humbling thing. It shows how far away we have got from what existed at the beginning.
C.C.E. In the beginning of the Acts you could point to the place. "The Lord added to the assembly", @Acts 2: 47. There was that to which He could point.
J.T. There was that there to which He could add.
J.N. A great house carries the thought of ruin with it.
J.T. Anything else is contributory to the thought of the family. If there is government, rule, or administration, all tends so that the family might be protected and dwell in peace and love.
J.N. So that the Father should have His portion in that house.
J.T. It dominates everything that follows. That is the high altitude of divine thought, so that always we have a drop down to the level of discipline and the kingdom and government, but it is all to culminate in the idea of the family established permanently.
J. S. In the family idea you would not introduce anything in connection with ruin.
J.T. In the next chapter the Lord lifts the idea from the level of the material building of Jerusalem to that of resurrection. "Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up" (@John 2: 19), but He spoke of the temple of His body. The word for 'temple' used by Him is not the same word as is used earlier. The employment of that word directs the spiritual mind to what there is; without referring to it formally or officially, it is His body. You are still in relation to the Person but the idea is spiritual and it is developed elsewhere, in Corinthians and Ephesians. It is kept in relation to the personal body of Christ, and hence there is consequent upon this an understanding by the disciples of
{488}
the Scriptures. They believed the Scriptures and the things which Jesus said, showing we have the place of light, and having the light of the temple we understand the Scriptures and all that He said; that is not connected with the saints as the temple, but with the body of Christ, so that we are still in relation to Him.
J. S. The body was there, and in the resurrection the unfolding took place.
R.B. The light here is connected with His personal body.
J.T. The idea is introduced and you can begin by yourself with the Lord before you realize that the saints are His temple; we come into the light according to Corinthians and Ephesians, otherwise we should not have what we have today. Recovery lay in some person, or persons, coming into the apprehension of Christ, because it is from that standpoint that everything is seen. You work out the thought of the temple and come back to it in the thought of the saints. You cannot find the saints unless you have the Lord. You work things out from the Lord, and you find the saints through Him.
C.C.E. The temple is only to be found in the Lord in @John 2.
J.F. Now that outward ruin has come in, the light is regained by coming in touch with Christ personally.
J.T. Otherwise the ruin would be irretrievable, but in returning to the Lord, everything is there, so that He transfers the thought of the temple from the material building, that He had just cleansed, to His own body in resurrection, and what I understand is that I am elevated from the level of what is external on to the platform of resurrection, outside the range of man's mind altogether. That is our position if we have light at all; we are outside the range of man's mind. Not even the disciples came into it until after He was risen. There is nothing in it for the flesh.
J.F. The believer cannot really understand the Scriptures aright until he reaches the Lord in resurrection.
J.T. That is exactly how it stands today. The light that has come in has been on these lines. However clever men may be in research and learning, it is all outside the range
{489}
of the temple. The simple believer comes into it because of personal attachment to Christ as in chapter 14.
J. S. There must be the coming in by him as in chapter 1, coming to see where He dwells, before the believer can come into the light of the temple in chapter 2.
J.T. John is occupied with Him personally. He looked at the Lord as He walked. There was interest in John and hence his testimony was effective. We have to begin with Him risen, and I think this is to shut out man.
R.B. Does it not make it intensely spiritual?
J.T. It shuts out man, however clever he may be. The Lord had cleansed the temple; He brought in a testimony in the scourge as to what he will do for Israel by and by. It was His Father's house. "The zeal of thine house hath eaten me up", The disciples learnt the bearing of that passage. It was well that the Jews asked for a sign, because the sign really shut them out; it goes on to say that, although many believed on Him at this particular time, He did not commit Himself unto them. Man is utterly untrustworthy, although even he may seem to believe, and the sign that the Lord gives is to shut man out in his religious mind and ability.
A.A.E. What is your thought as to the cleansing of the temple coming at the beginning of the gospel? In the other gospels it is nearer the end.
J.T. It is to complete the subject of the third day, the millennial day. The cleansing of the temple is the completion of His work amongst the Jews as a testimony. The sign which He gives is to shut them out religiously.
C.R.B. The natural man cannot understand the things of God.
J.T. Samson is to be in possession of the riddle. The Philistine giants, great as they were, could not answer it. It is wonderful what they discovered and effected by their minds, but they could not answer the riddle until he disclosed the secret. We should not disclose the secret. If you do you let the Philistines in. Christians have a secret which will be unfolded in the resurrection.
J.N. How do you disclose the secret?
J.T. By bringing the truth into the range of man's
{490}
natural capability. We must not disclose the hidden wisdom which Paul speaks of in Corinthians.
J.F. Do you think a believer having acquired the knowledge of the Lord risen is used of the Spirit to interpret divine things himself? The words "being interpreted" are continually used by the Spirit. Do you think the man himself gives the interpretation?
J.T. The enemy obtained possession of the secrets in the beginning and wrought the undoing of the assembly publicly. The Lord's sign here involves a secret: "Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up". They did not take that in, nor did He tell them. The Spirit of God tells us in this gospel, but He did not mean them to know.
A.A.E. You do not refer to the public testimony.
J.T. No, that is another matter. If you take this as it stands what could they say about it? They asked for a sign and he says "Destroy this temple ..." They begin to talk about the forty-six years it took to build. Their minds were on the material fine and the Lord does not enlighten them. The Spirit of God puts it down for us, and His disciples had the benefit of it after He rose.
-.H. It is remarkable that they remembered about the third day, and went to Pilate (@Matthew 27: 62, 63).
J.T. His disciples had forgotten it, but the Holy Spirit brought it back again. We are not told that they believed this at the time. But after they received the Spirit, who would bring all things to their remembrance, they "believed the scripture and the word which Jesus had spoken".
W.P. Has the Lord in view in this that He might have us here for His pleasure and that there may be return for God?
J.T. I hope we shall see that, but do we understand this sign? There is often an undue effort to bring down God's things to the range of man's mind and that is to undo our position. The gospel is to all but there is the mystery of the gospel.
G.N. In another place He gives them the sign of the prophet Jonas (@Matthew 12: 39).
J.T. Three days and three nights in the heart of the
{491}
earth, that is another point of view; it is His death. Here it is raising up the temple because I think He wants to shut out man in this development of the house. Man's mind is to be shut out.
J.N. It says that we must not give that which is holy to the dogs.
J.S. Would you say the difficulty in apprehending John's gospel is that we are slow to apprehend that there must be fight by divine power, that God must come in in divine power.
J.T. The Lord clears the ground in this chapter. He gives a sign which man cannot understand but which the believer understands. After He was risen the disciples believed the Scripture and the word. As they apprehend Christ risen they understand the Scripture.
J.F. What was found in Him was the oracle of God, the wisdom of God and the glory of God. If all that is to be permanently maintained here it involves a new order of man in resurrection.
J.T. For this you need new birth as in the next chapter. John is most sweeping in the way in which he shuts man out from the very beginning.
J. S. Could you illustrate how we can disclose the riddle?
J.T. By bringing it down to the range of man's mind. Theology takes the ground that man can know about God. The very term is a denial of what we have here. The knowledge of God is outside the range of man's mind, and that is what the Lord begins with in regard to this great subject. The sign is to shut man out. The Holy Spirit tells us He spoke about His body. The great secret in this gospel is attachment to Christ and if we do not know things it is because of our lack of love. It is very beautiful to see the two disciples following Him. He would bring out what was there. They were very definite: "Rabbi ... , where abidest thou?" It is that definiteness which God appreciates amongst us.
J.N. Is the whole system a question of divine affection?
J.T. If you love the Lord you will be kept and come into the light.
{492}
J.F. How is that love to the Lord indicated?
J.T. By coming into the light of His Person. John the baptist was impressed; he furnished John the evangelist a model, a man of like passions as ourselves, in whom to present the truth. There was never a man who had a greater opportunity of making much of himself than John; the Jews sent to him and intimated plainly enough that they were willing to give him the place of the prophet. He would be recognised by the leaders if he was prepared for it, but he is true and refused to take any place at all. He says "I am the voice of one", and later, "I have seen and borne witness that this is the Son of God", and then on the morrow, he stood, meaning that his work is done. The Son of God is on the scene and he says, "Behold the Lamb of God". His heart is impressed with the Person and the others are impressed. I think that he passed on to his disciples the sense that he had of the greatness of that One and they began to be attracted to Christ; I think the evidence of that is that they wanted to know where He abode and that they abode with Him that day.
-.H. Is there anything in 'that day'?
J.T. That was the day of John's testimony. It had nearly expired but there were two hours left of it. It would be like the overlapping period in the Acts out of which the assembly, as we have it, was developed.
-.H. Would you say a little more in connection with affection for the Lord, in personal touch with Him? John, the disciple whom Jesus loved, did not know at the time of the resurrection of the Lord Jesus. Paul says He loved me. Our affections for the Lord are because of what he has done for us.
J.T. Paul based his remark on the death of Christ. He loved me. The knowledge of the Son of God involves He has a personal interest in me. It is an individual matter. John learnt it by personal contact.
C.R.B. Affection for Christ was a result.
J.T. We love Him because He first loved us.
R.B. John the baptist said "Behold the Lamb of God", John the evangelist "We have contemplated his glory".
{493}
J.N. Is it not because of the contact?
J.T. It is. In chapter 9 Jesus found the one that they had cast out. There is personal interest on the part of the Son of God in every one of us. He watches our circumstances and at the opportune moment discloses Himself to us.
J.N. Nicodemus was attracted to Him by some wonderful power.
J.T. Nicodemus connects Him with God, showing there was a moral element in him that was not in the others. The others would not go beyond the man, and made much of the things He did. That is unitarianism. He was here on God's account.
Le R. Is not our love towards Him sustained more by what we find in Him than by what He has done for us?
J.T. The testimony of His love is in His death, but He sustains you after you know Him (@Song of Songs 2: 6). The more you have of it the more you see that love is a question of persons.
J.F. The end of this chapter shuts out all doctors of divinity on that line.
J.T. It clears the ground for the work of God in chapter 3. We have to learn that. The Philistines could never have answered the riddle if they had not ploughed with Samson's heifer. The professing church is false. The responsible body is false; it has disclosed the secret.
J.N. It must have been provoking to the ruling men that they were shut out.
J.T. It is well to be in possession of the riddle because you can always silence them, and lay them under tribute so that they are in a position of disadvantage. If you get these men on their own ground they will have the best of it, because they have devoted their time to it. It is their profession, but if you bring the riddle in, all their learning counts for nothing because it is the secret of God. The secret of the Lord is with those that fear Him, not with those that study.
{494}
THE HOUSE OF GOD (2)
@John 8: 31 - 36; @John 12: 1 - 3
J.T. It will be understood that these passages have been suggested because we have in them the idea of the house. Chapter 8 suggests the Son's relation to the house, that He abides in it for ever. These references are not accidental; they run, as we should expect, through the gospel, culminating in chapter 20; they are not therefore promiscuous, they are links in a chain and we may assume they are the teaching of the gospels throughout. In other words the house developed in this gospel involves the work of God in men's souls. Chapter 2 clears the ground for that work, and we may see that the work of God, as seen in these intervening chapters, involves energy. The idea of energy is strikingly illustrated in the Old Testament in Jacob, with whom the house of God is first connected in Scripture. It is introduced in @Genesis 28 in connection with Jacob, and what Scripture discloses in regard to him is that he was marked by energy in displacing the man after the flesh. He took hold of his brother by the heel. At the very outset of his being on earth he took hold of his brother by the heel, and he wrestled with the angel in his strength (@Hosea 12: 3, 4); he prevailed; he wept and made supplication, and then it says "he found him in Bethel", in the house. All that corresponds with the work of God in our souls, as seen in @John 3 to 7. There is instinctive energy at the outset in one who is born anew. A babe just born is not governed by his own will or thought, what he does is according to those instincts present in early life. Jacob later wrestled with God in his strength. He was intelligent then as to what he was doing. He made supplication, and was found in Bethel; so we may see in these intervening chapters the energy of life in the believer leading him into the house, leading him into correspondence with the house.
J.F. Is the house where every divine thought is treasured?
{495}
J.T. Yes, where God's things are treasured. A man's house is that in which he surrounds himself with what reflects his character, so that God's house would be where all the character of God shines out; what we find here, introduced in such a remarkable way in connection with our liberation, is that the Son abides in the house for ever, so that in coming into it we are in that which abides. It is not a temporary idea. John has a way of introducing things that link us up with eternity. The Son abides there for ever.
J.F. Would that be in contrast to what we have in Luke? There it is what is for time.
J.T. Yes, it is a provisional thought in Luke in which God expresses His grace for those disciples. John has the family in view and it goes into eternity. In Matthew you have more of the house than in any other of the gospels. He gives more references to the Lord acting in the house and serving in the house in various connections, than does any of the other evangelists, because the Holy Spirit wishes to set out there that the house is that in which divine administration is presented to us. Matthew gives you the householder. Matthew uses the word "householder" several times because his thought is we should be householders having in our treasure things new and old.
-.S. This house is composed of all believers.
J.T. Viewed from the Pauline side it is "whose house are we". John is dealing with the thing abstractly. You have to see it in relation to Christ -- the Father and the Son.
J.F. Is the Spirit given in chapter 4 so that apprehension of divine operations may be given to the soul? The Samaritans there realized that the Lord was the Saviour of the world.
J.T. The Holy Spirit in chapter 4 corresponds with the light of the gospel in chapter 3: "God so loved the world .", verses 16, 17. That is the divine side. Chapter 4 indicates that men have come to the apprehension of that, and that could only be by the Spirit. The presence of the Spirit as seen in chapter 4 is of great importance as regards energy, both of affection and intelligence. They come and see Him themselves. The woman had spoken to the
{496}
Samaritans about Him, but now they say, "We have heard him ourselves", and they came to apprehend Him as the Saviour of the world.
C.C.E. Freedom is connected with the house here.
J.T. That is the outcome of what was built up in the previous chapters. You are prepared for this now, do you not think?
J.N. In what way are we prepared for it?
J.T. Because of the ministry of chapters 3, 5, 6 and 7. That is to say the question of life has to be solved in our souls.
J.S. Chapter 5 speaks of quickening by the Father and the Son.
J.T. It is divine Persons quickening there, quickening that we may live with Christ.
J.F. John deals with the first tree in the garden, the tree of life, not the tree of the knowledge of good and evil.
J.T. The suggestion of Jacob helps because energy in the believer culminates in the house according to the type in Jacob. You remember the passage in @Hosea 12.
W.W. You read of the Lord speaking to the Jews, "If ye abide in my word, ye are truly my disciples; and ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall set you free". That seems to be the link that connects us with the Son.
J.T. The truth is liberating us in detail.
W.W. I was thinking of those that believed on Him. It says, "If ye abide in my word". So that if the Lord speaks to believers it is to bring out what is according to this and for them to "know the truth".
J.T. It is well for young believers to make an introspective examination and see how much spiritual instinct there has been in disallowing what is natural. We cannot carry our natural feelings and affections into the house of God. The believer at the very outset is marked by certain instincts, very indefinite it may be at the outset, but nevertheless they are there and they increase so that Jacob in his strength wrestled with God. You come to a point where you see the need of another power, the need of the Spirit. You see the need of another power because the obstacles are very real
{497}
and have to be overcome, so that Jacob prevailed and obtained by his energy what he sought.
J.S. So chapter 6 will adjust the obstacles, "It is the Spirit that quickeneth, the flesh profiteth nothing".
J.T. Chapter 4 is the beginning of that as to power. The Lord brings in the thought of the water. He says, "If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that saith to thee, Give me to drink; thou wouldest have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water". And then He says, "The water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting life". So that we have there the definite suggestion of energy springing up. It is an outflow in power, not merely in light but power for deliverance from the world of lust, from the world of death. One is brought into another order of things in the springing up into everlasting life.
J.F. I suppose they crossed the Jordan in the power of the new spring they obtained in the wilderness.
J.T. There was a definite object before their souls in the ark, but they crossed it by power. Typically we do not cross the Jordan except in the power of the Spirit.
C.C.E. How does chapter 7 come in? That is an energetic outflow.
J.T. That is Jesus glorified. It is a most instructive gospel. It is on the line of energy or life; chapter 4 is from the side of giving, and chapter 7 from the side of reception. "This spake he of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should receive", @John 7: 39. You have received something definitely, and then it says, "For the Spirit was not yet, because Jesus had not yet been glorified", verse 39. So that at the end of that chapter Jesus went to the mount of Olives, and I think that dominates chapter 8. He comes in from the mount of Olives to the temple, and he brings in the light of grace in dealing with the wicked woman.
W.W. What about the energy connected with the food as in chapter 6?
J.T. That is the constitution you have. The believer is built up in a definite constitution in life. He is no longer in a varied state, as we say, up hill and down dale. It is
{498}
according to God in the eating of the bread that came down from heaven. I doubt if very many believers have come to chapter 6 and hence the varied experience. It is by eating food that we become satisfied spiritually. You have a definite constitution which can stand up against things and you are available now for the Spirit in testimony. It is a flowing out in chapter 7.
J.F. "Grace and truth subsists through Jesus Christ", @John 1: 17.
J.T. I think chapter 7 would correspond with what we get in chapter 1 in that way. "Grace and truth subsists through Jesus Christ". The law was brought before her in the beginning of chapter 8; they would deal with her on that line, but the Lord was full of grace, not at the expense of truth, but full of grace and truth. Grace is in the forgiving of the woman, truth is in the writing on the ground. Truth must be accurate, hence the writing.
W.W. Say a word about the writing. Moses wrote on the stone, and the Lord writes on the ground.
J.T. The ground is death, the Lord's own death.
J.F. Is the writing the full expression of God in love?
J.T. The first writing puts the accusers out and the second writing retains the woman. She can be forgiven on the ground of that. She is really retained for the house. It is a wonderful expression of the grace that subsisted in Christ, expressed in all circumstances. When we see that He came in from the mount of Olives we can see the bearing of it more because this chapter contemplates the house connected with the Son.
A.A.E. What is your thought with regard to the mount of Olives?
J.T. It stands for the Spirit, the very term Olivet suggests the Spirit. Chapter 7 is the climax of the truth of the Spirit, where the believer has Him and the rivers are flowing out, but all that is consequent on Christ's place on high; He is on high in relation to the Spirit. Coming in from Olivet means He comes in in relation to the Spirit and it is in that connection that the house is brought in. In chapter 8 the Son is known in it.
{499}
A.A.E. Would the mount of Olives also be in contrast to Sinai?
J.T. It stands in that connection.
J. S. What is the significance in the receiving of the Spirit being connected with the last, the great day of the feast?
J.T. I think it is that it was the feast of the Jews. It is not tabernacles in the typical sense. It is to bring out the supremacy of Christ, not only His greatness but the greatness of a believer on Him; the believer in Christ is greater than any priest they had. We have little conception of the magnitude of the presence of the Holy Spirit here in a believer who is built up according to these chapters. What a vessel God has in him, in a man.
J.F. Do you think the energy of the Spirit practically sets us free so that we might be in the house as sons? I was thinking of the man bound to his bed for thirty-eight years. Liberation by the Spirit, as in chapter 4, would release him from that bondage.
J.T. There is not only the Spirit contemplated in chapters 6 and 7; there is the word, the word of Christ, and then His death, the death of One come down from heaven, giving His life for the world; chapter 7 brings out that the Lord was a stranger to his brethren and an alien to his mother's children. That is found in the psalm from which the passage is quoted in chapter 2, "The zeal of thine house hath eaten me up". We have to face the rejection of our nearest kin. Flesh profits nothing. His brethren did not believe on Him. It shows how utterly unreliable the flesh is; even in the nearest relative you cannot rely on it.
C.R.B. It says "every one went to his home. But Jesus went to the mount of Olives".
F.F. "The Son shall make you free". How do you connect that with the Spirit?
J.T. The Spirit is the underlying principle of all this, the application of the truth. The truth shall make you free. It is dependent upon the presence of the Spirit and so the thought of the Son in the house is dependent upon the Spirit.
J. S. His brethren were not prepared then to accept the
{500}
truth that they were in bondage. We have to be prepared to accept the truth that we are in bondage, in order that we can be set free.
J.T. The truth setting him free is negative. It disconnects you in your conscience from what is not according to the house.
J. S. Does it correspond with "Loose him and let him go"?
J.T. Somewhat, only the truth has to become operative in your own soul, and the truth enters into detail. The Son sets us free in a positive way in His house in His own sphere. What is going on today is, "Send out thy light and thy truth", @Psalm 43: 3. That may come in as the Son in the house. "Send out thy light and thy truth: let them lead me; let them bring me unto thy holy hill, and to they tabernacles". What is going on is t he far reaching effect of the light and the truth. Light and truth are abstract things; they are very potent in the way of delivering us from things that are dark and contrary to the house of God. The Son is not abstract; He is a Person. He is in the house. There are many who may get the benefit of the fight and the truth, and some do not move with the light and the truth. They may see it where they are. The idea is to guide the soul unto God's holy hill and God's tabernacle, and there you find the Son.
F.F. Does this answer to "Come and see"?
J.T. That is the principle throughout.
J.N. The Son sets you free from every contrary thing.
J.T. The truth does that. What the Son does is an abstract thing, setting you free in the house. The effect of the truth is to disengage you through your conscience from what is contrary to God. The truth is very far reaching, it extends universally and the light too.
J.F. Is that why Jacob had to bury the idols?
J.T. The truth was operating in Jacob throughout. It was the action of truth and light on his soul. His coming into the house is another matter. God found him in Bethel, and there he had to do with the Person (@Genesis 35).
C.C.E. It is connected with a free system of affection. The Son sets you free.
{501}
J.T. The truth is more negative. It reaches me wherever I am, but the Son brings me into the circle of affection.
W.W. Is the house at Bethany the positive side?
J.T. The thought one had was that it was filled. It was filled with the odour of the ointment, and there again we have to take account of the teaching of the intervening chapters. The man of chapter 9 is set free by the Son. The light and the truth had been operating on his soul, the fight had touched his eyes. The Lord had put mud on his eyes, and said "Go, wash in the pool of Siloam". Now is he going to move? That is the question, is he going to be governed by the word? As the chapter shows he does not know who the Person is, but he had a certain impulse in his soul to act on the word. We do not come into the good of the truth unless there is movement with it, and so chapter 9 gives us the effect of the light on a man's soul; until he is cast out, and when Jesus heard that they had cast him out, He found him, and He asks him "Dost thou believe on the Son of God?"
J.F. That is how he found the pool by the king's garden as in Nehemiah. I was thinking of the king's garden where the flowers, the lilies, were growing.
J.T. Open that up a little.
J.F. When he received sight he saw that which was for God.
J.T. The Lord finds him. The light and the truth had become effective. They lead to his complete disentanglement, in a very humiliating way, of course, because he did not leave them; they cast him out. That shows how the light and the truth of God acting on a man's soul will lead to his excommunication from the current religion of the world. They cast him out and then the Lord comes in. When the Lord heard that they had cast him out He finds him. I think the one great thought connected with the Son of God is that He deals with each of us personally, as in @Matthew 17, "me and thee", It is the Son of God dealing with an outcast.
F.E. Would you say every soul has to go through that experience? None of us are exempt.
{502}
J.T. We become the outcast if we are true to the light and the truth.
J.F. Is that because in these systems they have no place for such a man? Human religion does not provide for such a man as this, neither for the Lord nor for the man governed by the light that is seen in Him. The Son of God and an outcast. When the Lord heard he was an outcast He found him; He setteth the solitary in families. He is now to be set in the family, that is the only exchange that is to be made.
W.W. Chapter 10 would give you the family.
J.T. It leads on to it, to the one flock. The Spirit of God takes up a new figure showing that sheep are being led out, a new figure of shepherd and sheep, because saints are to be viewed in the light of sheep and He calls them by name. How precious to be called by name. He calleth His sheep by name. He puts them forth and goes before them and calls them by name, so that one goes in and goes out and finds pasture. He is now in liberty.
R.B. Is that the liberty of the house?
J.T. It is the suggestion of it. The going in involves that.
J.N. Does one get the victory over the world because he believes Jesus is Son of God?
J.T. Yes, he would be under pressure otherwise. It was a serious matter to be cast out. The Lord would not leave you under pressure. He finds you and sets you up in connection with a new system. In chapter 10 we have the good shepherd, the One who lays down his life for the sheep. He came that the sheep might have life and have it abundantly. It is to furnish the outcast and set him up in the new system.
-.H. Say a little about calling by name.
J.T. It is very precious to be called by name. John makes much of the idea of name because name expresses the variety of life that is in you. It says of those in the upper room that the number of names together was about an hundred and twenty, @Acts 1: 15. Everyone was called by the Lord by his name, which expressed in each the variety of life.
J. S. That is the name you have in the book of life.
{503}
J.N. He would make you conscious he has something to say to you.
C.C.E. It is His name for you.
J.T. It is precious that the Lord should speak to you by name. You are to show the variety of life your name expresses. It is the name He gives you. The gospel begins with that. He looked on Peter, you remember in chapter 1, and said, Thou shalt be called Cephas, not thou art, but shalt be called.
J.F. That would be a son's glory.
J.T. I think the name you get from the Lord indicates the place you get in His system of things.
-.H. Is it necessary to be called by name to be a follower?
J.T. It is an immense incentive to be called by name. You feel what a place you have in His heart and mind. J. S. In Luke the names are recorded in heaven.
J.T. You have a Levitical reference.
J.N. Would it suggest headship? Adam gave the creatures their names.
J.T. He is the last Adam. Adam had such intelligence that he could name a creature by what he saw in it, and the Lord names us according to what we are.
C.R.B. It shows He deals with us individually.
J.T. That is what comes out in the end of chapter 9; that the Son of God, the Creator of the universe, should be occupied with me, should find me and converse with me! The man was ready for it -- built up according to the truth received in the gospel. "Who is he, Lord, that I may believe on Him? Thou hast both seen him, and he that speaks with thee is *he*", and he worshipped Him. The truth links on with chapter 11, which is the family. Chapter 10 presents the sheep, in the 11th you have persons that the Lord Jesus loved, in family relationships.
C.C.E. You refer to the family of Lazarus and Martha and Mary.
J.N. Would Bethany be the house coming into view?
J.T. Now you see it in connection with the family. In chapter 8 you have the Son in it.
J.N. Outside the world's religious system.
{504}
W.W. Is it a family without a head?
J.T. Yes, it is now to have a head.
J.F. Does that not involve that the experience of death had to be gone through, but we find Him on the other side.
J.T. In chapter 8 the Son abides in the house for ever, but in the 11th the Son of God is to be glorified. The house is filled with His glory. He is to be glorified in my soul. In the end of chapter 9 we worship Him. There you have one that is to be in the house, but he is to be in the house in the light of the glory of the Son. "This sickness is not unto death". All that follows is to bring in the glory of the Son of God. Hence Mary and all at Bethany are in the light of the glory of the Son of God.
J.N. Is Mary the only one that saw it?
J.T. She represents the height of the subjective position that was there. Lazarus represents the dignity of the position. They would know Him as declared to be the Son of God with power, according to the Spirit of holiness by the resurrection of the dead. That is the demonstration that He is the Son. In chapter 9 He tells us He is the Son, in the 11th He is declared to be it by resurrection.
C.C.E. There is a declaring of His person.
J.F. We are therefore now in the light of the Lord as the One Who raises the dead, and that imparts immense stability to our souls in the house. You are in the glory system.
W.W. Say a word about Martha serving.
J.T. She is serving in the light of the glory. That is the place to serve.
-.H. Say a little of what goes before that. In order for Lazarus to be found in the house he had to be loosed from the grave-clothes, and the Lord told those about him to loose him.
J.T. That is a service that may be performed by us. The Lord did not take off the grave-clothes. There is much in that way we may do for one another. Lazarus is now in Bethany as a risen man. Jesus came to Bethany six days before the passover, where Lazarus was who had been dead, and whom He raised from the dead; He is now coming to
{505}
give occasion for the display of what is there. Where a subjective effect has been produced, His presence always brings out what there may be, much or little, amongst His people.
J.F. Would you say that they were like the train in @Isaiah 6, they filled the temple.
J.T. I think they were. It is a very serious matter that the Lord should come to a locality. He comes in relation to a person in it. What do you say about the Lord coming to the locality?
C.C.E. It was very gracious and very discriminating.
W.W. You say coming to a locality in relation to a person?
J.F. You would not come to a place if there were not people to come to.
W.W. What about the sisters?
J.T. They come into line. It does not say He came in relation to them, the point is to bring out the dignity of Lazarus.
W.W. Is it the responsible side you are thinking of?
J.T. What is the effect of chapter 11 in the locality? The Lord comes in relation to what He had done already. What is He going to find in the locality?
J.N. Would the ointment filling the house correspond to the glory of God?
J.T. I think the Lord intended to bring this out. He knew what was in Bethany. He came in relation to Lazarus, because it was in Lazarus that the Son of God is glorified. He came in relation to that in which He is known to be glorified. If He finds additional things, good and well. He did here; He found Martha serving. They made Him a supper. It does not say who they were.
J. S. He comes into a locality to His own work.
J.F. In His mind they dominated the village. It was "the village of Mary and Martha her sister".
A.A.E. In what way would the Lord do that now?
J.T. He comes to localities. This is a pattern of course. I think we have to distinguish between coming to localities and coming to persons. The locality is not in view in
{506}
chapter 11 but the persons. This chapter has reference to the locality. There is that which is known to be the fruit of His work, and then He looks for what may not as yet be known, in His own divine way. He knows what is there, and He brings out what is there.
W.W. When He came to the locality death had claimed the loved one.
J.T. It was very deliberate. It is one of the most remarkable passages in the Scripture, that the Son of God should remain away in order to let him die. He shows the deliberation with which things are done divinely. He remained two days in that place.
J.N. What does Mary's act set forth in connection with this?
J.T. She had intelligent affection. You will observe that in chapter 11. Martha was very restless. When she heard the Lord was coming she went out to meet Him and had a good deal to say that was quite out of keeping with things as they were. Whereas Mary sat still in the house. I think that is where, in quietude and restfulness as knowing the Lord, the ointment is developed.
J.S. The Lord does not stand in relation to the persons but in relation to His own work in that locality.
J.T. Whom He raised. It brings out what they could do that He could approve and accept.
J.S. Our exercise should be to see where the work of God is.
J.T. It is not so much what He did but what they did. There *they* made Him a supper. *They* being indefinite makes room for any number. An occasion like that would give room to anyone in Bethany who had interest to contribute. They would all be taken account of.
J.N. Mary's act would be part of that supper.
J.T. It is rather the sequel. I think it is very necessary to see the Spirit puts down that *they* made Him a supper, indicating that every saint in Cape Town can have a part in that. It may be very little you contribute but you can do something. "They" being indefinite leaves room for any number to have part in it. But only one had the ointment. The occasion includes everyone who has interest in Christ.
{507}
Everyone may have some part in this. But as things proceed and they are seated the greatest spiritual stature will soon disclose itself. It will soon be discovered who has the ointment. We are all put to the test by the visitation to the locality.
J.F. She has no reserve in the Lord's presence. She took the ointment.
J.T. She anoints His feet.
C.C.E. He was going to death.
J.T. He laid down His life of Himself. It was His own act. They did not kill Him in this gospel.
J.S. Do you think in that action, she is prepared to follow Him into death?
J.T. She is occupied with Him. Her affections are transferred from Lazarus to Christ. Lazarus is not the supreme object with Mary now. He has his place at the table. It is to be specially noted that the "they" opens the door for every person in the town or village to prepare.
C.C.E. What do they prepare?
Rem. They prepared a supper for Christ; it is a season of delight.
J.T. After toil we sit down in restfulness with the Lord, and we have something. The Old Testament types help us as to what to value spiritually. The ointment I suppose is the outcome of a great spiritual stature, like the bullock in the types. There are different sizes in the offerings. The question is whether you offer from the herd, the flocks or the fowls. Any one is accepted, whether he offers a turtledove, or a sheep or a bullock, but the man who offers the bullock has more for the occasion than anyone.
-.B. Is this a collective thing? Have you any particular time on your mind such as the Lord's supper?
J.T. No, it is not the Lord's supper. It is what you make. The Lord's supper is what He makes.
-.H. The anointing is individual.
J.T. It is suggestive of the stature. The greatest spiritually will soon come to light in the Lord's presence.
J.F. Is this the climax of the teaching on one line?
J.T. We have arrived at the truth of the house as it may
{508}
appear in any locality. Although the house is individually connected with the locality it is a universal thought, but it may be seen in this character in a locality.
C.R.B. To what occasion would this apply now?
J.T. Any occasion for which the saints may be free to retire to the Lord. There they made Him a supper. Whenever He comes you give Him a supper. He gives you an opportunity when you are ready for it. You cannot tell when He may come. He came to Bethany where Lazarus was, six days before the Passover. The thing is to be ready to bring out what there is.
J.F. Any meeting corresponds with this.
J.T. It is a question when the Lord gives you an opportunity such as an occasion like this. The Lord must give you an opportunity. They did not make a supper and invite Him. They could not determine the time. He came and they made Him a supper. He had been to Bethany many times before. When He first came to Bethany Martha opened her house, but she complained about Mary, but there is not a word about making Him a supper. It is the result of a spiritual visitation from the Lord. You may look for it but you can never tell when it will come.
O.W. Is it a sign of that?
J.T. It is the outcome of what you have. "Against the day of my burying hath she kept this". He came before His burial, six days before it. If she had not been ready beforehand she would have deferred it for another week. She was ready for Him.
J.N. He puts His own interpretation upon her act.
J.T. The thing is to be ready to come in for the things that are indicated in the earlier chapters and have the ointment.
J.N. In distinguishing Him He distinguishes her.
W.W. The material value of the ointment was estimated at three hundred pence; what about the spiritual value?
J.T. The Lord alone could tell that. It filled all the house. What one person can contribute to the house of God!
-.H. Would it be right to say the supper for Him was an appreciation of Him as the Son of God?
J.T. They were in the light of His glory.
{509}
THE HOUSE OF GOD (3)
@John 14: 15 - 23; @John 20: 19 - 26
J.T. We are considering the subject of the house of God as suggested in this gospel. Whilst in chapters 2 and 14 the Lord definitely refers to His Father's house, the former refers to what is now past, namely the material house at Jerusalem, and the latter is future. The passages before us have in view the house as it is known and entered into at the present time. John, in referring to what pertains to the present time, avoids naming things formally and officially.
He refers to them in such a way as to make it clear that they exist, so that his gospel applies peculiarly to our own day, a day of declension in which we are to avoid assuming things in any formal or official way; nevertheless we have to cleave to the things that are existent here through the presence of the Spirit, so that we have the reference in chapter 2 to the temple. The Lord says, "Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up", meaning, as the Spirit through the evangelist reminds us, the temple of His body. One feature of the house that is suggestive of the temple may be found in Corinthians as applicable to the Lord's people as having the Spirit, and then in chapter 8 of John's gospel He says, "The servant abideth not in the house for ever: but the Son abideth ever. If the Son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed". There again we have a reference to a very precious feature of the house, namely that the Son abides in it, not as over it as elsewhere, but in it. In chapter 12 reference is made to the house, that it is filled with the odour of the ointment, a very precious suggestion as to what may be realized even in our times as brethren are together in the recognition of Christ. What is spiritual comes to light and fills the house. The house is said to be filled in @Acts 2 by the sound from heaven, but in @John 12 it is what comes from the saints -- the house is filled with the odour of the ointment. That chapter is the end of the course of instruction which
{510}
culminates in the suggestion of the house as identified with those who filled it. That is to say the Lord says later in the chapter: "While ye have the fight, believe in the light, that ye may become sons of light", @John 12: 36. The beginning of that chapter seems to give us a group of the sons, who show by what they had that they are sons of light. They know what to do, corresponding somewhat with the stars, so that we have a beautiful constellation, as you may say, in that group at Bethany.
C.C.E. You refer to Mary, Martha and Lazarus.
J.T. All that is in connection with the work of God in each individual christian, so that we are found together in life, but the section before us this morning is leading up to the assembly viewed not as in a locality or in the presence of the world, but rather in a spiritual formation. It is not exactly viewed as a structure, for John does not so regard it in this gospel, but as composed of persons who are collectively the objects of the affections of the Lord, so that it says that Jesus "having loved his own who were in the world, loved them to the end" (@John 13: 1), and the passage read from chapter 14 can be connected with the house because you have the Spirit in a collective way. He is here personally, not as in the earlier part of the gospel as life in the believer, but as in the company, and consequent upon that the Lord comes to us and manifests Himself to us and the Father and the Son come and abide with us; I think we may dwell with profit on that. In chapter 20 you have the exclusive feature. I suggested that passage because of the reference to doors.
C.C.E. Do you think the coming to you is a collective thought?
J.T. I thought so. The passage I think hangs on verse 15, which in itself is based on their obedience. "If ye love me, keep my commandments". We are reminded that in order to realise the privileges of the house we have to keep His commandments, for the very presence of the Spirit is based in this passage not on His exaltation but on our keeping His commandments, and then on His mediatorial solicitation on our behalf. So that we get
{511}
things from heaven on the ground of obedience.
C.C.E. He comes to a suitable company.
J.T. There is a moral correspondence between those that keep His commandments, as loving Him, and the other Comforter. There must be a correspondence between the Lord and the other Comforter.
J.F. Do you think the saints provide the house or dwelling place here?
J.T. I think it is put on that basis. The emphasis is on loving the Lord and keeping His commandments. What have you in your mind?
J.F. I was wondering whether that would be the continuation of the tabernacle thought now that that has been laid aside.
J.T. The saints are the material so to speak for the house. I do not know of anything more important than that the emphasis is laid on obedience, as making the way for the incoming of the Comforter. Connecting the Spirit of God with what is not marked by obedience to the Lord is very objectionable.
R.B. Is it possible for a company not to keep His commandments?
J.T. Alas, it is general now!
J.N. They were not keeping His commandments at Corinth.
J.T. The test of their spirituality would be that they recognise the apostle's letter as the commandment of the Lord.
R.B. Are there any definite commandments?
J.T. I think it is best to read the letter to the Corinthians. "The things that I write to you, that it is the Lord's commandment", @1 Corinthians 14: 37. The word 'commandment' is in the singular. I would take the epistles to the Corinthians to be in a general way representative of the Lord's commandments as governing the assembly.
J.S. Would you say the commandments of @John 15 are the outcome of the Lord's work and the commandments in chapter 12?
J.T. They are very general. It is for you to know what
{512}
the Lord had in mind. They would know as having been with Him.
R.B. Does it involve spiritual sensibility?
J.T. It does. There are many details that many christians pass over but the Lord would have them all in view. One of the finest features of Deborah is seen in her remark: "Hath not Jehovah the God of Israel commanded?", @Judges 4: 6. That is what comes up under all circumstances, as to what the will of the Lord is. What is there that governs the position in the way of His commandments?
W.W. Mary said, "Whatsoever he saith unto you, do it", @John 2: 5.
J.N. Would it be the attitude on the part of those who rally round Him?
J.T. I think it is a state of subjection. Whatever the Lord commands you are ready for it.
J.N. Not legality, church laws, and such.
J.T. You have in the addresses to the assemblies: "These things saith he", @Revelation 2: 1. The letters are very brief, but the brevity is simply material for the Spirit. What appears to be so brief is capable of enormous expansion, so that at the end of each address you have "He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches". We are told what the Lord says and that would come in the form of authority to each assembly. What the Spirit says would be the amplification of that in detail and applied to the conscience of the saints in each assembly.
C.C.E. Otherwise we would need to read the Scriptures only. There would be no need of meetings like this.
J.T. We have meetings like this in order to let the Spirit open up whatever the Lord's commandment may be in regard to the position. You can understand how much amplification there was in the old economy. "The Lord spake unto Moses saying ..." That would be a definite concise word governing the position. It would represent the authority of the Lord, but then there would be the opening up of that by the priests. The priest's lips should keep knowledge. The people were to hear the law. So that we have in Ezra and Nehemiah not only the reading of the
{513}
law, but the giving of the sense of it, and that is the function of the Spirit. We are not told what He says, the point is to hear what He says. "He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches". The Holy Spirit opens it up to you. So that any who speak as the oracles of God should have a very deep sense of responsibility to the Lord that what is said is according to the mind of the Spirit. It is not a mere repetition of Scripture, although you do quote Scripture. The Holy Spirit works in your soul and gives you an impression of things.
A.A.E. Does "He that hath ..." imply moral condition?
J.T. It is the question of our state of soul. The addresses to the assemblies are highly, as you might say, parabolical. They are put in such a way that only one who has an ear to hear would understand them. It is always so where there is departure. The communication of the mind of God is to be in such a way as to shut out the natural mind.
-.H. Obedience would spring from love, not from legality.
J.T. Yes. "He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them". Let no one assume to love the Lord who avoids His commandments. I should think the great fundamental principle underlying the physical system is the will of God. "He commanded, and it stood fast", but then there is the unfolding of wisdom: "He spake, and it was done", @Psalm 33: 9. The speaking conveys His mind and the wisdom in which everything was made. The commandment holds everything fast. There can be no stability in anything apart from keeping the commandments. Everything is crumbling, the only thing that can keep stable is abiding by the commandments.
C.C.E. It is the same in the physical universe; if it were not so, everything would go to pieces.
J.T. Yes. You have here after the commandments the idea of the word. "If any one love me, he will keep my word". You have the opening up of the whole mind of God. Two things work out in connection with the tabernacle. There is the idea of divine authority in Moses, but
{514}
there is also the idea of divine wisdom, the disclosure of the divine mind. The workmen were endued with wisdom.
The tabernacle was the unfolding of the mind of God as regards the heavens and earth. We are told in Hebrews of the patterns of things in the heavens. God dwells in relation to what He speaks. There must be what corresponds with His mind in His abode, but the first thing is the commandment. That is the great test of love, and then when the question is asked, "How is it that thou wilt manifest thyself unto us, and not unto the world?" the Lord answers immediately, "If any one love me, he will keep my word".
A.A.E. Do you not think it needs a little emphasis? It is not the commandment as it will affect our individual conduct, but it will affect us before the whole company. Many christians think their personal conduct is everything and do not get a view of the commandments in connection with the company. Do you think this would include both?
J.T. Particularly the latter; it is how I am to be regulated in regard to the whole company of the people of God.
The present state of things in christendom is, of course, a travesty of it. There is no thought really of what is the Lord's commandment in regard to these things. We have the commandments, but having them is one thing and keeping them another. It is in the keeping of them that you have the love expressed.
J. S. The keeping of them would come out in connection with the service of the saints.
J.T. It is very remarkable in the book of Ezekiel what a great variety of instructions there is in regard to the house. We assume to have things now just about as they are, so as to divide them up into compartments, when the meeting should begin, and how it should begin, etc., and it is most encouraging to see the exercise there is as to the order in the assembly. But I have been thinking lately that a consideration of Ezekiel brings you to a standstill very quickly, because the things that are shown there are so varied and apparently conflicting that you would have to say that you do not understand them. I put it to any person here to read chapters 40 to 46 of Ezekiel and to say
{515}
if he understands; yet there it is, it is the house. I feel it is intended of the Lord to keep us humble in regard to the house of God. There are all kinds of measurements, and, as you look into it, you find that there is not a single measurement or idea that does not convey some spiritual thought, and as you take them in you are enriched as to the wonderful variety and extent of the house of God.
J.F. I was struck by the going in; they go in by way of the north and come out by way of the south.
J.T. You go straight before you.
J.F. The quarter you approach from is cold.
J.T. You may either go in from the cold quarter, the north, or from the south, but if you came in by the south you must go out by the north and that keeps you regulated.
J.S. The east is reserved for the prince.
J.T. That is to say there is room made there for the Lord. He has got His pre-eminence.
J.N. Please explain about the north and the south.
J.T. The north is you come in in connection with the discipline of God. "Whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth", @Hebrews 12: 6. You could not be in the house at all if you were not disciplined, but "no chastening for the present seemeth to be joyous". God would have us in His house according to Himself, hence the discipline. It is to the end that we shall be holy. Without holiness no one shall see the Lord. You enter in a very humbled chastened way, and you go out by the south in all divine favour. From the standpoint of a northern latitude the favourable quarter is the south.
J. S. Gold comes out of the north. We must be in the good of the gold to come out at the north.
J.T. It is the point that speaks of judgment whether corrective or disciplinary, but if we go in from that point of view we are chastened. If you go in from the south, as many of us do, it is in the sense of the love and the favour of God in Christ, which is delightful. That is all objective. It is the attitude of God in the dispensation. You go in in the divine favour, but in order to be rightly balanced you come out the other way.
{516}
O.W. What is the thought of going out?
J.T. That a meeting is over.
J.F. The creatures in the earlier chapters went straight before them.
J.T. That is the principle, and another great principle in the house is that indicated in the event of the appearing to Manoah and his wife in Judges. The Angel says, when Manoah asks him his name, "How is it that thou askest after my name, seeing it is wonderful?" He had said, "If thou wilt *offer* a burnt-offering, thou shalt offer it up to Jehovah". He is a type of the Lord in His relation in the assembly Godward, so Manoah presents his offering and the Angel did wondrously; it is the service of the Lord amongst us. The Angel did wondrously and then ascended in the flame of the altar up into heaven. That is, I think, a suggestion that you go out heavenward. I believe that our experience of the Lord in the assembly is to fit us for our translation to heaven, what we call the rapture. He goes out in all the fragrance of the offering up into heaven.
C.C.E. That is very interesting.
J.T. The Lord would impress upon us that we are in touch with a living order of things, not mere knowledge. It is a living order of things, into which He has a right to come according to His pleasure, and when He is among us it is for us to see that what He does He does wondrously, for His name is wonderful. We may look for the Lord to act wondrously before us, and what will be more wonderful than the translation of the saints in due time?
J.N. He would act according to His name.
J.F. It has been interesting to see the Lord as head. He is with us. He is on our part Godward. Is that right?
J.T. That is right, so that after the Lord's supper in Matthew and Mark, they sang a hymn, including the Lord, and having sung a hymn they went to the mount of Olives, a spiritual ascent. We have here the three ideas He gave to us. He comes; He manifests Himself; and then the Father and the Son come in relation to our keeping the Lord's words. These are three distinct thoughts.
R.B. "I am coming to you".
{517}
J.T. That will be in the way of comfort. I will not leave you orphans. You shall not be parentless, and then the manifestation, I apprehend, is some suggestion of Christ. There is an impression made. You get a new view of the Lord, and then thirdly there is the dwelling, the Father and the Son coming in and making Their abode. There I think you have the formal suggestion of the house; that is how an overcomer can enjoy the good of the house of God in a broken state of things.
C.C.E. Please compare and contrast the coming in to sup with him in Laodicea with the manifestation in @John 14.
J.T. It is a very intimate connection. I understand from that passage that Laodicea and Philadelphia are collateral. They exist side by side, and the testimony to individuals in Laodicea is therefore to Philadelphia. The Lord appeals immediately in the knocking. It is a testimony. He is standing at the door. "Behold, I stand at the door and am knocking". It is no special man's door. It is the one knock for all. "If any one hear my voice and open the door, I will come in unto him and sup with him, and he with me". That would be that He would give you a sense of His personal interest to such an extent that He would even come in to you, even in Laodicea, and sup with you, there. It would, of course, be according to what you could provide, because for instance if I was in the Romish or Anglican system I would have very little, but the Lord would join in whatever I have. Whatever I have of Him He will join in it. I do not apprehend that He would have anything to do with my church relations, or my religious relations or associations, He would simply have part with me in the little I have, and we know from the types that a handful of meal gives you a footing. He can even have part in that. Very small it may be but it would be enough for Him to have part with you. You can understand that there would not be much in anyone opening to Him in Laodicean circumstances. They were rich and increased with goods, but not what the Lord would have. But the Lord will join in the little that there may be to the end that the person should sup with Him. If He invites you to sup with Him
{518}
you will have plenty, but you will have to move.
C.C.E. It is the only thing which would keep them going. The coming and supping with them would alone keep them going.
J.T. One observes that the so-called denominations are becoming increasingly impoverished. Years back there was much more amongst them. There is a gradual draining of the real spiritual wealth that is there. The Lord's attitude is there to the end: "I stand at the door and am knocking". That is the attitude He maintains. If anyone opens to Him and He comes in, He will bring him out to Philadelphian circumstances. He will bring him to the light of the assembly and that is where He sups.
C.C.E. If you do not move there your slight reserves will drain away. The cupboard will become empty.
J.T. I have been thinking about Joab. He saw that David wished to bring Absalom back, and he sent the wise woman of Tekoah to David with the result that Absalom was brought back; but what was the result -- Absalom set fire to the barley field. In other words christendom has brought back the apostate. Men that are apostate are today accredited in the pulpits of christendom. They are infidel, and they attack the Lord's Person on every hand. He is attacked by men who profess to be His servants, and I believe it is the leaders, who are more or less right, that have compromised the situation and brought back Absalom; the result is that the barley field is being burnt up. Everything that is of Christ is being destroyed.
C.C.E. The real ones cry out 'we have no food'.
J.T. They cannot cope with the infidelity that is about. It is very striking that Absalom burnt the barley field of Joab. They are destroying the Person of the Lord in the systems, so that the whole thing is honeycombed with infidelity; the foundations are gone. Going on to chapter 20, the closing of the door is not in mind, that is not what is being done in christendom generally; the door is not being closed for fear of the Jews.
C.C.E. The whole draught of evil and infidelity blows in and there is no room for the Lord.
{519}
J.T. We must keep the doors closed in regard of the religious element. The doors were closed in the two instances in which the Lord came in in chapter 20. It does not say the "door" because it is a spiritual thought. It is not the public assembly exactly; it is the saints viewed spiritually. They have wonderful light. Mary had just come with the wonderful message. They had heavenly fight and they knew enough to treasure it; hence they closed the doors.
W.W. What do you mean by the Jew?
J.T. The religious element. Satan acts through the religious element.
W.W. In Colossians the door is closed on the learned man.
J. S. The religious element in ourselves must be excluded.
J.T. That is the first thing to see to.
A.A.E. Have you any thought as to why "for fear of the Jews" is not mentioned at the second meeting?
J.T. Dispensationally it is the Jew being brought in. He is there in Thomas, but it is the Jew that is capable of believing. Thomas is dispensationally the coming in of the Jews in the latter day. The Jew is not to be shut out for ever. If he is there he is capable of believing. Thomas is not believing but is capable of believing. One must not shut out a man capable of believing, we must be sure there is an opportunity of them believing.
J.F. Is this the way the secret would be kept, by the doors being shut?
J.T. That is how the Philistines are kept from knowing the riddle. The disciples had wonderful treasures; they were in possession of the light of the message through Mary Magdalene.
J.F. The young lion had been destroyed. Christ was risen. The young lion that came out to contest the pathway of love would be overcome.
J.T. It is wonderful to see how the saints are, as it were, in the carcase of the lion, spiritually. Samson returned and found the swarm of bees, life in death. That is how the thing really stands. Samson returned and found the swarm
{520}
of bees and honey, referring to the energy of life in the saints in a material way. Bees, I suppose, suggest the energy of life.
J.S. If you disclose the secret you lose the power.
J.T. Out of the eater came forth meat, and out of the strong sweetness.
J.N. What was the special secret Mary brought?
J.T. The heavenly relation in which we stand as the brethren of the Lord.
J.S. The secret would be what they would find when the doors were shut.
J.T. I think the word "doors" should be noticed because there may be any number, referring to the state of our souls or hearts, but when it is the question of public assembly, the Lord's supper, it is "follow him into the house where he entereth in", that is one entrance, but when it is the saints separately, everyone has to see to his own heart. I cannot expect brethren to look after my heart. I have to look after it myself. "Keep thy heart with all diligence; for out of it are the issues of life", @Proverbs 4: 23. Purity depends on each keeping his own heart. When it is a question of the true assembly there are doorkeepers. There are those who look after persons when they come in, and no one is allowed to come in unless he is real. Peter in chapters 5 and 8 of Acts, was very careful as to whom he should admit into the company, but he could not look after all the hearts in that company. If you, dear brethren, have the precious light you have to see to your own heart that the doors are shut.
C.R.B. Is that why the address is to the assembly and the appeal to the individual?
J.T. The fact that I am in the public assembly is not in itself a guarantee I am right because at any time I may let in things by linking myself with associations of the world.
J.N. "Of your own selves shall men arise", @Acts 20: 30.
J.T. Keep your heart with all diligence. It is in our hearts that the Holy Spirit is operating and there the issues of life are.
{521}
THE HOUSE OF GOD (4)
@Luke 14: 1 - 24; @Luke 15: 22 - 32
J.T. It seems to me to be in moral order to reach divine things now through John's gospel because John's way of presenting the truth precludes the natural mind. His principle is that the flesh profiteth nothing. It is utterly untrustworthy and so in the wisdom of the Spirit of God, the truth is couched in such form in John's gospel as to shut out the natural mind. The things are all there, only they have to be understood spiritually, and by the Spirit, so that when we arrive at the things themselves we may take them up intelligently as they were at the beginning. Luke contemplates the house not as it is known today, but as it was in the beginning, as that which replaces the Jewish system, so that the Lord says in the end of chapter 13, "your house is left unto you desolate", and then m the beginning of chapter 14 we find Him going into the house. "As he went into the house of one of the rulers", is, I think, an allusion to another house into which He was going, and the instruction that follows, I think is to enable us to see how we are to be in that which is public, for that is what is in view in these chapters, what is public on the part of God. We are to be there on the principle of invitation, and in responding to the invitation we take the lowest place. What appears at the outset as He enters the house is a dropsical man; such a man as that is not the man for the house. A dropsical man, I suppose, would be someone in whom water has had an abnormal effect.
C.C.E. He would be very swollen up and feeble. His size does not correspond to his strength.
J.F. The trouble is he cannot get rid of the water.
C.C.E. What have you spiritually before you?
J.T. Nothing is more useful to God than water, and it is used as a simile of what is spiritual, what refreshes and cleanses, so that if it has an abnormal effect it would have reference to ministry received in the soul but not working
{522}
normally. We have to understand how to assimilate and use the things we have here. There is a great deal seen of what we would call the abnormal effect of ministry; it is worse than useless in the house of God, and this is what the Lord is confronted with here. He entered into the house to eat bread on the sabbath and, behold, there was a certain dropsical man before Him. Such a man needs the Lord's special touch. It is not enough to enjoy the ministry that God graciously gives unless it has a normal effect in the soul. It only creates an obstruction in the house of God.
J.S. This man was an obstruction rather than a help.
J.T. He was before the Lord. Thank God the Lord was able to help him and disposed to help him, and did help him. The point to see is that he was not normal.
J.N. What was spiritually wrong with him?
J.T. I think that typically the ministry was not rightly assimilated.
J.F. Would he answer what the apostle speaks of as having received the grace of God in vain?
J.T. Quite, the Bereans we are told searched the Scriptures daily whether these things that were ministered were so.
J.S. Luke would give us the house of God, the continuous thought.
J.T. Their house was left unto them desolate, so He enters into another house, and this chapter gives us the principles whereby the other house which we have to do with today is to be ordered and preserved.
J.S. The ministry must be rightly received and rightly assimilated in order to produce the right effect.
J.T. Quite so.
J.F. Is the idea that anyone coming into the house in this aspect should act in the light of what God is doing?
J.T. What is in your mind about what God is doing?
J.F. He was going out to all these public states of soul, and would have the head of the house to act in line with God and do the same, and invite them.
J.T. God's house is that which is set up here for the administration of His bounty, of the bounty of heaven, as is said in 1 Timothy. The dispensation of God, being that
{523}
which is in His house, as the word indicates, is in faith. God is dispensing all the wealth of heaven, His bounty; that is what Luke has in his mind. Dispensation is through the house. The word dispensation has the force of things being administered in the house, housewise. Hence Luke represents the house as bearing manward. It was. The music can be heard outside and the invitation comes out officially, "that my house may be filled". However, as we have pointed out, an inflated man may interfere with the working of the house. Thus a man in an abnormal state would not be likely to begin with the lowest room, in fact he would require much more room than he was entitled to. One great principle in the house is to keep small.
J. S. Would the ministry in Luke be on the line of reduction?
J.T. Yes.
J.F. You begin by being small enough to go through the eye of a needle.
J. S. How does the Lord begin to make this effective?
J.T. It says, "taking him he healed him and let him go". It does not say, as earlier, that He delivered him to someone else. The young man in chapter 7 is delivered to his mother, meaning that he was in need of care. This man does not suggest that. One who is enlightened needs to be healed and let go. He is able to look after himself. I judge he would represent a man who was at one time right. It is recovery rather.
J.S. So that he might eventually find himself in chapter 15 in the best robe.
J.T. If the Lord lets a man go He can trust him. If He cannot trust him He will deliver him to someone else.
C.C.E. Yes, I was just wondering how far it went. Do you refer to the recovery of the believer?
J.T. I think one who can be let go will find his own company. Luke tells us that later.
C.C.E. Therefore he finds the company of the house.
J.T. He will find his place. If the Lord lets him go He can trust him.
F.F. What about him being healed on the sabbath?
{524}
J.T. The Lord did this to show that the old dispensation had gone. The house is left desolate.
J.N. Is it the new wine coming out?
J.T. Yes. How many of the Lord's people can be let go? You have to keep your eye on most of them.
R.B. Timothy was set at liberty. Lazarus was let go.
J.T. Yes, and afterwards he was sitting at table with the Lord. The experiences are, like every part of Scripture, instructive, and as we approach the house the Spirit of God suggests a certain state of soul in those that are to form it. There may be certain operations needed but there is a state developed so that He took this man and healed him and let him go.
J.N. He passed through the Lord's hands. That is very necessary today as everything around tends to inflate.
J.T. If a man passes through the Lord's hand He either lets him go, or he is handed to someone else, as he must be looked after.
A.A.E. Into whose hands is he put?
J.T. The Lord's people. Later in this gospel the disciples took off their garments and put them on the colt. They did that of their own volition. They saw some defect and they would make it up.
J.N. Lazarus had to be attended to before he could be let go.
J.F. Is it not in this gospel where one is delivered to the officer until he has paid the last penny?
J.T. Just so.
S.LeR. Describe a man who is set at liberty. What is the condition of such a brother?
J.T. He is what you might call perfect. He has all his senses in exercise. A babe is not developed and has to be fed with milk and watched carefully, but a full grown man can order his own dish. He knows what he can assimilate and having his senses exercised he discerns between good and evil. He refuses the evil and chooses the good; that is what a man does who can be let go. But there are some who cannot choose and refuse and you have to do that for them. You have to care for the young in the faith.
{525}
J.N. Could anyone else but the Lord deal with inflation, with a dropsical man?
J.T. It is too great a matter to be dealt with by the saints.
W.W. Do you look at this man as a typical man?
J.T. There are many like him. The thing is to commit him to the Lord.
J.N. What causes the inflation?
J.T. Taking in things and not fully assimilating them. One who makes reserves. You say I enjoyed that, but I am not going to let it affect me in every respect. You have limits and an abnormal condition is set up. I suppose it was physical in his case.
J.N. Does everything around today tend to bring about inflation?
J.T. Quite.
W.W. This man would stand for the old dispensation which was unable to deal with man after the flesh. The Lord introduces something which will heal the man.
J.T. Great features in the preaching are first the preaching of Christ as the Administrator; the second preaching is the Christ, and the third the Son of God. @Acts 2 is Christ in heaven administering the Spirit; Philip's preaching is the Christ, and there you have works of power immediately in connection with it, meaning that the Christ can do everything, He does everything for God, and everything for man. That is seen in connection with the house. Christ can do everything and you bring all things to Him. Whatever is too hard for you, bring it to me, says Moses. The Lord is able to do everything. It is a great point to get that in the soul in regard to the house. Many things will come up which are beyond us; bring them to the Lord.
R.B. Is that not headship?
J.T. Rather He is the vessel through whom God accomplishes things; the Lord Himself does it. The woman of Samaria rightly observed that when the Christ came He should tell them everything, so that we can look to the Lord in regard to matters that are beyond us. Instead of having any desire to get rid of any brother you bring him
{526}
to the Lord, because it would be a great hindrance that the saints should have to carry a man like this, but this passage shows that the Lord can deal with such a situation.
J.F. Is that why the apostle exhorts those two sisters in Philippians to have the same mind in the Lord? He would refer them to the Lord in connection with everything. He is able to put everything right.
J.T. Having the same mind in the Lord means that that is the only basis on which they are to be of one mind. We might be of one mind on some other ground but we are to be of one mind in subjection to the Lord. The term Lord indicates administration, but the Christ is the One who accomplishes things, does everything. Not only does He administer the bounty of heaven, but he meets every contingency, He deals with everything, and so this sign is intended to be a sort of key to the chapter that there is not to be any irregular formation from the ministry of the word. There should be a normal effect of the word. It works out in us in every connection; it is regular.
C.R.B. We must act up to the light that God gives.
J.T. There are many people in christendom receiving ministry but it is not developed in them. It has not its normal result.
A.A.E. We must not pick and choose. We must take the whole thing in its entirety, and let it operate in us.
J.T. The engrafted word is able to save your soul. Again, good ground is he who takes heed to the word and understands it and brings forth fruit, thirty, sixty and a hundredfold.
W.P. We ourselves cannot get rid of that which has inflated us, so we have to place ourselves in the Lord's hand that He might free us from it and heal us.
J.T. He alone can do it.
J. S. The house is to be filled with those who are prepared for adjustment: "Go out into the highways".
J.T. The Lord indicates in the next parable the principles that are to govern us as we approach the house. He marked how they chose out the first place and said to them, "When thou art bidden of any man to a wedding, sit not
{527}
down in the highest room ... but ... go and sit down in the lowest room". By placing yourself in that position you are respecting the Lord because He is over the house, as we learn in Hebrews. He has built it and is over it and in placing yourself thus in humility in the house as invited it is for Him to determine where you are to be. He has bidden others and we must allow Him His rights in the house.
W.W. When the dropsical man had submitted to the reduction would he not naturally take his right place?
J.T. Yes, he is ready for it now.
J.N. The Lord would imply they were all inflated.
J.T. They had the truth but it had not formed them.
J.N. Taking the higher place would be the result of inflation.
J.F. Do you think a man thus would take character from the Lord Himself, the One who went down.
J.T. I am sure that is right. He came in in the most lowly manner. It becomes very interesting as you take a place humbly in relation to the house to see how the Lord acts sovereignly, how He promotes. You learn how to make room for the brethren, it saves us from being envious because it is a question of the Lord's rights. He may say, 'go up higher'. You are not to look upon him with envious eyes as he goes up higher.
C.C.E. If he does not say go up higher, you are quite content to stay where you are.
W.W. The etiquette of the house is to assume another better than yourself.
W.P. You would not seat yourself; you would wait to be seated.
J.T. It is most interesting to see now what He would do. He will promote according to your stature. You see in the Acts how Peter and John stand out at the outset. They went up to the temple together at the hour of prayer. They were, as it were, the best that were there, because there are degrees of comparison in the things of God, and there was nothing abnormal in their movements, they were normal. They were the best product. They were there as a testimony. In the end of Luke the disciples all go to the temple. They
{528}
were in the temple continually praising and blessing God. They were a wonderful product of Christ's ministry and were in grace in testimony to the Jews as to what the Lord had effected. In the Acts you find in chapter 2 Peter stands up with the eleven and speaks, and in chapter 3 Peter and John are together at the temple at the hour of prayer. They were the best of the products. They were not there arbitrarily; they were those that were suited by their formation and they could say to the lame man, "Look on us". That was not self-occupation. They did not intend by that that they were to be the objects for the lame man. They were not to be worshipped, but they were heaven's product. The Spirit of God could ratify that, so that the Lord had promoted them then in order that there should be a balance maintained in the house, as they were used and were sustained in their service. In chapter 4, being let go they went to their own company. As returning to their own company they would again come under the ordering of the Lord, because it is a continuous process. The house is His here and it is for Him to regulate our position; so you find all the apostles are emphasised after their return to their own company. It is not the thought of the Lord that, while some are of greater stature, they should unduly dominate the position; so that the signs were done before by the apostles, and when Barnabas comes he does not come to Peter and John especially, but lays his money at the apostles¬ feet. Then you find later that Stephen is promoted. All this is in keeping with what is public. The Lord has a right to put forward the best that there is. It is in keeping with the order of the house, so that Stephen develops from the office of a deacon into the dignity of a martyr, a most honourable position because he is the first martyr. He was the best and the Lord put him forward. He is the first one to reflect heaven because his face and countenance shone like that of an angel. He came in in a very lowly way.
J. S. Paul was lowly.
J.T. You see Peter and John are not mentioned at all now. At the outset they were the best, now we have others, so that there is continual variation in the house. There is
{529}
nothing in that way fixed, it is a question of growth and development. The Lord knows what is going on and puts forward the best. Barnabas comes into view. First Stephen and Philip and then Barnabas, and then finally there is a whole year in Antioch with Barnabas and Saul, and again you have an adjustment. There were a lot of teachers there at Antioch, but the Spirit says, "Separate me now Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them", @Acts 13: 2. He knew what was there.
J.F. Would that be in keeping with what we have here in respect of these people? They chose out the place, but it was for the Lord to choose.
J.T. It was for Him to do.
C.C.E. It is very blessed, the Lord has reserved that prerogative to Himself. He alone can do it rightly.
J.T. The clerical system around us disregards all this, because it is all by appointment. There man is on another principle altogether. It is not the lowliest man that becomes pope, or archbishop.
You see how the Lord would bring us back to first principles. As we arrive at the house spiritually He would lead us to see what it was publicly at the outset, and it is right He should put forward the best because it is a question of public testimony. Why should He not have the right to put forward the best? He puts forward the best because it is a question of helping man.
O.W. The man that is healed in @Acts 3 is brought into fellowship.
J.T. He not only stands with Peter and John, but enters the temple leaping and walking and praising God.
A.A.E. Would you distinguish between the position the Lord gives the person in the house publicly and the position a believer has in the body of Christ which is more private and inward.
J.T. What we have been dealing with this morning is what we are inwardly when the doors are shut.
R.B. Are the doors open at all?
J.T. Yes, this is public. The Lord is over it and it is for Him to say who is to be prominent.
{530}
W.P. The sitting down is not growth, but a waiting attitude until the Lord moves us.
J.T. You are at His disposal. As Barnabas came up with his money he laid it at the apostles¬ feet, which meant 'I am at the disposal of the Lord', I and my money, and he was named by the apostles Barnabas, meaning Son of Consolation.
J.N. Had the inflated spirit taken possession of Ananias and Sapphira?
J.T. Quite.
J.N. They wanted a name.
J.F. What we had this morning was the Son shining on things; this is the public side.
J.T. They run together, one is inward, the other is public. You can see the moral rectitude of allowing the Lord the right to put forward whom He pleases, because He would put forward the best He has got. That is the principle of God.
J.N. This would be headship.
J.T. It is the Lord in the position of governing the house; headship enters into it.
J. S. David places his mighty men according to his estimate of their worth.
W.S. How should we recognise the one that God puts forward?
J.T. I am sure you will see it; the saints usually discern. The people of God are usually with God if they are in a normal position.
W.S. It would be dangerous otherwise.
J.T. As Paul and Barnabas started out, Barnabas is first. "Barnabas and Saul". It would be noticed in @Acts 13 in the list of teachers that Saul is mentioned last, and the Spirit says, "Separate me now Barnabas and Saul", but before very long it is Paul and Barnabas.
J.N. In the Corinthians some were saying "I am of Paul, and I of Apollos". They were inflated and Paul sets himself aside to bring them to their right proportion.
C.C.E. A good deal of trouble is caused in the assembly by not recognising that changes take place in the relative
{531}
value of brethren. Because a brother has been prominent at one time it does not say he is going to excel others at all times. The other man may outstrip him and it is surely the safest to take the place the Lord gives him.
J.N. Paul had to withstand Peter.
C.C.E. Barnabas was only too glad to let Paul get in front of him, to own his superiority.
W.P. There seems to be a putting to a lower place as well as a higher place. Barnabas took the lower place.
J.T. Ananias is an example of how one could come in in an abnormal condition: he would be in the house abnormally. Then again Simon Magus in chapter 8 was one who had gone in. He wanted the distinction that the possession of the Holy Spirit would give a man, and he says, 'I am willing to buy that', but to have such a thought as that showed that he was in the bond of unrighteousness. Probably Philip did not discern the man was wrong, but Peter discerns it.
J.F. I suppose Silas proved his spiritual instinct by preferring Antioch to Jerusalem. It was whence the testimony would go forward.
J.T. That is very interesting. He was not governed by metropolitan feelings; he discerned what God was doing. How it honours the Lord to submit and let Him determine who is to be put forward; He knows best, and it is due to Him that the very best should be prominent.
O.W. Was not Moses rather slow to accept his promotion?
J.T. Do you mean at the beginning? It is very beautiful to see the spirit of Moses when two of the seventy that were appointed prophesied in the camp; a young man ran to Moses and told him, which young men are apt to do, and another young man, Joshua, said, "My lord Moses, forbid them". He was a partisan. That is another thing we have to contend with. It was the Lord's will that the seventy men should share with Moses in the ministry, and Moses says, "Enviest thou for my sake? would God that all the Lord's people were prophets"; because the more prophets the more light, the more there would be of God. Another gift does not take yours away, it enhances it.
{532}
J.W. The householder comes to the guest, and invites him to go up higher. Would that be on the line of a gift making room for itself?
J.T. No doubt, but I think that the Lord's gift does make room for him. What is in view here is the Lord's right in putting forward.
J.W. That is sovereign right. But he that bade thee and him may say, Give this man place.
J.T. Both have been invited. That is sovereignty, but after this invitation there is discrimination. If the Lord puts you higher than me, it is because in His perfect wisdom He knows you are fit for that. There is another thing that He immediately notices and that is that we must not use personal preferences in the house of God. He says, "When thou makest ... a supper, call not ... rich neighbours ... call the poor ... and thou shalt be blessed; for they cannot recompense thee: for thou shalt be recompensed at the resurrection of the just". This is another important point, that we should not use personal preferences.
W.S. We should not be partial.
J.T. Quite. A great deal of damage is done by personal friendships in the house.
J.F. The resurrection of the just has reference to the world to come, when the effects of the house will be seen universally. That should be before us in all that we do.
J.T. Leave your recompense to the Lord. So the Lord speaking of all these things would convey to one that is present the thought that it would be a very blessed thing to eat in the kingdom of God. For God has said virtually thus is how things are to be there. "Blessed is he that shall eat bread in the kingdom of God". There was one person who understood what the Lord was doing.
J.F. Had he not the savour of it?
J.T. Yes. He saw that the Lord was here forming it. In Luke, it is the kingdom of God, and these principles that He was setting out involved that it would be very blessed to eat bread in God's kingdom.
J.F. Did not the Lord answer that by saying, 'It is so great that there is room for you in it'?
{533}
J.T. He opens out what the kingdom is by the parable of the great supper. The previous instructions would mean that any of us who entertain should convey the sense that it is the kingdom of God -- it is not a social matter -- that my table corresponds to the kingdom of God.
It is blessed to eat in the kingdom of God. There are not personal preferences in the kingdom of God. God acts without respect of persons and the believer's board should be like that. When you sit down at it you should feel you are eating in the kingdom of God. God's principles rule here.
J.F. So that the host would suggest God to the guest?
F.F. When thou makest a feast, would that be a special occasion?
J.T. The Lord shows how you are to act and in that way you act like God.
W.P. We acknowledge God's authority over us.
J.T. If you act like God. As David says, "that I may show the kindness of God unto him". The passage means that God's kingdom is known in His house. The supper is in the house. It is really the celebration of righteousness. Righteousness has been accomplished through the death of Christ and the Holy Spirit coming in shows that God is celebrating and He invites universally. It is a wonderful conception.
J.F. It is a wonderful conception, and do you not think the guests would act like Christ by going down?
J.T. The man that heard the Lord and understood Him and said, "Blessed is he that shall eat bread in the kingdom of God" gave the Lord the opportunity of opening up the supper in God's kingdom, so that now we have the house in its world-wide aspect. The invitation began with the Jews and they refused, and it goes out wider so "that my house may be filled".
J. S. According to Luke the house would be subservient to the kingdom.
J.T. I think that is the way it stands. The kingdom is a wider idea, but it is there too. When we come to chapter 15 we have the kind of people that are in it, and the joy that is in it.
{534}
J.S. The Lord unfolds the idea of one coming to the supper in chapter 15.
J.T. It is from the standpoint of the kind of people that are there permanently, and of the elder brother's fault finding with God's celebration. It is a public institution, because he comes up and hears the music and the dancing. It is within his range, a public matter, grace brought it there. The father came out and entreated him to come in.
J.F. There is a worse state here than dropsy.
J.T. The Jew is not curable from this standpoint at all. He is outside, he is in the field. That is a serious place to be in; if we bring in the types he is exposed, because a murder happened there. It is the Jew in the position in which he is exposed to the judgment of the man-slayer, at the hand of the avenger of blood.
J.N. The spirit of inflation led him there.
J.T. In the next chapter he is in the lake of fire, he is in torment.
C.C.E. The music and the dancing should be heard today.
J.T. That is the thing, so that our meetings are public in that respect, we are not private. Things are going on and anyone can discern if there is music and dancing, so that it is for him to say whether he is going in or not. The elder brother would not go in. His will was active in it.
Rem. The wealth and blessedness of heaven are brought within the range of man.
J.N. Here and now, in the house?
J.T. Quite.
