{1}
THE PLACE OF ISRAEL IN THE THOUGHTS OF GOD
@Romans 9: 1 - 5
J.T. It might be very profitable for us to consider the place of Israel in the thoughts of God. The first few verses of @Romans 9 seem to me to indicate the place of Israel in the thoughts of God.
J.P. I suppose the tendency with us has been to be so engaged with our own blessing that we have overlooked a great deal that belongs to the truth of God.
J.T. I have been thinking too that perhaps most of the things that we speak of as blessings which we have come into in christianity, we find in Scripture to be primarily connected with Israel.
Ques. For instance, sonship?
J.T. Yes, that is the first thing mentioned: the adoption belongs to them.
J.P. And the adoption is sonship. I believe what is so important and so helpful to us is to apprehend the greatness of God's purposes, not simply to take in our part, but to apprehend God's purposes in their entirety. I think that everything then falls into its own place.
Rem. Whether as regards Israel or the church.
J.T. Yes, and it is not only that these things are presented as a subject for faith (that is, as something to come in in the future) in the Scriptures, but I think that every element is available at the present time.
W.C.R. What do you mean by that?
J.T. Well, take the first one here, the adoption; it is not simply represented as a matter of faith, but it is available, as is clearly shown in chapter 8. It is not simply that you are in the light of sonship, but that you have the spirit of sonship: "As many as are led by the Spirit of God, *these* are sons of God".
{2}
J.P. What about the glory?
J.T. I suppose that also is connected with the Holy Spirit. He is the "Spirit of glory", @1 Peter 4: 14.
Ques. You mean that those things are available *now*?
J.T. Certainly; I think that this is exceedingly practical, because it shows that the thoughts of God have taken form, every one of them. Of course, where it says, "according to flesh", you cannot apply that to the church; he is speaking here of the things that particularly distinguish Israel. What may be called blessings apply to the church now.
Ques. Will Israel pass through death in the same manner in which the believer now does in order to enter into these blessings?
J.T. Israel is viewed as dead, and they come into resurrection. The figure in Ezekiel is very clear "These bones are the whole house of Israel", @Ezekiel 37: 11. That is what was said to the prophet, and verily they assume form and come to life.
G.R. It is national resurrection; they are not in view today.
J.T. They are only in view in the assembly now. In the assembly proper there is neither Jew nor gentile, but the remnant of Israel is maintained there. That is the point the apostle makes in chapter 11: he adduces himself as a proof of it. Indeed the apostle goes so far as to say elsewhere that not only the remnant shall be saved, but that the whole twelve tribes were "instantly serving God day and night" and that they hoped to come to the resurrection (@Acts 26: 7).
Ques. I do not quite understand how they are preserved in the assembly. You mean that there are Israelites coming into the light of God's favour now?
J.T. I think so; a remnant of Israel is merged into the assembly; they are so taken account of.
Rem. God added to the assembly such as should be saved.
{3}
J.T. Yes, the spared remnant of Israel.
Rem. Then their place is far better than Israel nationally.
J.T. They come into heavenly glory in result. In spite of the national breakdown God preserves the true Israel in the church. Nothing that God introduces here can lapse.
J.D-t. It is always deeply interesting to me to see the work of God among the Israelites; the faithfulness of God is really what carries them through in the church.
J.T. That is the idea; the church is where things are preserved. Take the law; it is maintained, only that it reappears in a better form. The righteous requirement of the law is fulfilled in those who walk not according to the flesh but according to Spirit (@Romans 8 : 4).
J.P. I was just thinking how the Lord is causing the truth of the assembly to grow in our souls; it is really marvellous. You know all we think of is that we have got a little blessing for ourselves, but if it were not for the assembly, where would the character of God be maintained? Really everything is maintained in the assembly.
J.T. Everything. There is a very interesting point in @Isaiah 8, where, in view of Jehovah hiding His face from the house of Jacob, it says, "Bind up the testimony, seal the law among my disciples" (verse 16).
J.P. And does not the Spirit of God take up that scripture in @Hebrews 2?
J.T. He does: "I and the children which God has given me". They are to be for signs and wonders to Israel. And then in the same chapter (@Isaiah 8) the law and the testimony are the test of everything, and they are the test of everything today. For faith everything is intact.
A.R.S. Suppose some person came to you and said, 'But the church has failed'. What would you say to him? What about the shipwreck in @Acts 27?
{4}
J.T. Well, the shipwreck did not take place until they got close enough to land to get ashore. Every single passenger on board that ship upon which Paul sailed got to land safely.
J.P. There are things connected with the church on the divine side according to the purposes of God which never fail.
J.T. In view of the breakdown of the assembly the guarantee for everything is in Christ, the faithful and true witness. Directly the breakdown of the assembly comes into evidence then Christ becomes prominent as the faithful and true witness.
Rem. I was thinking with regard to the shipwreck that God said to Paul, "God hath given thee all them that sail with thee". Their salvation was bound up with Paul.
J.T. Quite so. While the ship was at sea the only salvation for the passengers was to abide in the ship; but directly it got close to land, their salvation depended on leaving the ship and going on to land. I think Christ becomes the land.
J.B-t. I think that is a very important point for souls, because they have to learn to rest in Christ; everything is maintained in Christ.
J.T. Things are maintained *down here* at the present time for the reason that the Holy Spirit is here; they are not maintained in what is ecclesiastical. The ship refers to what is ecclesiastical.
Rem. I have heard it said that too much is made of the assembly, and the assembly has been put in the place of Christ.
J.T. I do not think you can make too much of the assembly, because God has placed His testimony in the assembly, and so far as I see it will be there eternally; I do not think there will be any change. What God has placed in the assembly here will come out in it in the future. It is not the saints as dissociated from the Lord. If it is a question of
{5}
ecclesiasticism, you may make too much of it, as in Rome. The idea is that the assembly is Christ morally. In @1 Corinthians 12 the term, "the Christ", includes the assembly; it is His body.
J.B-t. I look upon it as the Person of Christ first, the assembly second.
J.T. But that is not it. It is all right in a way, but at the present moment Christ is expressed in the church; you cannot separate them. The Lord is not acting on different principles now than He did in the beginning.
O.R. God will never give up His thoughts.
J.T. You cannot dissociate Christ from His body.
Ques. If everything is maintained in the church, how does that connect with chapters 2 and 3 of Revelation?
J.T. There it is the public, historical thing that is in view, that which was established to bear the light of Christ to the world during His absence. Then you must remember that Philadelphia comes into view, and I have no doubt that Philadelphia represents the church according to what it is to Christ. You get the overcomer, of course, in all the phases of the church, but what He says to the overcomer in Philadelphia is very different from what He says to the other overcomers. He speaks of the New Jerusalem coming down from God out of heaven, and so on. The thing to see is that although the ecclesiastical and official thing has broken down, yet the Holy Spirit is here, and the saints are here, and if the Lord is acting down here at all He is acting in connection with these, and that is what the gates of Hades will not prevail against.
J.P. That about the overcomer is very beautiful.
There were the three 'mys' on their side, and He answered with all the 'mys' on His side.
J.T. And then as you proceed with the message to Laodicea, the Lord is standing outside; but where is
{6}
He outside? What I understand is that He is outside the ecclesiastical system, and He is found among His people, those who are morally outside. I think Thyatira is the ecclesiastical system. The Lord recognised the assembly ecclesiastically until Thyatira; in that church a remnant is recognised, and that involves separation morally.
G.R. But I have heard it said that the church never was ecclesiastical; it was always in the power of the Spirit.
J.T. That is true, but there was that which was public and official, and with which the Lord had been identified, which had the place of the candlestick.
That is what I mean by ecclesiastical, the proper church position publicly. I think the Lord suffered the church up to Thyatira.
G.R. One would see it in the early chapters of the Acts outwardly.
J.T. That is the idea. But to return to Israel; God had reserved a remnant, and the apostle Paul was the testimony to it. He says, "I also am an Israelite ...", @Romans 11: 1.
Rem. We get that in @Ephesians 1, too: "We ... who first trusted in Christ".
Ques. As a principle, do not the remnant always come in for the best?
J.T. They do. They always come in for what is better than that to which they were previously attached.
The remnant of Israel came into the church. But then in these chapters it is not the church in its heavenly character as connected with the divine counsels, but as the gentiles occupying properly the place of Israel down here. Israel is set aside, and it contemplates the setting aside of the gentiles also.
G.R. But they are grafted in. I think this chapter is very wonderful; it is most important to see the consistency of God with Himself.
{7}
J.T. So you get the doxology in the end of chapter 11: "O depth of riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! ...".
F.L. It looks as though the apostle, when he got to the end of the theme, was overpowered with the grandeur of it and he breaks out with the doxology.
J.T. It is the glory of God that is in view, and the glory of God is in resurrection. What is really involved is the bringing in of Israel into resurrection, and in that way God's glory is brought to pass.
Rem. Can you say a word comparing the place of Israel and the place of the church? Will not the church enter into more than Israel will enter into?
J.T. The church has its distinct place in the divine scheme, but it is not so contemplated here; it is not even called the church. It is simply the gentiles that are in view here and they are occupying the place of Israel, so that Israel is cut off. But the point is to show the faithfulness of God in regard to promise "For the gifts and calling of God are without repentance", and so it says, "All Israel shall be saved",
@Romans 11: 26.
J.P. There is a divine needs-be for these chapters; we get to the middle of chapter 3 and it looks as though Israel's fate is hopeless; then another line is followed out and the Spirit of God takes up the threads, unites them, interweaves them and brings them out in the fulness of time.
J.T. You get the gentiles here coming into the goodness of God; their salvation depends on their continuing in this goodness, and if they do not continue they also will be cut off.
J.B-t. What a wonderful chapter this is!
J.T. How contracted our minds are! We are so accustomed to what we regard as distinctive to ourselves that we have lost sight very largely of the divine scheme, whereas it was God's thought that all
{8}
His plans should be preserved and cherished in the affections of His people at the present time.
J.P. Do you not think that the verses from 11 to 16 inclusive in chapter 11 are very wonderful? They show what a wonderful place Israel as such has in the purposes of God. God has taken occasion from their fall to accomplish certain purposes in regard of the nations, and the force of the apostle's argument here is that if in connection with their fall certain things have taken place, how much more when God takes them up again!
J.T. What will it be? "Life from among the dead".
J.P. "Have they stumbled in order that they might fall? Far be the thought: but by their fall there is salvation to the nations to provoke them to jealousy. But if their fall be the world's wealth, and their loss the wealth of the nations, how much rather their fulness? For I speak to you, the nations, inasmuch as I am apostle of nations, I glorify my ministry; if by any means I shall provoke to jealousy them which are my flesh, and shall save some from among them. For if their casting away be the world's reconciliation, what their reception but life from among the dead?".
J.T. I think it brings in the wonderful resources of God. It might appear that in the breakdown of Israel God was defeated. I have no doubt at all that Satan's intent was to set Israel aside, for he knew perfectly well that thus the testimony of God would be set aside. He could not effect through Balaam what he could through the corrupting influences of the Moabites, and his point was that God would be puzzled to save His character; to do so He would have to destroy the people as thus corrupted. Phinehas saved the day and the plague was stayed. In rejecting Christ and the Spirit Israel is set aside. But in setting Israel aside the nations are enriched in the wealth of God, so that Satan did not gain his point; all that
{9}
which God intended for Israel is preserved in living power among the gentiles.
J.B-t. It is all spoiled now.
J.T. It is in a public sense, so that the nations themselves come under the judgment of God, because they continued not in the divine goodness. It does not say the church; it is the gentiles in contrast to Israel. At the same time the remnant of Israel is included; they are grafted in *among them*.
G.R. There is a very interesting passage of scripture where Jehovah asks, "Where is the bill of your mother's divorcement, whom I have put away?".
J.T. Christ has never given up His affection for Israel; He feels the loss of Israel just as Isaac felt the loss of his mother; but He got comfort in the church.
J.B-t. I was telling a Jew on board the boat last week how greatly God loves His people and what their prospects are in the days to come, but it did not seem feasible to him.
J.T. If he had had any idea that you were in a sense the custodian of Israel's blessing for the moment, he would no doubt have been quite interested; and it really is true.
J.B-t. It is very feasible that there is nothing failing at all; it is all being carried on divinely, although it is not manifested outwardly, but by and by it will be manifested and then all will see it.
J.T. But I think we should bear in mind that God wants it cherished here where the defeat came to pass. Every christian at the present time should be deeply concerned in regard to the divine counsels.
J.P. Is it not a wonderful thing when you come to take account of an epistle like this? It is written by appointment of the Holy Spirit; hence we are bound to believe that everything is in divine order. I think we have had a wrong thought about the three chapters, the 9th, 10th and 11th; we have regarded them almost
{10}
as though they were an intervention, but it is the perfect order of the Spirit of God.
J.T. Unquestionably. In the first chapter it is, "The gospel of God ... concerning his Son ... made of the seed of David according to the flesh". Do not forget that He is made of David's seed according to flesh, and if He is of David's seed according to flesh, it means a great deal. Look at the end of Revelation: in that last presentation of Himself, He says, "I am the root and the offspring of David". Does that look like ever giving up things here? Never.
J.P. A man that can speak like the apostle does in the closing verses of chapter 8 of Romans certainly is interested in the divine counsels: nothing "shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord".
J.T. Hence those chapters are in perfect order; they are what affection looks for, what a man looks for who is in the good of chapter 8. Those who love God want all His counsels and thoughts maintained. A man who can speak as the apostle does in chapter 8 is concerned about every single thought of God. The apostle could wish that he were accursed from Christ for the sake of Israel.
Rem. Moses wished himself blotted out, but not the people.
J.B-t. It is a proof to me of the wonderful grace of God that He should be communicating His counsels to His people now.
J.T. It is wonderful favour on the part of God.
J.P. I think we ought greatly to appreciate it.
J.T. He communicates to affection; it is people that love Him that He speaks to.
Rem. I think these chapters are not a break but a link with what you get after chapter 11.
J.P. Yes, we are educated in the love of God to the end of chapter 8, then comes the link, and then
{11}
you get the chapters that really bring out the characteristics of the kingdom.
J.T. Affection ever looks for divine thoughts; affection is in sympathy with every divine thought, and God looks for it. The Lord looked for friends.
G.R. It is just the difference between a servant and a friend.
J.T. A friend is one whom God takes into His confidence.
G.R. Abraham was God's friend.
O.R. Hence what you find is that christendom is filled with servants and not with friends.
Rem. They are in the world, like Lot sitting in the gate of Sodom. The *angels* were sent to Sodom; but Jehovah says, "Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do?". At Sodom the angels wanted to stay outside; Abraham was outside.
G.R. Is it not interesting that He gives a moral reason for it with regard to telling Abraham, for He says, "I know him that he will command his children and his household after him"?
J.B-t. It is a proof of God's confidence in His friends. You communicate what is in your mind to your friend, because you take for granted that he is interested in all that you are interested in.
J.T. I hope that the Lord will revive an inquiry into prophetic subjects, for interest in prophecy indicates affection for the Lord. Prophetic subjects may be taken up as a matter of theory, but prophecy is for those who love God. The testimony of Jesus is the Spirit of prophecy. Directly the Lord presents Himself as the root and offspring of David and the bright and morning star, then the bride says, "Come"; she is engaged in all that with which He is connected.
J.P. We should be asking more about the security of divine thoughts. I ceased preaching about the believer's security a good while ago. I do not believe
{12}
in rocking the devil's cradle. It is people who do not know God who want all this to be sure and secure.
J.T. I am sure what should engage every christian at the present moment is the security and maintenance of divine *thoughts*; that is to say, all the testimony of God in the assembly.
Rem. The time is drawing near when all these things will become actual.
J.T. But it is a wonderful thing for God that they should be maintained and cherished in the affections of His people now.
O.R. Divine *thoughts* are not far off at all.
J.T. No, they are in the sphere where the Holy Spirit is.
B.T.F. You get the will of God mentioned in chapter 12; what would you say it refers to there, that perfect and acceptable will of God?
J.T. It refers to the christian's walk down here that he might prove what is that good and acceptable and perfect will of God; the point is to prove it.
J.B-t. Experimentally, that is after our own will is gone in the living sacrifice.
J.T. Yes. I think it would be a good thing for us to enquire whether we have paid our vows. We have all taken the ground of giving ourselves up to Christ; really we do it in a sense in our baptism; the question is whether we have paid them. It says, "God ... *hath* no pleasure in fools", @Ecclesiastes 5: 4. If you have made a vow, Scripture exhorts you to pay it: and that means that you recognise God's claim over you; that you present your body "a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, *which* is your intelligent service", @Romans 12: 1.
B.T.F. What do you think chapter 12 is based on? In the beginning of the chapter you get the word: "I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the compassions of God, to present your bodies ...". What do you think that refers to?
{13}
J.T. I suppose it refers to what is developed in the earlier chapters, inclusive of the 9th, 10th and 11th. If you follow these chapters out, that is, the 12th to the 15th, you get pretty much what came out in Christ as Man down here.
J.P. Do you not think there is a very distinct moral order to be seen in chapter 12? You see, it begins with God; as you say, there is the paying of the vow; you present your body a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, *which* is your intelligent service. The second verse no doubt is connected with the first, and then he goes on in the third verse, "For I say, through the grace *which* has been given to me, to every one that is among you, not to have *high* thoughts above what he should think; but to think so as to be wise, as God has dealt to each a measure of faith". Then he proceeds to our relationship to each other as in the one body. I think there is a clear moral order here in this chapter.
J.T. I have no doubt that the idea is that the saints are to be here for the will of God, and that involves the body. God would bring out publicly in the wilderness what His will is, but that means that every other will has to be given up. Baptism involves the renouncement of our own wills. Heretofore you yielded your members as instruments of unrighteousness to sin; now they are to be yielded to God. The question is, what will God do with them? He will set forth His will down here in them.
J.P. And that in the sphere of relationships where He has placed us.
J.T. It is a wonderful triumph on the part of God.
Rem. The idea is practically to set forth in the body of Christ what was set forth in Christ. On the coming of Christ it appeared that in sacrifices for sin and in burnt-offerings God had no pleasure: "Lo, I come ... to do ... thy will". A living sacrifice is what God finds pleasure in, and He was going to find
{14}
in the body of Christ (the saints) the sweet delights that He had found in the Person of His Son.
J.T. Quite so. Take a dozen men and women and put them together, their own wills gone, and see what God will do with them. You will find a wonderful delineation of the divine mind in them. The thought of God for the moment is not to take us out of this scene, but to delineate His will in us, and that means that you give up your own will.
Rem. And so the thought in @Hebrews 10 is, "I delight to do thy will, O my God".
J.T. What are we here for? For the will of God.
You yield your body. If you let God take up your body, you will prove what is that good, acceptable and perfect will of God. That is the true road to happiness. If anybody wants happiness, that is the idea.
There was never anything in the universe like the assembly. Here is a company of men and women who were going on after the course of this world in whom God began to work; He transformed them into a vehicle of His power.
Rem. When every thought of God had failed in the flesh, He takes up a people for the delineation of His will.
O.R. God will get true service.
J.T. God will do wonderful things when He gets a company of people like that. There are many members in the body, and all the members have not the same office, but all are members one of another. That is how the will of God is delineated. God's intention is to put us in relation to one another and every one is to serve according to his measure of faith.
Rem. In the first verse it is acceptable unto God, and in the second acceptable unto us.
J.T. You prove the goodness of God's will by giving yourself up to God. Every member is occupied with the good of the whole body.
{15}
Rem. It really brings us to the point of @Romans 6.
T.A. Does not this chapter bring out that each and every one takes his true place; no one is seeking to be here and there, but each one just finds the place that God has put him in?
J.T. God's thought is that His will should be expressed down here and I think all these wonderful traits put together form a delineation of this.
{16}
THE RIGHTS OF CHRIST AS CREATOR AND REDEEMER
@Ruth 4: 1 - 22; @Exodus 30: 11 - 16
I desire to say a word about redemption. There is only one Person who has the right of redemption, and that Person is the Lord Jesus Christ. As believers we stand in relation to Him as our Redeemer. But @Revelation 4 shows that He is also entitled to us as the Creator, a title which the creation, as made to live by Him, fully recognises. The creation is represented in the living creatures; they fully recognise God's title. The believer is entitled to regard himself as in relation to God's creation, and made to live by Christ. He recognises Christ as his *Creator*. Then chapter 5 shows that a believer stands in relation to Christ as his *Redeemer*. The Lord has title to him as having redeemed him. We are to hold ourselves as believers in these two connections. Firstly, we are the first-fruits of God's creation, a wonderful position to occupy. The Lord Jesus Christ, as the Head of that creation, has breathed into us the breath of life, so that we are made to live, and as living, we represent the creation, so that already He is owned in His creation. The testimony went out to the creation; the Lord Jesus says in @Mark 16: 15, "Go into all the world, and preach the glad tidings to all the creation", and then as having accomplished redemption, He was received up and sat at the right hand of God (verse 19). He sat there, so that all creation should hear. He directed the apostles to preach the gospel to every creature; and in order that every creature should hear, He sat at the right hand of God. He is in a place of supremacy, and so, as His emissaries went forth to preach, it says, they went everywhere and the Lord went with them, "the Lord working with them"
{17}
(verse 20). So that the Lord Jesus Christ is in charge of the gospel. He is the Head of the creation. He has wrought out redemption, too; accomplished the glorious work of atonement, and satisfied God in respect to all the sin of creation, and has gone on high, so that all creation might hear. We believers own this, we own His rights over us as Creator. He made us to live, and it is His thought that every creature should hear the glad tidings.
But He would have you to know something of His appreciation of you, and it is in that connection you need redemption. Redemption is the right that belongs to one who is a kinsman. Now I want to show you how redemption evidences the Lord's appreciation of man. He would secure man as a right as a property, and therefore I have read the passage from Ruth as showing how the Lord was set in motion (if I may use such an expression reverently). Naomi says (chapter 3: 18), "Be still, my daughter ... for the man will not rest until he have completed the matter this day". That is to say, Ruth came to his attention. She came on to his field; we are told that it happened that she came on to his field, she became acquainted with him. I could enlarge on that in chapter z, but I only touch on it now. She became acquainted with Boaz on his own field. That is the most wonderful field that man can put his foot on. It refers to the present situation. Christ is risen and there is a platform in resurrection, which is available for man. Ruth becomes acquainted with Boaz on his field, and from that moment Boaz became interested in her. She *happened* to come on it, under God's direction, as it may be with some individual here. You are in a wonderfully favoured position. It is like Boaz's field, a position of privilege, and the Lord would introduce Himself to you. Read chapter a and you will be struck with the grace of Boaz. If you see Christ on His own field, so to speak, you will see Him at His
{18}
best. There is a beautiful touch in chapter 2. He greets his reapers, "Jehovah be with you!"; he was a mighty man of wealth, but a gracious man, and they had full confidence in him; their reply was "Jehovah bless thee!". The point is to establish confidence in the soul that is enquiring. So if you have come in here as a matter of 'happening' the Lord would disclose Himself to you. Following on that Boaz speaks to Ruth, he speaks words of comfort to her; he encourages her, with no reproof for being a Moabitess; he speaks of what was commendable in her. The Lord will never discourage you with reproof. Whatever there may be of God in you, He will take account of it. You may think you are very poor and despicable, but He has other thoughts of you. Ruth felt so. "I am a foreigner", she says, but Boaz says, "Jehovah recompense thy work, and let thy reward be full from Jehovah the God of Israel, under whose wings thou art come to take refuge". There is no evidence that she had come to trust the God of Israel, but he gave her credit for it, he gave her credit for more than she would accredit herself with. I speak of it to show the dealings of God with man. The result is she has confidence and goes down to the threshing-floor to see him. She claims him as a kinsman, and that is what Christ appreciates. She goes down to that threshing-floor at the expense of her dignity and that is what we have to do. At the expense of her dignity as a woman she went down and the Lord appreciates it. "The man will not rest"; one had come into evidence whom he would have as his own, and he would redeem her. "Shall I not seek rest for thee?", Naomi says. You know you have not got rest. You have no certain dwelling place. Ruth had none; she was dependent on the leavings of the reapers; her property was mortgaged, and she was a beggar dependent on the benevolence of others, but the light of God in Naomi suggested rest. You know you have not got
{19}
rest. You are interested in Christ and in His people.
Ruth was. Naomi represents His people. I am speaking of the book in a practical way. Naomi represents those in whom light is, the people of God. Her word is always right, she understands the situation. I refer to that so that you may understand the point of redemption. The Lord redeems what He prizes, so chapter 4 is redemption, and in the passing over of the first kinsman we get what refers to the law. It could not give life, it had no power to redeem such an inheritance as was Elimelech's; there was not only a necessity for redeeming the land, but life was necessary, so Boaz accepts the position accorded to him. He accepts the right of redemption.
Now that is the position of the Lord Jesus Christ in the midst of Israel. The remnant came to His attention. He valued them. So also in a wider sense man came before Him. He would have man. He has most of us tonight. He valued us before He bought us or He would not have paid the price. So the Lord valued Israel. He valued the remnant, and He gave Himself for them, for He died for the nation, and not for that nation only, but that He might "gather together into one the children of God who were scattered abroad" (@John 11: 52), those that were of value, those that were worth having.
Redemption is a transaction in public, not a private one. The Lord desires that the saints should be known publicly as His property, hence the transaction took place in public, "in the presence of the inhabitants, and in the presence of the elders of my people". The Lord would have a people on earth as His, and hence He redeems them in public.
There are different lights in which redemption is spoken of. In @Genesis 23 you get the redemption of a field; that was also public, but the principal point there was that the price paid was current with the man who knew the value of it, with the merchant. That is
{20}
not the point in Ruth, however; the point in view there is that it was done in public and after the manner and custom of Israel. I want you to get the light of this. It was legal. Things must be legal if they are to be established. You do not want the title deeds of a house to be questionable. That is the point of view in Ruth. The Lord died for us publicly so that there is universal witness to it, and secondly what He did was legal. He had the right to do it. The first kinsman gave way in His favour. Applying that to the antitype, the law had to give way. The power of Christ made it manifest that it was impotent, the law gave way morally. Christ's works gave Him the first place. He is the only One who has ability to redeem, and the first kinsman gives way. Firstly, He redeems publicly; secondly, legally. So it says, "This was the custom in former time in Israel". It is what was necessary for confirming things. Death was the great means by which everything was established. I need not enlarge on it. Even the books of the law and all things under the law were sprinkled with blood. All was confirmed under that principle. The custom was there had to be death. The Lord by dying has secured His inheritance and established it on legal ground.
Boaz's title to Ruth was indisputable. Christ's title is also indisputable. So Boaz took off his shoe and gave it to his neighbour. The Spirit is alluding to the death of Christ. He came to a point where He stooped and took off His shoe, He exposed His foot, He died, and has paid the price. That was all I wanted to show from Ruth. He has established it on legal grounds, according to the requirement of what God had established in Israel. I want you to question your own soul, as to whether you are on that basis with Christ, that He has secured you. Boaz called the attention of the witnesses to it, that he had that day redeemed the inheritance, and taken Ruth to be his wife. The christian, who recognises the rights of
{21}
Christ over him, realises that he belongs to Another and that Other takes you to Himself so that you may be "to another, who has been raised up from among the dead, in order that we might bear fruit to God", @Romans 7: 4.
Now to refer to @Exodus 30. Each believer has to appropriate redemption for himself. When the people are numbered in Scripture it means God is taking account of them. It is precious to think God is taking account of us. He takes account of each of us. Your name is written in heaven. He makes known to your soul that He is taking account of you and you respond and recognise at what cost you have been taken account of. Now here is half a shekel (verse 13), what is current, not with the merchant but with the sanctuary. Many believers never arrive at this, they are satisfied to know their sins forgiven, but God takes account of you, and the answer in your soul is you recognise at what a cost you have been secured, at half a shekel, and Jehovah says, "The rich shall not give more, and the poor shall not give less". You have cost the Lord Jesus as much as Paul cost Him. He said, "Who has loved me and given himself for me", @Galatians 2: 20. That was the price, the half shekel of the sanctuary. Paul understood it. How much do you understand it? It was to be a heave-offering, referring to the affections begotten in the believer in the light of the price at which he has been secured. Do you understand you cost the Lord as much as the apostle Paul? "The rich shall not give more, and the poor shall not give less".
One word more: that offering which you give (which refers to your affections), the answer to the price, is used for the sanctuary. The aggregate of half shekels is appointed for the sanctuary, "and thou shalt take the atonement-money of the children of Israel, and devote it to the service of the tent of meeting". I only indicate that to show the connection between
{22}
the redemption and the sanctuary. You will remember that the sockets of the tabernacle were embedded in silver, meaning that the divine structure is founded in redemption; and the appreciation of the believer who is in the fight of the half shekel, who responds to the price paid, which is not less than Christ Himself, that appreciation of Him which is really the fruit of the Spirit, is interwoven into the sanctuary. The believer, so to speak, is woven into it, for the aggregate of the half shekels of the 603,550 males in Israel (@Exodus 38: 26) was used for the tabernacle. So, I say, as believers we are woven into the sanctuary, "the assembly of God, which he has purchased with the blood of his own", @Acts 20: 28. As such they are precious and are built into the divine structure.
May the Lord give us fully to own His rights over us, and not to fall short of the sanctuary!
{23}
THE KING
@Psalm 68: 18; @Luke 19: 37, 38
I have been seeking to show on a previous occasion how all the forces of evil were banded together against God when He intervened on earth in the Person of Christ; how all the forces of evil were banded against God and against Christ, and how God answered that by setting His King upon His holy hill of Zion. That was God's answer to man's hostility. And then I tried to show that what follows upon this is the preaching, that the Preacher is King, that it is necessary to have one supreme power in order that the preaching should become universal. So Solomon, who is the typical preacher of the Old Testament, says of himself that he "was king ... in Jerusalem". In spite of all the antagonism of the world, God has set His King upon His holy hill of Zion; and instead of meting out judgment to His enemies He preaches to them. The King, instead of executing wrath, becomes a Preacher. God has made this same Jesus, whom the world cast out and crucified, both Lord and Christ, having all power in heaven and on earth; and instead of wielding that power against His enemies He preaches to them. When the apostles were sent out they were enjoined to preach the gospel to all people, beginning at Jerusalem with His own enemies. Solomon tells us that "I, the Preacher, was king ... in Jerusalem"; it is not that the king was preacher but that the preacher was king. I want to emphasise that, that the Lord Jesus Christ, instead of wielding the sword of authority for the execution of wrath, became a preacher instead, and He is preaching to you tonight. By His kingly power He holds in check the forces of evil in order that He might have an opportunity to speak to men. Now that is the present dispensation,
{24}
that is the gospel day. The Preacher is King, and hence He has universal right to speak to men.
I wish to proceed a little further on that line to show you something of what is involved in the preaching. I shall perhaps be a little detailed in what I say, but I want to convey to you if I can what obtains in heaven. It is really what is announced in the glad tidings. If I could convey to you the wonderful place that man has in heaven in the Person of Christ, you would understand the gospel. This is what I had before me in the passages I have read. You will remember the heavenly multitude were praising God and saying, "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good pleasure in men". That is, they were engaged with Man upon earth. The wonderful thing to be announced was that God had come into manhood in the Person of the Son. The incarnation did not take place in heaven but on earth. That glorious Person had passed through myriads of angels. He descended to Bethlehem and He became Man there, identifying Himself with perhaps one of the poorest and most despised families in Israel; and He was laid in a manger-there was no room for Him in the inn. Such was the reception accorded this heavenly Visitor by humanity. There was no room for Him in the inn. It mattered little to the angelic host whether He was born in a mansion, a castle, or a manger; the fact that they were engaged with was this, that there was "good pleasure in men". Hence their delight. They saw in that Babe the guarantee for a race of men on earth that should be to God's good pleasure. That was the situation in the second chapter of Luke.
In chapter 19 we have another company celebrating the praises of Christ. A great deal had intervened since chapter 2. He was no longer a Babe, He had grown into Manhood, doing good, anointed by the Spirit. If there was one thing that marked the Lord,
{25}
it was activity; He went about doing good. I cannot begin to dwell in detail on the activities of the Lord Jesus; the apostle Peter puts it in small compass when he tells us that He "went through all quarters doing good, ... because God was with him". So in chapter 19 there was this company at mount Olivet, and we are told that "all the multitude of the disciples began, rejoicing, to praise God with a loud voice for all the works of power which they had seen". The angels did not celebrate any great works; they perceived in that Babe a guarantee for the maintenance of the divine glory. "Glory to God in the highest". The angels saw all that in the Babe. The multitude of the disciples in chapter 19 were engaged with His mighty works. It seems to me as if God had arranged this testimony divinely; it seems as if this multitude of disciples were constrained to praise. It does not at all appear that it was pre-arranged by them. On the surface it is clear that it was God that brought it to pass as a testimony to the mighty works of Christ; but these works were rejected, the mighty Worker Himself was rejected-indeed men attributed the works of the Lord Jesus to Beelzebub, a terrible testimony to the state of man upon earth.
The multitude of the disciples, whether intelligently or otherwise, cried with a loud voice, "Blessed the King that comes in the name of the Lord: peace in heaven". The effort at the present time is to bring peace on earth, and I need not tell you that I am not in that. The great ones of the earth are in it, those who possess means are in it, there is a drawing together of the governments of the world to bring to pass universal peace. A grand project that, but it is not God's project; it is God's project to begin from the top. The Lord came into the world, "the Prince of Peace", and He preached peace, but they rejected Him; and now He has gone to heaven and the earth is left in a state of turmoil, in a state of moral chaos,
{26}
and yet men today are aiming at universal peace. It is a supreme delusion. Peace has to come from heaven now; the opportunity for peace on earth has passed; it can never originate on earth since the Prince of Peace has been rejected. I want to explain that if I can, but first of all I want to make it clear that since His mighty works have been refused, peace as having its origin on earth is an impossibility. The Prince of Peace is gone up to heaven. Luke shows us in chapter 2 that the mind of God was peace on earth and he shows us in chapter 19 that it has been abandoned and substituted by peace in heaven; and then he shows us at the end that the Lord Jesus is carried up into heaven. He is carried up. If you are going to visit a person, you take a train to his town and a carriage to his house-you are doing all that. No doubt he will receive you kindly, but if he has a great interest in you he will send a carriage for you. That testifies to you that the person wishes to have you visit him, and that he is anxious to make you welcome. That is Luke's side of the gospel. In John we are told that he "ascended" up into heaven, and in Mark that he "was taken up"; but in Luke he is "carried up", as much as to say that when earth refused Him heaven delighted in Him.
I want to go through the cloud, as it were, to show you what went on up there. We are entitled to look through the cloud. You remember in the first chapter of the Acts we are told that a cloud received Him. There were souls that were gazing after Him into heaven; they appreciated Christ, and Luke tells us that they were gazing up after Christ into heaven. A cloud is a symbol of distance, for it was that which overshadowed the tabernacle of old. We are told that "a cloud received him out of their sight", but I want to show you that you can look through the cloud. "We see not yet all things subjected to him, but we see Jesus", @Hebrews 2: 8, g. Stephen says, "I behold
{27}
the heavens opened, and the Son of man standing at the right hand of God". When the Lord entered, heaven was in a receptive mood, there never had been such a day in heaven as that day! Paul says that He ascended far above all heavens, that He might fill all things. What I want to convey is that having passed through a cloud He receives gifts. You may say, That One who received the gifts was God! But what the Spirit says was that He received the gifts as *Man*; that it was not simply as a divine Person, but He received the gifts as *Man*. The Man is in heaven, and He has received gifts for men. In @Psalm 8 it says, "What is man, that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man, that thou visitest him?". The Lord has a wonderful place as Man in heaven, all the gifts of heaven are given to that Man and He receives them as Man for man. Now that is what I understand by the gift of the Spirit. The Lord received it as Man and because He was Man; it is as if no other order of being should receive it, and He received it, not for angels but for man. What I want to ask at this point is, Are you interested in this? He has received wonderful things in heaven and He has the gifts for man. The Lord, in spite of your rebellion, has a gift for you. He has received gifts for the rebellious also, that the Lord God might dwell among them. Would you not like to be a dwelling place for the Lord God, that He might dwell there?
Now peace has been established in heaven, and He receives gifts from God there and He distributes them on earth so that there might be a dwelling place on earth for God. God will never dwell except in a desired abode. He speaks of Himself as having a desire. What would God desire? Certainly God would not dwell in one in rebellion; it is impossible that God should dwell in us whilst we are in rebellion. It is evident that our wills have to be broken, and hence Christ is announced as Lord so that there might
{28}
be submission to Christ. Is there? I believe that the most difficult thing for a soul is to submit. Even after the light of God has dawned upon us, the will is the last thing to surrender. Directly the light came into the soul of Saul of Tarsus the Lord spoke to him and said, "Saul, Saul": and what did Saul say? "Lord". His will was broken. That man was brought low; he says, "What shall I do, Lord?". The Lord had received a gift for Saul, He had received the gift of the Spirit; He intended that in Saul there should be a dwelling place for God and hence Saul is broken down.
Is there one here tonight who has not submitted to Christ? Remember, it is not bowing your head, that is not the kind of submission. He looks for submission in your heart and soul, bowing to the Lord from the heart. When one is broken down and submits to Christ, God delights in that man. He desires to have you now. He says, "Here will I dwell, for I have desired it". He has a gift for you. The question is, Will you have what Christ has to offer? He has received gifts for the rebellious. It is evident that God will not dwell with you unless He has pleasure in you; He must delight in you before He will enter in to dwell with you, and is it not wonderful that God should have delight in such as we? How is it possible? It is through the death of Christ that He delights in us, and the next thing is that He says, "Here will I dwell, for I have desired it". Now are you content without God dwelling in you? It is one thing to have your sins forgiven, and to have hope of heaven, but it is a wonderful thing that God delights in us and still more wonderful that He dwells there.
{29}
THE SOVEREIGNTY OF GOD IN THE GOSPEL
@Hosea 6: 1 - 3
We need to be reminded that the gospel going forth into the world assumes that God goes before it sovereignly in order to prepare the way for it. Every intelligent christian recognises that and counts upon it. If the gospel is to be effectual, God has to precede it so as to prepare souls. He acts sovereignly, as of old; the Spirit of God is said to have been hovering over the chaotic state of the earth before it was called into its present form or order. The Spirit of God hovered over it; that is to say, God was here in a sovereign way by His Spirit, with the end in view to bring in order. Now I liken the state of humanity morally to the physical creation in @Genesis 1: 2, before God begins to act upon it; the state of the race may be described as being darkness and chaos, but the Spirit of God is hovering over it. We are little aware of the fact that God's Spirit is now here, hovering over the race, ever waiting for an opportunity to act on your soul. From the moment that a man is born into the world, God shadows him. He takes account of us from our infancy and waits upon us, so that He might have an entrance into our hearts. Now, that is a very touching thing. When we knew nothing about God, had no exercise and were totally indifferent to Him, God was concerned about us. I make bold to say God thinks of every man that comes into the world, and His thoughts of us are thoughts of good and not of evil. "I know the thoughts that I think toward you, saith Jehovah, thoughts of peace, and not of evil", @Jeremiah 29: 11. Whatever your thoughts may be, God thinks of us for good.
A moment then comes when God commands light. He said at the beginning, "Let there be light. And there was light", @Genesis 1: 3. He commands light, and
{30}
there is light, as the apostle says, "God who spoke that out of darkness light should shine who has shone in our hearts for the shining forth of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ", @2 Corinthians 4: 6. God has shone into the hearts of christians.
Think of that! A moment comes in the history of a soul when God commands light, and that light penetrates into the darkest crevices of the human heart; the sun in the heavens cannot do that, but "All things", says the apostle, "are naked and laid bare to his eyes, with whom we have to do". It says in that same passage, "The word of God is living and operative, ... penetrating to the division of ... joints and marrow"notice that, the surgical operation of the word-"and a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart",
@Hebrews 4: 12. You might find it difficult to discern between these things, thoughts and intents. Happy for us if many of our thoughts were allowed to remain as thoughts, and if many of our intents were allowed to remain as intents, and never to become actions!
There are thoughts, intents and actions. We look at one another, and can only judge of the actions. I can say little as to your thoughts and intents, but I can say something as to your actions. Then it says, "There is not a creature unapparent before him; but all things are naked and laid bare to his eyes, with whom we have to do".
Now, the entrance of God's word, we are told, giveth light, and the question is, What are you to do with the light? What does it disclose? It discloses a horrible condition. You remember when the Lord gave signs to Moses, the second sign was to put his hand into his bosom, and when he drew it out, it was leprous. There is nothing in that heart of yours but leprosy. "Out of the heart of men, go forth evil thoughts ...", @Mark 7: 21. There is leprosy within, and what proceeds out? Nothing but corruption!
However fair your exterior may be, and however well
{31}
you may pass muster according to the rules of this world, when God's light shines in, there is nothing but leprosy disclosed; and the leper's place is outside the camp! Peter discerned the leprosy when the Lord borrowed his boat, and he said, "Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, Lord" (@Luke 5: 8), and the next character that appears is a leper, but the Lord touches him, and the leprosy departs. The light of God shines in, and if you are honest it produces a bad conscience. If you have never had a bad conscience you will never have a good one! First it must be purged. The light of God penetrates, exposing what is inside, and the effect of the exposure is a bad conscience. A wounded stag wants to be alone. The leper should be isolated, and he desires to be isolated. His place is outside the congregation of the Lord. A bad conscience drives you to isolation, but a purged conscience prepares you for the congregation of the Lord, where you are no longer in isolation, but in company.
The first part of the passage I have read contemplates that the speakers are convicted, and that by the light of the Lord. Now what is the effect? The effect is that they say "Come and let us return unto Jehovah: for he hath torn, and he will heal us; he hath smitten, and he will bind us up". He smites the conscience of the sinner, and the sinner who is enlightened knows that only God can heal. The effect of the word is a surgical operation and produces a wound, and God alone can heal that wound. The speaker has light not only as to his own state, but as to God, and that is the gospel. It says in @Genesis 1, "There was evening, and there was morning-the first day", not 'morning and evening'. The light produces a state in your soul that corresponds to the evening, and after an evening comes a morning: the morning is filled with hope. The evening is the end of a day, and the end, in a sense, of the hopes connected with that day, but the morning is full of hope
{32}
so the answer to every evening in the soul is a morning of light. The reception of the gospel may lead to an experience which corresponds to an evening, but that results in a morning of hope. @Genesis 1 depicts the history of your soul, till you arrive at the end, where there are no more evenings but a continual day in the presence of the full light of God. Paul did not contemplate any more evenings; he contemplated a continual morning. He was in the good of the light that shines in the face of Christ.
The speakers here in Hosea have light as regards God. They say, "Come and let us return unto Jehovah". If the light comes it finds you a good distance away. Astronomers speak a good deal of the distance between the sun and the earth, but the light of God travels more quickly than the light of the sun.
Morally, the distance between God and your soul is immeasurable, but light travels quickly. In the tabernacle the cherubim of glory were looking down, whereas in the temple they were looking out, as if God had changed His attitude on account of the mercy-seat. He is looking out now on the race, and directly He sees a movement in any man's heart He is interested and *He* moves. Not only does the light travel but God travels, I say it reverently, and He travels rapidly. He *ran* to meet the returning prodigal, and He will run to meet you; you will not have far to come! The book of Chronicles contemplates that in principle God looks out on the race, and directly a movement takes place in your heart, He can see it, and to see it is to induce Him to move. I love to think of divine Persons moving. They reserve the right to move, and they move towards man. The speakers here knew that; they have light and say, "Come and let us return unto Jehovah: for he hath torn, and he will heal us; he hath smitten, and he will bind us up". What a different operation now! no longer surgical, but bandages! You need those bandages, and the
{33}
nurse knows so well how to apply the bandages. It is like the Samaritan in the parable binding up the man's wounds, pouring in oil and wine. God alone knows how to do it for He has created the wound. Who among us has not had a wound? Scripture says, "Faithful are the wounds of a friend", how much more so are God's wounds! He wounds you to bind you up, and in that you learn His care and love for you. Well, now they have got more light than that; they go on to say, "After two days will he revive us; on the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live before his face". It is God's thought for man, that he should be revived. I still pursue the illustration of a patient in a hospital; it is one thing to be bound up, but another thing to get out of the bed and walk! All that applies to the christian; in other words, you have to be revived spiritually. Note the intelligence the speakers have here; they say "After two days will he revive us". 'Two' represents *adequate* testimony; 'three' represents *complete* testimony. Now God has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, as the apostle tells us, for He desires "that your faith might not stand in men's wisdom, but in God's power", @1 Corinthians 2: 5. Hence the manner of Paul's preaching was not after man's wisdom. He desired that his converts should be established on a firm foundation.
Much of the preaching of the present day leaves the convert in a hospital bed at best! You want a firm foundation; you need to be established, and God would establish you in His power, and in the full light of His nature. The "two days" refer, I think, to the Lord's testimony in the flesh; "Go, tell that fox", the Lord says, "Behold, I cast out demons and accomplish cures today and to-morrow"-a double testimony-"and the third day I am perfected", @Luke 13: 32. What was the Lord here for? He was here in testimony: He says, "If I by the Spirit of God cast
{34}
out demons"-what is the testimony following on that?-"then indeed the kingdom of God is come upon you", @Matthew 12: 28. The power of God was present in the Lord's ministry. What was the object?
To establish those who had faith, to let them know that God had come in. *Peter* understood it when he said the Lord Jesus went about doing good, "because God was with him". God had visited His people.
Those two days have their place on the divine side, and represent the ministry of Christ, but they also have their place in the soul, in your history and mine. You want to have your soul established in Christ's ministry. You want to understand the gospels, and to see the foundation on which christianity is reared up.
Paul says, "Not in wisdom of word", @1 Corinthians 1: 17. You want to have your faith established on God's testimony presented in Christ. "After two days" the testimony should become effectual in their souls. Put yourselves in the company of those who heard Him.
What an effect on your soul! I think I should have said, 'This is the Hope of Israel, all the hopes I have gathered up from Moses and the promises are all centred in this Man'. There were those who said "Search the scriptures", that is quite right, but the Lord says, "They it is which bear witness concerning me", @John 5: 39. There is no profit from the scripture, unless you see the testimony of Christ. When you come to the gospels, you get Moses and the prophet on the mount speaking with Christ, but they disappear, for all their testimony was personified in that Man; they disappear, and the Father says, "This is my beloved Son, ... hear him", @Matthew 17: 5.
Let me appeal to you to hear the voice of Christ. If you want your soul to rest on a solid foundation, let it rest on the testimony of Christ.
Then they go on, "On the third day he will raise us up". Wonderful words!-to be revived and raised up, and made to live in God's sight. I take "the
{35}
third day" to indicate the death and resurrection of Christ. "The third day", the Lord says, "I am perfected"; and He went through all that had to be gone through to take man's place. He is perfected in resurrection. As you see Christ in resurrection you are entitled to regard that as your own resurrection. Do you regard yourself as risen? As a believer you are entitled to. It is no question of actuality, it is a question of faith. Abraham believed God who "calls the things that be not as being"; that is what faith does. It takes account of God. I see in the death and resurrection of Christ my own death and resurrection. We are entitled to see that. The leprosy is removed by the touch of Christ; but in order to remove it, He had to go into death. The leper is thus cleansed and made fit for the congregation. "On the third day he will raise us up", so that faith in the remnant goes on to the full end, and recognises there is recovery for God.
"And we shall live before his face". You are made to live, but not for yourself. God loves to look into our souls and to see that the pulsations of our heart are Godward. "Thou hast in love", says Hezekiah, "delivered my soul from the pit of destruction".
"The living, the living", he adds, "he shall praise thee", @Isaiah 38: 17, 19. Then there is a point further, to show how faith goes to the full end of the truth "we shall know,-we shall follow on to know Jehovah; his going forth is assured as the morning dawn; and he will come unto us as the rain, as the latter rain which watereth the earth". It is not 'if we follow on'; it is "we shall follow on". If made to live before God, you want to know that God. Here the covenant comes in; God opens up His heart to you, and His disposition towards you, and thus you come to know Him. There can be no greater thing than that. He has relieved us of pressure, and death, and now we are made to live before Him-"we shall
{36}
follow on to know Jehovah". One deplores the inertness and sluggishness of believers; how little exercise there is as to the knowledge of God! The knowledge of the Lord is to cover the earth as the waters cover the sea. Our souls are to be illuminated by the light of His nature. That is God's thought.
There is nothing God delights in more than disclosing what is in His heart; and when you know that, you have absolute confidence. Delilah said as to Samson, "He has told me all his heart", @Judges 16: 18. There was no longer any hesitation; she was assured she had the secret. Alas for Samson, she *had* the secret! But now, you have the secret of God, and the knowledge of His heart. You have never any difficulty as to anything after you know His heart. One is completely emancipated; one is never disturbed about anything after that. How much christians are disturbed and harassed, tossed about like a bark on the waters, but if they had the secret of the knowledge of God in their souls they would never be disturbed. You take account of everything that happens to you in that light. If there is a cloud, you see the bow in the cloud; it is put there for the encouragement of your heart. You are like mount Zion, which represents the sovereignty of God; it cannot be moved. It abides for ever. What a point to reach! "We shall follow on"-they never stop until they reach the end-"to know Jehovah".
One point more: "His going forth is assured as the morning dawn; and he will come unto us as the rain, as the latter rain which watereth the earth". What an expectation! It is, no doubt, an allusion to Christ gone on high. He went there to influence the earth; not simply for Himself, but on account of His people, in order that there should be the sun in the heavens and rain on the earth. "His going forth", says faith, "is assured as the morning dawn". David said that the King should be "as the light of
{37}
the morning, like the rising of the sun, a morning without clouds", @2 Samuel 23: 4. Christ is like that, and that morning never has an evening! Then, "He will come unto us as the rain"; that is ministry, refreshing ministry from Christ. Rain comes down on your soul, and produces fruitfulness. You find out all about God, then there is fruit. Such is the position that christians are placed in; and one would appeal to souls, as to whether we are in the light of these things. Are you made to live? That is, are your affections quickened in regard to God? *Raised* up is a matter of faith; you take account of these things as Abraham who believed God, who calls those things which be not as though they were; and so can you and I. But we are to *live*! Your affections are to be all quickened Godward, and all the movements of your heart hereafter are to be toward God. Then there is "the rain"; that is the Spirit comes down with all the gracious ministry for your soul, so that there shall be fruit for God. It is the latter rain here, not the former rain; it is not promiscuous; it is just what is needed. Ministry is divinely applied and regulated, and fits in where it is required. The end in view is fruit for God.
{38}
THE SON AND SONSHIP
@Romans 8: 14 - 29
I do not intend, beloved friends, to add a word to what has been said but rather to suggest a thought which had a place in my soul. The spirit of sonship has been introduced. While I can scarcely venture to add a scripture to what has already been given I should like to speak of the truth in connection with the Son as spoken through the one whom Jesus loved. I have been distinctly impressed with the opportuneness of the word exemplified from John's position. Some of us have been dwelling on Paul's position.
What a vessel he was, how divinely fitted to set forth the full scope of the divine mind! As an architect he completed the structure in which every thought of God should find a place, a man divinely qualified not only to give expression to the divine mind but as architect and builder to carry it all out here. That was Paul. And then there is one in contrast to Paul whom we have seen coming in at the end to bring forth the glorious Person of the Son, Him whose dignity and beauty lend lustre to the whole system. Such is the Son, and how admirably suited and fitted that beloved disciple was to bring forth the truth of the Person whom he loved. I suppose that was his own estimate of what came to light in the Son. But there is the church. The apostle Paul by the power of God and wisdom of God had reared up that here in which all that which came to light in the Son should find a home.
I should just like to add a word as to sonship. The thought of the Son necessitates the idea of sonship and I wish to refer to it for a few minutes. Some of us were looking this morning at the setting forth of that part of the testimony which has reference to
{39}
heaven on earth. Ephesians introduces to us that part of the testimony which has reference to heaven. You can readily believe that is a big thought, that and the responsibility together have a very wide scope, but you have the testimony, beloved friends, and we want that. A remark I would like to make is that the truth contained in both epistles (Romans and Ephesians) was set forth in the Lord; that is, the thought of man here upon earth in relation to God was set forth in Christ. That is the epistle to the Romans. In the Man He introduced what man should be. That which God has lost in the Garden of Eden is in a way received back in christianity. Man is again in relationship with God so that God has His true place in that Man. Well now we have something added to that in Christ, a Son with a Father. Now it is that that I wish to dwell upon for a moment. I feel it is important to call your attention to the fact that the spirit of sonship was introduced before the fact of sonship was set forth in the Lord here below. Scripture speaks in various ways about sonship. There is no subject more interesting. The initial thought connected with it is that of sympathy with God. When the foundations of the earth were laid "all the sons of God shouted for joy". There was intelligent sympathy with the sons and all were interested. That does not convey to us the dignity connected with sonship nor the peculiar affection God has for the Son. When you come to the application of the term 'son' to men it applies primarily to Isaac: "Take now thy son, thine only son". It came in afterwards in respect of Israel. I am speaking of Isaac as typical. We are entitled to take account of and speak of things typically. "Take now thy son, thine only son, whom thou lovest". That is Christ: sons of God do not convey the idea of Christ. Whatever applied to Christ must have a unique bearing. Abraham had other sons. "Take now thy son, thine only son,
{40}
whom thou lovest". You have the idea there of the place the Lord had with the Father. We must understand the difference between the thoughts of God and man, and of Father and Son. The question of righteousness and life has reference to God and man. It is a question of the reinstatement of men here in regard to God. The Lord said in resurrection "I ascend to my Father and your Father". That conveys the most intimate relations of divine Persons, "I ascend to my Father and your Father". Think of it! He says also "I ascend ... to my God and your God"; that has reference to man, it has reference to a place before God for man. The idea of relationship to the Father is to be in the family circle. The Lord has been on the earth in the consciousness of that relationship; He could look up to heaven and say, "Father". That was the relationship in which He stood to God; He was in the intimacy of relationship with the Father. The Father belongs to the most intimate precinct of that abode. The Spirit of that Man has been given to us. Romans lays the basis for Ephesians. It shows us man with power to discharge every relationship in the Spirit. These persons are in relation to God as God. Chapter 8 is to show what the Spirit is to us to enable us to fulfil every moral requirement. The Spirit is given to every justified person so that we might maintain righteousness here.
Justification enables us to look up in His face. God has a people for Himself; they are for God. That same Spirit enabled the people to live, enabled them to live where everything is death. "As many as are led by the Spirit of God, *these* are sons of God". What kind of people are they? They are sons of God, that is dignity.
God has a company in whom every moral requirement is fulfilled as they move about in the dignity of sonship. What He has given to us is a spirit of adoption. What does that Spirit do? That Spirit
{41}
cries "Father" twice. He not only enables us to discharge every obligation and walk in dignity as God's sons, but He enables us to respond to God, to answer to the name of the Father. What a thing to have your soul in the full light of the revelation of the Father: "Abba, Father". What a portion God has in those who are set up in the relation of sons before Him! "God has sent out the Spirit of his Son ... crying, Abba, Father". But there is more than that. The Father loves the Son and has given all things to be in His hand. The Father is going to bring a company into that place the Son has here. The end of all ministry is to form the saints after Christ. God has brought everything in in Christ. God sets to work to effect that in those whom He has set in relation to the Person. Moreover "whom he has predestinated, these also he has called". He predestinated us to be conformed to the image of His Son. God looked down here on earth and saw that everything was well pleasing. Think what that was to God, One who not only maintained what was due to God, but One in the relation of Son. 'I will bring in a race of men just like that suited for heaven'. Hence God is leading many sons to glory, so here He intends to conform us to His image that He might be the Firstborn among many. That great end of God is a family relationship, and that brings out what the nature of God is. He is to have a family and that a holy one. That Son is to be the Firstborn among many. God grant this might be the result of the ministry! God has brought in His Son and He intends to fill the scene with beings formed after the image of that glorious Person who has been here on the earth.
{42}
THE GOSPEL IN CONNECTION WITH BAPTISM
@1 Peter 3: 18 - 22
I desire to present the gospel, as I understand it and in the measure in which I am able, in connection with baptism. I do not wish to preach baptism, but to show the connection between it and the gospel.
You will observe how it is alluded to here in the passage I have read, in a very remarkable way, as foreshadowed in the deluge, and it is spoken of as a means of salvation. Whilst not emphasising baptism unduly, I would remind you that the Lord said, "He that believes and is baptised shall be saved", @Mark 16:16. Especially as in preaching today we frequently preach to people who are baptised, it becomes an exercise to raise the question in souls as to how far there is correspondence with their baptism. It is a very interesting subject in the Scriptures and one which is largely spoken of; and as each one here has been baptised, it is worthy of consideration as to how far each corresponds to it.
The command which the Lord gave on leaving the apostles was, "Go therefore and make disciples of all the nations, baptising them to the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit", @Matthew 28: 19.
Then I would remind you of Peter's commandment at Caesarea to the gentile believers to be baptised "in the name of the Lord", @Acts 10: 48. What is contained in the Lord's injunction to the apostles and Peter's to the gentiles enters into one's own experience as a baptised person. Another question arises unfortunately the rite is often administered by those who themselves are not in the good of it, so that the true import is not conveyed to the baptised person.
I would cite Philip as one who performed the rite in
{43}
keeping with the message delivered. Philip was an evangelist; evangelists are not plentiful, yet the spirit of evangelisation was brought in by the Lord, and it has been continued. We should note specially His ministry as recorded by Luke, for Luke presents God drawing near to man in a Man. The first evangelists in Luke are angels; the angel said to the shepherds, "Fear not, for behold, I announce to you glad tidings of great joy, which shall be to all the people". Then there was a multitude of the heavenly host in complete sympathy with the message given by the angel "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good pleasure in men". Men are to be brought in under God's eye for His pleasure; that is the end of evangelisation. It is not only that He should be infinitely delighted in Christ, as He was here, but that He should have pleasure in men. The Lord Jesus took up that, and in Nazareth He stands up to read in the synagogue; what words of grace! "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach glad tidings to the poor; he has sent me to preach to captives deliverance, and to the blind sight, to send forth the crushed delivered, to preach the acceptable year of the Lord", @Luke 4: 18, 19. Peter calls attention to Him, and says, "Jesus who was of Nazareth ... God anointed him with the Holy Spirit and with power; who went through all quarters doing good, and healing all that were under the power of the devil, because God was with him", @Acts 10: 38. I wish you to bear that in mind in connection with evangelisation. In a Man you have expressed here the true idea of evangelisation, and that is to be continued in men here.
Philip was an evangelist, and it was, perhaps, the most critical moment in the history of the assembly as attacked from without. The enemy had made a tremendous onslaught in Saul, but Stephen, in the face of fearful opposition against him was able to rise above it and express the spirit of Christ. He says, "Lord,
{44}
lay not this sin to their charge". Think of the power required for that: a man of like passions to our own, facing his persecutors without recrimination, in the spirit of Christ! Stephen dies, but the spirit of evangelisation lives, and @Acts 8 testifies to it! Saul would destroy every vestige of the assembly, but the supreme power was vested in the hands of Christ, and His emissaries went everywhere preaching the word. It is in that connection that we find Philip the evangelist, his heart filled with the message, preaching intelligently, preaching suitably to his audience that Jesus is the Christ. The Lord had announced it to the woman of Samaria, and Philip was in accord with that. Then, entirely subject to the Spirit, he leaves his great work, not choosing for himself-another great mark of an evangelist-and goes to the wilderness. There he met the eunuch and preached unto him, not the Messiah, not the Christ, but Jesus. The eunuch needed that; he had no difficulty as to Jerusalem; he had recognised it as God's appointed place for worship. So, from @Isaiah 53 Philip preaches unto him Jesus, the Person. Every evangelist should be acquainted with that scripture. It is the beauty of Christ: "He shall grow up before him as a tender sapling, and as a root out of dry ground". Where all else was sterile, there was fruitfulness, under the eye of God, though to men there was nothing outwardly attractive. Men look for a military man, a man of outward power and lordliness; the coming man will be all that. There was none of that with Jesus. He appeared not very different from the fishermen around Him.
What an opening for an evangelist! How much happier to be entirely under the Lord's hand than marking out one's own course as a servant. Philip, it says, "beginning from that scripture, announced the glad tidings of Jesus to him". He went a step further; he completely won the eunuch's heart for Christ! Is your heart won for Christ? You require two things
{45}
first, to know Jesus as the Person, the One in whom is every divine beauty, and then to know Him officially, for God has a system of His own, and He has anointed Jesus to carry out all His will. As attracted to Jesus, you are delighted with every official position He fills. The eunuch says, "Behold water; what hinders my being baptised?". Virtually he is saying, 'I want to die'. Then it says, "And they went down both to the water". That may be where the difficulty lies with many, for baptism signifies your death with Christ, your complete severance from this world. Young people complain of want of companionship, and the cry is raised that there is not sufficient provision made for the young. But the Lord is extraordinarily interested in young people, and has omitted nothing for their happiness. He has not overlooked them; but the question is, Is your heart really won for Christ? If so, baptism has a place; you regard it as a necessity. The eunuch says, "Behold water; what hinders my being baptised?". He was thinking of Jesus; His life was taken from the earth, and he virtually says, 'I want to die, I want to be in correspondence with that Man'. He was like Ruth, who said, "Where thou diest will I die, and there will I be buried", @Ruth 1: 17. Philip and the eunuch went down, both of them together. Philip had doubtless been there before, for no man is fit to be an evangelist if he has not tasted death; it is inconsistent of him to baptise another, unless he has done so. You remember Marah; the waters there were bitter (see @Exodus 15: 23). It means that the judgment of God rests upon you as born in this world, and you must accept it. Philip had accepted that, and more, the waters had been made sweet for him. The wood cast into the water speaks of Christ as having borne the judgment, which the taste of the waters suggested. The waters were no terror to Philip, and he went into them with the eunuch, who was baptised and then went on his way
{46}
rejoicing. That narrative is set in Scripture for our learning and comfort, if we desire to take up the place of discipleship. The eunuch went on his way happily; I do not suppose he relinquished his high position in Ethiopia. You may not need to relinquish your position but, as a baptised person, you will fulfil your duties the better. Think of the change in the eunuch, in his spirit and demeanour! What a testimony he would be! He had doubtless plenty of companions in his high position, but they were no longer of any value to him for he had found Christ. He had been attracted to Him and had accepted the death of Jesus, and then had gone on his way rejoicing.
Philip had no *official* position; the keys had not been entrusted to him. He was simply a deacon, but he exceeded his office, spiritually, and was caught away by the Spirit of the Lord. Peter was an official; his commission was to baptise. In @Matthew 16 the Lord raised the question with the disciples as to who He was, and Peter makes his remarkable confession "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God". That man, you might assume, is the great vessel to be used in building the assembly. If the truth of the assembly is opened up, it must have a universal bearing. Israel was limited by divinely-set bounds; and the gentiles were prohibited by these same bounds. Now, the Lord commits to Peter the keys; He intended Peter to be the vessel by which these restrictions should be removed from the gentiles. The Lord said to Peter, "I will give to thee the keys of the kingdom of the heavens". Virtually the Lord is saying, 'Now the light of the assembly is out, every restriction must be removed, and removed by divine authority', and in Acts, Peter is taken up by God in that connection. He preached to Cornelius and his company, and, while he was preaching, the Holy Spirit fell upon all those who were hearing the word-a most remarkable thing!
In @Acts 2 Peter preached a model sermon, and in
{47}
answer to their question, "What shall we do ... ?" (it is a good thing to raise questions) replies, "Repent, and be baptised, each one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for remission of sins, and ye will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit". There Peter puts believing before the gift of the Spirit. That was essential to the Jew; but to the gentile, God acts. They said nothing, though there may have been much said in the heart. Heart movements are for God; He takes account of them. In the burnt-offering, typically the more the light shone upon the inwards, the more were the infinite perfections of Christ disclosed. But when God looks in upon your heart and mine, what does He see? "The word of God is living and operative, and sharper than any two-edged sword, and penetrating to the division of soul and spirit, both of joints and marrow, and a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart", @Hebrews 4: 12. If there is a movement towards Him, He takes account of that. It says in @Romans 10, "With the heart is believed to righteousness". The gospel is addressed to the *heart*, but you must confess with the mouth, otherwise you are never saved. You must raise your standard where the opposition is. The congregation at Caesarea did not speak; it was not for them to speak, but God spoke to them through Peter. And not only did He speak, but He acted; the Holy Spirit fell upon them. Now Peter acted at once. God had done something; now he must do something. He was divinely commissioned to remove the restrictions from the gentiles; and he commanded them to be baptised. It is a question of commandment, and in the name of the Lord. The meaning of being baptised "to the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit" is that you are introduced formally, into the full light of God, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, just as a Jewish proselyte was introduced into the Jewish economy. Think of what you are introduced into, the revelation of God! Do not talk
{48}
of lack of companions! You are introduced into that sphere where the full light of God is; you are baptised to that.
Peter commanded them to be baptised "in the name of the Lord", @Acts 10: 48. I understand by that, that in removing the restrictions, he brought them under the wing of the Lord; the "name of the Lord" signifies that you are supported by all His power. You are introduced into the full light of the revelation and entitled to claim all the power the Lord Jesus wields. Prove it! It is worth proving! Prove that the Lord has power, for it says, "Every one whosoever, who shall call on the name of the Lord, shall be saved". Prove that in your daily life! The point is to raise up the standard of Christ, to give notice publicly that you are on that side. The Lord is then (I say it reverently) morally obliged to support you.
It is a wonderful thing to be consciously under the wing of Christ in your daily life-that One who has attracted your heart in the gospel! Under His wing there is nothing to fear. "Jehovah is for me, I will not fear; what can man do unto me?", @Psalm 118:6.
It is in that connection that Peter refers to baptism in this passage (@1 Peter 3). He says, "Christ indeed has once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God". It is a very poor thing if christians have to suffer for sins-"being put to death in flesh, but made alive in the Spirit". In the gospel all stands on a spiritual platform, in the power of the Spirit-"in which also going he preached to the spirits which are in prison, heretofore disobedient, when the longsuffering of God waited in the days of Noah while the ark was preparing, into which few, that is, eight souls, were saved through water: which figure also now saves you, even baptism, not a putting away of the filth of flesh, but the demand as before God of a good conscience, by the resurrection of Jesus
{49}
Christ". A good conscience demands it. Baptism is negative; there is no power required for that, but salvation requires power. Hence it goes on: "Who is at the right hand of God, gone into heaven, angels and authorities and powers being subjected to him".
That is the position in which we stand; we have accepted death here with Christ. That means you sever your connection with the world; it is essential to salvation to have a true estimate of the world. John says, "The whole world lies in the wicked one" (@1 John 5: 19); every element of it is evil. John also says, "Love not the world, nor the things in the world ... because all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world", @1 John 2: 15, 16. If you judge it thus, you accept baptism and come into the good of the Lord's present place.
Peter exults in the thought, "Gone into heaven". It is more than what he saw in @Acts 1. In @Acts 2 he says, "Having therefore been exalted by the right hand of God", but in the epistle he says, "Who is at the right hand of God, gone into heaven, angels and authorities and powers being subjected to him". Now you come into the good of all that, and, as a baptised person, it is a question of putting to the test what Christ can be to you. The Lord has salvation, and "Whosoever, who shall call on the name of the Lord, shall be saved". You want to do that! No better advice can I give, in having to do with a world that hates Christ, than to count upon the Lord's word in little things as in great.
Then in connection with the testimony, if you are exercised, the Lord will support you. Paul could say, "The Lord stood with me, and gave me power",
@2 Timothy 4: 17. It is an immense thing to put the Lord to the test, and prove how He will support you. The Lord make us to know the power which is at our disposal!
{50}
ESTABLISHMENT
@Psalm 125: 1, 2; @2 Corinthians 1: 21, 22
My thought is to say a word in regard of establishment. It is a great thing that souls should be established; that is established in regard of God's mind, and in regard of their place in the counsels of God. I should like to explain that to you. Some of us have already been dwelling on @Hebrews 11; it refers to faith in the Old Testament, how faith grew, and as a whole this indicates how the believer grows, gathering up all the previous light until he is settled as before God. In Abraham you see the faith that reckoned on God's power. He had a son who was everything to him, an object of his affection, and God called upon him to give him up. Abraham gave him up on the principle of faith, counting that God was able to raise him up. That is faith, reckoning on God's power, counting that God was able to raise from the dead and to place him in the sphere assigned by God's counsels. Joseph, by faith, gave commandment concerning his bones; he made mention of this at his departure. Now bones are of no importance except in the light of the power of God. They will become dust and, except in the light of God's power, have no importance. Hence Joseph was in the light according to God in giving commandment concerning his bones. He had faith that God could place him in the sphere designed for him. In contemplating his death in Egypt he had the faith that God could remove him to the sphere designed for him in God's counsels. But what comes in between? The resurrection of Christ now and our resurrection still in the future.
Now there is the path of responsibility, the period in which the believer is to be for God, where he is blessed of God, in the midst of a constantly changing
{51}
scene. It is here you want to be established in your soul as to that. God has raised up Christ from the dead and placed Him at His own right hand; it is the place designed for Him in His counsels. None of us are very sure about these things and about the present, and Moses furnishes us with that side, for the faith that came out in Moses has reference to the present. God is able to keep us at the present moment. Moses's parents were not afraid of the king's commandments.
Why? Had Pharaoh not power? Pharaoh was all-powerful in Egypt; it was a pharaoh that knew not Joseph; you could not reckon on his sympathy. As a believer you cannot reckon on the sympathy of this world though you may secure it. The world had no sympathy with Christ. Do you accept the support of the power of this world? The powers that are in this world do not know Christ. They may have a certain knowledge historically, but they have no sympathy with Him. As a follower of Christ, you do not seek this sympathy. Do you look for protection in the world? Believers have at times formed alliances with the world for protection, but true believers refuse to seek sympathy in the world. The parents of Moses could not count upon it. That was the king under which Moses was born; he was hostile to God's people, yet Moses's parents were not afraid of the king's commandment.
You often find that young believers are afraid of that form of power, that is, whatever you are in touch with; I want to deliver you from that, for while that exists, you are not at rest, you are not established. The parents of Moses were not afraid of the wrath of the king. Why did they not fear? They had faith that God would intervene for them. What is your faith? The apostle proposed faith for the jailor, for he was exercised as to salvation. Man's exercise is first to be right with God, and the jailor was assured that something was against him. There was something
{52}
that had shaken the prison, and it was not the power of this world. The power that moved that prison was greater than all the power of the world or empire, and he felt that power was against him. Personally the jailor represented the power of the empire and he had the servants of Christ under his control. He could not define his feelings; he felt things were not right and he cries, "Sirs, what must I do that I may be saved?", @Acts 16: 30. It is remarkable that he should address his question to them. The apostle proposed faith in a Man who had power. He does not say, Believe on the Nazarene, that was the point in Jerusalem. That is not Paul's answer here; it is, "Believe on the Lord Jesus". Have you got that kind of faith? I think it is a wholesome thing to enquire as to what kind of faith you have. Paul proposes faith, but in a Man who has power. He could say, "I am not ashamed of the glad tidings", @Romans 1: 16. When he went out from Jerusalem highly elated with his commission he was armed with authority to capture the followers of the Lord Jesus. He was armed with all the power of Jerusalem, and Jerusalem was supported by the power of the Empire. He recognises in principle the power of the world. He was a very good official, quite equal to his commission, but when he got the commission from Christ, the light from heaven, he goes out to the gentiles and he can say, "I am not ashamed of the glad tidings".
Think of Christ, beloved friends, going up to heaven; the gates were thrown open and He entered! They gave way to Christ; He ascended up far above all heavens. This is a great day for exploring the air, but can you think of a Man going into heaven? He has "ascended up above all the heavens, that he might fill all things", @Ephesians 4: 10. From there He arms that man, He takes him up from the earth and gives him His Spirit. He imbues the apostle Paul with His own Spirit, and sends him forth into the gentile world.
{53}
What dignity attached to that position! How he would expatiate on the glory of that One! He preached a Man he knew, and he proposed faith in that Man, and now all nations are called upon to have faith in that Man. Paul could say, "I live by faith, the faith of the Son of God, who has loved me and given himself for me", @Galatians 2: 20. He could also say, "Faithful is the word, and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am the first", @1 Timothy 1: 15. That is how the apostle Paul could speak to people. He would propose faith to you; he would have no hesitancy or reluctance. He would not have you with doubt, he would say, 'You believe in this Man!'.
How real are the arms of the Lord about us and the power of the King! How real to believe, just to believe on that Man and be saved! The idea of everything is to get light as to Christ. If you get the light of Christ in your soul then you get movement. What movement there was in the jailor! He got light and he asked questions. What an effect the light had for that man! He had faith; he believed in God, rejoicing with all his house. He believed all that the apostle presented to him, he believed the whole message; and that laid the foundation of the church at Philippi. If ever there was an assembly established it was the Philippian assembly. The foundation was connected with Lydia and with the jailor; it was the first foundation in Europe, and the jailor was secured for Christ by that message. What a beginning for the West! Light shone into his soul with regard to Christ and set his soul in movement. The apostle's message to the jailor had reference to the present moment. The question was, "What must I do that I may be saved?"; and the answer was,'Believe on that Person!'. I want to know if you have such a trust as that. I do not mean the soul's salvation in Christ, but faith for the present time. "They that confide in Jehovah are as mount
{54}
Zion, which cannot be moved". Where are you in regard to that? This is a rushing age; everything is marked by the rapidity of change. Where are you, beloved friend? Are you moving with the masses? Every wind that blows makes a change; that is what the ocean is, but now you have a mountain; and the mountain remains unchanged. "They that confide in Jehovah are as mount Zion, which cannot be moved". As I said before it is all a matter of what kind of faith you have, whether you are perfectly calm and undisturbed by the prevailing condition of things.
If you go back a few psalms in this book you will find that a course of experience is entered on in @Psalm 120. First the speaker says, "Woe is me, that I sojourn in Meshech, that I dwell among the tents of Kedar!". That is the experience of many souls, but the next psalm says, "I lift up mine eyes unto the mountains: whence shall my help come? My help cometh from Jehovah, who made the heavens and the earth". That is the language of faith! He looked up for support in @Psalm 121. Then in @Psalm 122 he had the house of God before him. He had light as regards the house of God, and he was glad when they said, "Let us go into the house of Jehovah". In @Psalm 123 he is waiting on the Lord "as the eyes of servants look unto the hand of their masters".
How is that? He is attentively waiting on God for deliverance. In @Psalm 124 he finds the Lord is on his side, if not he would have been swallowed up. It is a happy thing to have the apprehension that the Lord is on your side. Then in @Psalm 125 we have "They that confide in Jehovah are as mount Zion, which cannot be moved; it abideth for ever. Jerusalem!-mountains are round about her, and Jehovah is round about his people, from henceforth and for evermore".
Now you can understand the difference between that and dwelling in the tents of Kedar! We have
{55}
one trusting in the Lord, and the Lord round about His people as the mountains are round about Jerusalem. One need not have a thought in regard to the present in the light of this. The enemy remains, but the Lord is round about His people from henceforth and for evermore. What a stay that is to your heart! The surges may roll around you, but the Lord is round about you, as the mountains are round about Jerusalem. That is what the jailor experienced, as answering to the apostle's proposal, "Believe on the Lord Jesus". That Man has power!
The apostle in writing to the Corinthians was desirous that they should be established. If they were as mount Zion they would be established. If you were established, nothing here would affect you or move you. Things may exercise you; everything that occurs in your life should exercise you, but exercise brings strength. If a man exercises and eats food he will be healthy and strong. Coming in contact with adverse circumstances will not move you, but exercise you. If you have suited food, exercise will develop you.
Paul had exercise but it did not move him. He could say, "Be firm, immovable", @1 Corinthians 15: 58. It is painful to see believers carried about with every wind of doctrine. When Elisha prayed that the eyes of the young men might be opened it says, "He saw; and, behold, the mountain was full of horses and chariots of fire round about Elisha" (@2 Kings 6: 17), and the psalmist could say, "The chariots of God are twenty thousand, thousands upon thousands", @Psalm 68: 17. It is God's invisible protection! "Jerusalem!-mountains are round about her, and Jehovah is round about his people, from henceforth and for evermore".
Now the apostle wished to establish the Corinthians, and he says, "He that establishes us with you in Christ". Think of the grace of the apostle in speaking thus to them! God would establish you as well as me, he says. God does it, and He does it by bringing
{56}
light to bear upon your soul. You want to accept everything that God has done. "Now he that establishes us with you in Christ, and has anointed us, is God, who also has sealed us, and given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts". God has done all that; God is bent on establishing souls. Then He anoints you, and anointing means that you are to be distinguished. God puts something on you that distinguishes you, that is the Spirit of God. God puts the Spirit of God on the believer; it distinguishes him. You are marked off by God, distinguished by God!
Then He seals you. What does this mean? God puts His stamp on you, showing that you belong to Him; you are the property of God. Then it says, "And given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts". He gives you something for your enjoyment. There are many things in our heart and mind that we abhor; it is a fountain of all that is evil. God gives "the earnest of the Spirit" in our hearts. See what the Lord said to the woman in @John 4: "The water which I shall give him shall become in him a fountain of water, springing up into eternal life"-springing up, that is the Spirit! Think of what it was to that woman, a fountain of water which would spring up, spring up to God! The countenance of man was made to look up into God's face, and by spiritual affection the countenance is turned Godward.
May the Lord affect our hearts!
{57}
RIGHT RELATIONS WITH GOD
@Exodus 4: 1 - 9
The book of Exodus is perhaps as well known as any section of the Old Testament, and the same may be said of the epistle to the Romans in the New Testament. One is thankful that it is so, because aside from a right understanding of Exodus and Romans we can never be in right relations with God in our souls, and God's thought is that we should be in right relations with Himself. It is His thought that His relations with man should be adjusted, and this book, taken with the epistle to the Romans, enables us to understand how God has effected His relationship with men. God desires to be in relationship with you. Do you desire this? God has been at great pains, as it were, to make it possible for Himself to be in relationship with men and yet to be consistent with His own nature. God proposes this. There are many here this evening who know God as the only true God and who know that they are acceptable to God in Christ, but the thought in a meeting like this is that all should be in relationship with Him.
The door is kept open by the Lord for the gospel, so as to increase the number in relationship with God. God's thought is to have man reinstated in relation with Himself. The door is held open by the power of God so that light should be set before souls. The object is to cause exercise. We never get the mind of God apart from exercise. If we are not exercised we can never be right with God. Exercise is wholesome, though it may be very painful, but no one learns reinstatement with God apart from painful exercise. The soul enters on a period of darkness. Abraham had experience of darkness. People are extremely
{58}
careless at the present time. They come into a gospel meeting as a religious duty, but there is nothing in that at all. What have you before you? Have you turned in here to hear of God? to hear of Christ? God is interested in you. God will never disappoint you; there will be something to answer to your desires. God is interested in His people. Moses essayed to deliver the people by his own strength, but he found in the wilderness that God was infinitely more exercised than he. God says in chapter 3, "I have seen assuredly the affliction of my people who are in Egypt, and their cry have I heard on account of their taskmasters; for I know their sorrows. And I am comedown to deliver them", @Exodus 3: 7,8. God proposes to do it, that is the great thought! God came down to earth in the Person of Christ to effect the deliverance of His people. One would seek to impress this on your heart. God came down to effect your deliverance; God came down. He saw and He heard and He came down to deliver. It would be in a human vessel; God was here in a vessel. I speak reverently, but He became Man so that there should be an adequate vessel here for God to speak through; and more than this, a vessel adequate for Him to act through. That was the Person of Christ here; God acted in Jesus and He spoke in Jesus, and we have that foreshadowed in this passage. Now Moses is selected to undertake the mission, and he says, "They will not believe me". Many a servant has had that feeling come over him. But then the Lord says to Moses, 'I will give you three signs'.
I want to dwell upon these three signs, to open up to you, if I can, their bearing. God gave Moses these three signs, in sending him back from the wilderness to the land of Egypt for the deliverance of Israel from Egypt. First, God says, "What is that in thy hand?".
God takes up what you have, whatever the thing may be. Moses had a staff, and that staff had a
{59}
spiritual meaning. I have no doubt it represented what man was entrusted with here on earth, for the authority of God was invested in man. We do not naturally love authority. In connection with creation, God introduced the idea of authority, and authority invested in man. We must have to say to God on the ground of authority. Moses rod represented the principle of God's authority here on earth invested in man; but that became satanic. We have to do with the world, and today, as it stands, the authority is in the hands of those alienated from God, for the authority in the world is, in principle, under satanic influence. Of course, there is God's overruling hand; for God is restraining Satan's influence, but the history of authority is the history of satanic influence.
Thus the word is, "Cast it on the ground. And he cast it on the ground, and it became a serpent". Think of the power that is active in that! That staff in man's hand became a serpent. Such is the world, and it is only waiting the moment when the full satanic power will show itself. Well might Moses flee from it! The spiritual mind recoils from satanic influence exerted in authority. Pharaoh was the embodiment of satanic influence vested in authority, and the Egyptians were under this. Where are you? Think of being under the influence of a serpent! Passing out of the hand of God to Satan, you find your place in the world, and that world is under the domination of the serpent. Were your eyes open you would recoil from it. The power of the serpent becomes evident; well might the spiritual mind recoil from that. The hissing serpent was there, the governing power in the upper region of society with Pilate, at the death of Christ, a terrible terminus of authority committed to men's hands! We have to do with that kind of thing. Souls are stupid in the indulgence of self-will which is the very essence of sin in the presence of God.
Is God going to suffer this? He says, "Stretch
{60}
out thy hand and take it by the tail". Moses took the serpent by the tail and it became a staff in his hand. What I understand by that is that God took up man afresh in Christ. God has not surrendered His idea, but He takes up man again in Christ, and, if you take in this thought, you get deliverance. The staff in His hand became the symbol of divine authority, the instrument in God's hand for the deliverance of the people throughout their history. It brought about the overthrow of Pharaoh's power and the deliverance of the people of Israel. What is the rod of God to you?
Do you ever think of it? Christ is the rod of God-a wonderful idea! What is authority in the hand of Christ? The sin of the race is implied in the indulgence of the will of the race, but God has taken up the authority in Christ; it is in His hand.
Now what is the character of the authority in Christ? I should like to refer to the case of Saul of Tarsus as an illustration. The Lord Jesus had died, had risen and had gone into heaven, and God had made Him both Lord and Christ. God had taken up the idea of authority in that Man and authority is invested in that Man in heaven. It waited for God to show what kind of authority was in that Man. There is a time coming when He will have a rod of iron and will rule the nations, but Christ did not rule Saul of Tarsus with a rod of iron, nor you, nor me. He said, "Saul, Saul, why dost thou persecute me?", @Acts 9: 4.
Has the Lord ever spoken to your soul? If He speaks to your soul, it is to assert His authority in your soul. If so, you may become rebellious, but He overthrows your will. If ever the will of man was in activity, it was in Saul, but the Lord's authority is greater than his will. He says, "Saul, Saul"-that is the rod of Christ! That is how He exercises His authority at the present moment. He speaks directly to your heart, He calls you by name! If the Lord spoke to you tonight by name would it not touch your heart?
{61}
If He singled you out and called you by name, it would make an impression on your heart and establish His authority there.
He extends His kingdom in this way. The ruling men of this world are always concerned about extending their kingdoms. Before the kingdom was limited to Israel, God intended that His kingdom should be correlative with the universe. The Lord would extend His kingdom in your heart and would assert His authority in your soul. In the words "Saul, Saul, why dost thou persecute me?" there was the Lord extending the benign influence of His kingdom. I suppose none ever understood the kingdom better than Saul; he constantly preached the kingdom. For him to preach the kingdom was to announce a Man who loved him; so he says, "We do not preach ourselves, but Christ Jesus Lord"; that involved the authority of Christ in the soul of man. What souls suffer from is the activity of their own wills. Let Christ speak to you, call you by name; He will undertake for you! The next thing therefore you find is that the Spirit of God was given to Saul.
If the light of Christ enters into your heart you die as to your spiritual condition; so the second sign is, "Put now thy hand into thy bosom". You may well consider your work and activities as under the Lord's eye. What are your motives? Do you find them in your own natural heart? What is in the heart of man?
Every evil and corruption is there, it is incurably wicked! What are the governing motives of men? What can they initiate? Where would it end? There is nothing but corruption, men acting from their own bosoms, that is motives, and leprosy is written over the whole. That presents the world in a very peculiar light. In @Genesis 6, God says, "Every imagination of the thoughts of his heart only evil continually". The hearts of men remained unchanged by the flood, for the hand that built Babel was leprous. But then
{62}
Moses was told to put his hand into his bosom again. The second bosom must be the bosom of Jesus. There was no corrupting there; every motive was pure; every movement of that blessed heart was Godward. The hand comes out as the other, the leprosy gone! I see work proceeding for God, no ambitious thought, no desire to be conspicuous. Every movement of that heart is Godward. That is the idea. God has received the hand that is not leprous. The hand of Christ was not leprous; He touched the leper and the leprosy departed.
I have said many times that the thought of God was to bring man into accord with Christ. If the gospel is announced to you, that is the thought. What is leprosy? It is sin. Whatever is the working of will, that is leprosy. The Lord brought leprosy to light in Peter; He asserted His authority, and there was a great draught of fishes. What was the result? Peter was discovered to be a leper. You are discovered to yourself, not to another; you are the leper. Peter said, "Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, Lord", @Luke 5: 8. See how he recognises the Lord's authority! The light of the authority of God shines into his soul and he appears leprous. Man becomes leprous when he disregards the authority of God in a Man.
Disregard of the authority of God, as presented in Christ, is leprosy. But instead of the iron rod to destroy the sinner, leprosy is removed. In @Luke 5, Christ touches the leper and the leprosy departs.
How great is the present moment; one would love to make it clear. It is the moment of the authority of Christ in a benign way, the reign of grace. Divine authority has taken this form to bring in conviction to the consciences of men-to show them they are lepers. Grace removes the leprosy it discovers!
What wonderful signs to take to Egypt! What testimony to ensure his being received from Jehovah!
{63}
The second lesson is Jesus bosom. The love of God to sinners, lepers, involved His death. How otherwise could it be removed? We see this in all the ritual applying to leprosy in the book of Leviticus; there had to be the death of one of the birds over running water. Leprosy has to go representatively. Your leprosy can only disappear in the death of another. Jesus took it upon Himself. I dwell upon it in reference to the hand being put into the bosom a second time; a different bosom it must have been, the leprosy was gone. God has in Christ another hand acting in resurrection power, and the divine thought is to bring us into accord with that. If you are doing anything now for the Lord it is not from selfish motives, but you are doing it for the Lord as Paul did. I warn you to be on your guard about the leprous hand, that is accomplishing things for selfish motives. That is a sweeping statement, but unless you are doing it as the outcome of the love of God in your heart, your hand is leprous. If you are under the influence of the love of God in your work, then your hand is like the hand of Christ; it carries out the will of God from pure motives.
The third sign has reference to life and its connection with Egypt. The life of the inhabitants of Egypt depended on the river. Apart from this river Egypt was a desert. Here is the benign influence of the authority of Christ in the gospel. It has been presented all these centuries and has been spurned. The result is that which is refreshment to you now becomes your judgment. The dispensation is not to continue; it is to terminate and that soon. That rod of blessing becomes the rod of iron; that which is the support of life to you becomes judgment, for the water is turned into blood. That is the end, a very solemn outlook. What is now the expression of the love of Christ in the way of cleansing and life-giving is reversed and becomes the expression of God's judgment.
{64}
The two first signs refer to the testimony of Christ and His cleansing power. If you reject those two signs, as the Egyptians did, they will become judgment to you, the unmitigated judgment of God. May the Lord deliver us from this!
{65}
RECOVERY
@Song of Songs 2: 8 - 16; @Song of Songs 8: 8, 9
It may seem a strange scripture for a gospel preaching, but this is a day of *recovery*. Probably there is not one in the room here who has not heard the gospel and who knows that Jesus died and made atonement for sin. There is scarcely anywhere in the world where the gospel has not been preached, indeed, the evangelist Mark says it is to be preached to "all the creation" (@Mark 16: 15); and Peter says, "Christ indeed has once suffered for sins, ... being put to death in flesh, but made alive in the Spirit", @1 Peter 3: 18. What Spirit does he mean? The Spirit of evangelisation. And then he goes on to say, "In which also going he preached to the spirits which are in prison, heretofore disobedient, when the longsuffering of God waited in the days of Noah" (verses 19, 20). Hence all one can do today who seeks to do the work of an evangelist is to seek to *recover*. There is no new ground now, such as Paul desired (@Romans 15: 20), to speak where Christ had not been named. We must speak where He has been named, and hence, if He is not known by you, it shows the need for recovery.
This is so especially with the children of christian parents. Christ's name has been called not only where you live, but upon you. It has been called upon you in baptism, and if now there is the need for conversion it is evident that there has been departure from that, and hence the need for recovery. So perhaps you have come into fellowship; that was what Moses did. He chose rather to suffer affliction with the people of God than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season (@Hebrews 11: 25, 26). I know your parents are responsible to bring you to Christ; that is what parents did in olden days, that He might put His hands upon the
{66}
children. No right-minded father would want to see himself reproduced in his child. That is what a man does see naturally. Leave a child free, without cultivation, and your traits will come out in him. But with a right-minded father that is a shame to him. He has judged himself and does not want to see himself reproduced in his child. A self-important man of the world might, but a christian father desires to see the impress of Christ coming out in his child. He brings him to Him for that. What would Christ put His hands on your child for but to leave His own impress there? But your child can come into fellowship himself as soon as he comes to years of discretion.
Moses did that. He "refused to be called son of Pharaoh's daughter", not simply would not *be* it, but would not be *known as such*; the idea of a name is in it. His faith was of two kinds, he did not fear the wrath of the king, that is, it had reference to the power of the god of this world against the people of God, and also that he kept the passover (@Hebrews 11: 28); that had reference to the delivering of the people of God from the power of sin. His faith had reference to this world, therefore the record is so useful for us; it is not like Joseph, whose faith had reference to resurrection, so that he gave commandment as to his bones (verse 22).
The moment you move towards Christ you find the whole power of the world is against you, but the greatest power against you is *yourself*. Here, in the Song of Songs, the call is to rise up and come away (verse 10), but if you do you will find everything against you, but principally yourself and your own desires and ambitions. Rahab in speaking to the spies mentioned two things: how Pharaoh was overthrown in the Red Sea, and how Sihon and Og were overcome. Og exceeded the natural in size; he was a giant, the size of his bed is given, the only man in the Scriptures the dimensions of whose bed is given, for he was apparently
{67}
slothful and loved ease, like you and me, a picture of us. But if the power of God could overcome these two, they could be overcome by you; the power of God can support you against yourself. If the call comes to you, "Rise up ... and come away", you need not fear, for support will be given you. And who would be without the support of the Lord? So we see the bride in the last chapter of the Song coming up out of the wilderness, leaning on her Beloved. This book depicts the triumph of Christ in recovering lost affection. It is much harder to recover what has been lost, than to win love at the first, "love of thine espousals". So this is the greatest of Solomon's songs, the greatest of the one thousand and five. Where are *your* affections? The Lord misses them if He has not got them. If you belong to Him, He misses you every Lord's day morning from the breaking of bread. You may think the responsibility too great, but the responsibility is yours anyway if you are a believer, and you are simply missing your privilege. The Lord remembers any spark of affection you had for Him; you may have forgotten it but *He* has not.
See, in the verses I have read, how He *regains* affections. He calls; she knows His voice. This shows that there had been affection or she would not have recognised His voice. Then He shows Himself through the lattice. You know what the lattice is in your case, I do not; you know what there is in your circumstances that shuts out Christ. But no matter how close the lattice is, He shows Himself through it. Then, as soon as He gains her ear, He begins to speak of the land. It is not the wilderness now; she had followed Him there in the strength of her own affections, "I remember for thee the kindness of thy youth, the love of thine espousals, when thou wentest after me in the wilderness" (@Jeremiah 2: 2), but now He speaks only of the land. He says, "The winter is past". What was the winter except when your heart
{68}
was cold towards Christ? And there was rain there, too, but "the rain is over, it is gone". Now those are all past, and He speaks of flowers and warmth and festivity. Then He says, "Let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice"; the countenance is what God takes pleasure in; God had lost man's countenance in @Genesis 4, when sin had come in. Man was made upright to look into the face of God. But God regains man's countenance in one indwelt by the Spirit. So with the voice; there is something peculiar and special about the voice of a spiritual person.
In the last chapter we see the affections regained. The bride comes up from the wilderness leaning on her Beloved. She has learnt His love and that she cannot trust her own, but must lean on His; she says, "Set me as a seal upon thy heart, as a seal upon thine arm", as if to say, 'I cannot do without you, I must lean on you for ever'. She has learnt two things, love and jealousy, because she has learnt His love. She has learnt that it is stronger than death. He has told her of her own fairness, and she told His to others. That is fitting; there is mutual admiration.
Then "We have a little sister". She has learnt that what He values is affection, and now that is all right with her, her thoughts go out to her little sister, who is lacking in affection; she represents really typically Judah going out in affection to the ten tribes. It is really Judah that speaks throughout the Song of Solomon. Judah had the birthright; it had come to him at last. Esau had it first, then lost it and it passed to Reuben. He lost it and it passed to Ephraim. Again it was lost and passed to Judah and he held it, so that Christ sprang out of Judah. When he is restored his thoughts go out to the ten tribes. Here we see that one sign of a person restored in affection is that his thoughts go out to others: "If she be a wall", and, "If she be a door". I do not know your idea of a door, but mine is self-judgment. A door is
{69}
a means of ingress and egress. "I am the door: if any one enter in by me, he shall be saved, and shall go in and shall go out and shall find pasture", @John 10: 9. It conveys the idea of shutting out what is contrary to God and letting in what is in accord with God. That involves self-judgment. If there is any sign of that in a man, affection would enclose him with "boards of cedar". I do not know what they may be, but evidently they speak of dignity. Then, "If she be a wall"; a wall is for preservation and protection. If a man protects the truth, one can count a good deal upon him. One has seen such, men who lack in affection, but who value the truth and protect it; one can build a good deal on such a one. Here it says, "We will build upon her a turret of silver"; that is evidently something very great and imposing.
I am doubtless open to the accusation of not having preached a simple gospel, but the gospel as to the atoning work of Jesus and what He has done to put away sin is known to everyone present. What I would like to impress you with is that He wants your affections, and how He has laid Himself out to gain them.
{70}
THE PREACHING OF CHRIST
@1 Peter 3: 18 - 22; @1 Peter 4: 1 - 6
One has in mind to call attention to the preaching. You will observe that, where we began to read, it says that the Lord was put to death in the flesh but was made alive in the Spirit, and in that Spirit He had preached to those who were disobedient in the days of Noah. You will understand then that He had been active to preach in the Spirit in Old Testament times, and that, in becoming Man, He was anointed with the Spirit in order to be a Preacher. "Being put to death in flesh", it says, "but made alive in the Spirit". He arose in that same Spirit. He arose in the Spirit of preaching, and that Spirit of preaching has continued up to the present time, and it will continue to the coming of the Lord. So that, beloved friends, you can see that a long period of time is covered by the preaching of Christ. There has really been no other preaching than that, and we would desire to be in accord with it at the present time. As it was active then, it should be our interest now, that it may continue in those that succeed in the Spirit of God, that is, in qualified vessels.
Now this subject is a very great one, and of very wide bearing. The Lord Jesus Christ has died in the flesh; He has suffered that He might bring us to God. That was the object in view, to bring men to God. But in order that we should be brought to God, there has to be the announcement of the glad tidings of God, so that all may hear. The scripture says, "How shall they hear without one who preaches?", @Romans 10: 14. Faith cometh by hearing; that is, hearing the word of God through the preacher. That is the divinely appointed way for the present moment. However weak things may appear to you, to those who
{71}
have faith it is a very great moment; it is the moment in which the Spirit of Christ is active in preaching in sympathetic vessels, vessels divinely qualified, hearts touched with love, preaching that which might bring men to God. Peter puts it here, "Who is at the right hand of God, gone into heaven, angels and authorities and powers being subjected to him". That is not apparent publicly. He has gone into heaven in the same Spirit in which He was made alive, and He is at the right hand of God. What is He doing? The power at His command is being exercised so that there might be an open door for the preaching. This is a great comfort to those in the service of Christ. They have not only the Spirit of preaching, but they have His power as at the right hand of God, gone into heaven, angels and authorities and powers being made subject unto Him. All are subject to that Man, and He is holding the door open for the time. He is waiting for you tonight! The Lord, in that marvellous place, is waiting for you!
The preaching contemplates that the world is alienated from God. Perhaps you have not accepted the fact that the world is alienated from God. The first mention we have of preaching has reference to a time when the world was alienated from God. I refer to @Genesis 6. @Genesis 5 is typical of the christian period. It refers in the end of @Genesis 4 to Seth, the appointed one, appointed in place of Abel. It is a very remarkable thing that we frequently refer to @Genesis 5 to prove that death is universal upon men; but at any rate there was one man immune from death, and that is like the present moment. It is a solemn fact that death exists, but in regard to those who have the Spirit of God, we have a testimony of life. It says in @Hebrews 11, "By faith Enoch was translated that he should not see death; ... for before his translation he has the testimony that he had pleased God". So in @Genesis 5 it says of Enoch, "He was not, for God took
{72}
him". It is what I call the lifeline, not the death line. The oldest man died but Enoch did not die, he walked with God three hundred years and begat sons and daughters, and God took him. Chapter 5 is the testimony to life, but chapter 6 gives the other side of the picture, the corruption of the world.
Are you in the world? The first occasion of preaching has the world alienated from God in view. Are you in the world? You may have it in your mind that you would like to try it. There are many enticing things there, many pleasant things; perhaps you would like to have the opportunity of proving them for yourself. God has taken account of that exercise; looking on to the gospel day, He brought a man into the world and endowed him with everything this world could give. He exalted him to the throne, giving him the means of acquiring everything in the world; there was nothing he could not command, for "What shall the man do that cometh after the king?", @Ecclesiastes 2: 12. Solomon not only had all this, but also had divine wisdom given to him to derive satisfaction out of these things, if satisfaction were in them. You have not that. If you had all the wealth of the richest man in Great Britain, would you have divine wisdom? Would you have God with you in it? No, you cannot get out of it what Solomon got out of it. Why? The reason is Solomon had God with him in it all. If you want to try this world, you must try it *alone*. What was his verdict in his unfailing wisdom? "Vanity of vanities! all is vanity", says the Preacher. Do you ever read the book of Ecclesiastes? It was written for you who are seeking to satisfy yourself in this world. God brought that man in to prove there was nothing to satisfy there. "What shall the man do that cometh after the king?". There is the testimony of God in the kindness of His heart; He has set that testimony there that you might not be deceived, and so that all after-comers should not be deceived.
{73}
Deceived you are, if you go in for the world. The man who had all that experience is set up as the Preacher, a sort of beacon-light: 'I have been there; don't come this way!'. It is a book worth reading; it was written for after-generations.
The Lord Jesus Christ, who was really the Preacher, rose from the dead in the Spirit of preaching; and so, in regard to @Genesis 6, there it was that the Spirit of Christ first became active; it was in the presence of a world alienated from God. God says, "The end of all flesh is come before me". He had feelings about it for it says it grieved Him at His heart. He looked down on the children of men and saw nothing but evil continually. The Spirit of Christ appears on that scene; it is almost a repetition of the first chapter of Genesis, where the Spirit of God was hovering over the deep, as though God was waiting to bring order out of chaos. So when we come to the *moral* chaos that had come in we find the same idea: "My spirit shall not always plead with Man". During those one hundred and twenty years, that Spirit in which Christ rose from the dead was active preaching to those disobedient people. One wonders what effect it has on souls now! The Lord goes to great pains that the gospel should reach you. How do you treat it? The difficulty often is that there is no exercise. Now if you are not exercised by the light, you will never get any good from it. The object of light is to illuminate the soul, that the soul might be set in movement. "Christ indeed has once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God". This is almost a quotation from Exodus, where it says, "I have borne you on eagles wings and brought you to myself", @Exodus 19: 4.
See the pains God took with Moses that he might be a qualified vessel. It is said of Moses, "By faith he celebrated the passover", @Hebrews 11: 28. What did he have in view? You remember in the earlier part of
{74}
his history, Moses slew the Egyptian. In doing that Moses anticipated the destroying angel, but Moses was not constituted the destroying angel, and hence Moses had to flee to the wilderness. He learned that he too had to go in judgment as well as the Egyptian. The destroying angel has reference to you too as much as to the Egyptian. Have you accepted that Moses did not at first. He had to go substitutionally in the passover lamb. You can never be brought to God unless you accept that. Moses had more than that in view. The destroying angel had reference to every Israelite; there was no difference, for death rested on them all. "By faith he celebrated the passover and the sprinkling of the blood"; that was for the outside that the destroying angel should not enter.
That was what Moses did by faith. There is no deliverance from the world unless you accept the fact that death is upon you. The next parties who had faith were the Israelites themselves. "By faith they passed through the Red Sea", @Hebrews 11: 29. That is the only thing we read of that they did by faith. How did they get that faith? Moses imparted the light in himself to the people. They crossed the Red Sea by faith, the only thing they did by faith, but it was a very wonderful thing. This, translated into the language of the New Testament, is, "delivered for our offences and has been raised for our justification",
@Romans 4: 25. That is the death of Christ presented objectively to your soul. Then @Romans 5 begins, "Therefore having been justified on the principle of faith, we have peace towards God", @Romans 5: 1.
The first eleven verses of @Romans 5 show what God has done for us in the Lord Jesus Christ, and the result is we are brought to God; the first thing is to be brought to God in your soul. "I have borne you on eagles wings and brought you to myself". If brought to God, He will dispose of you. God has a world of His own; the whole universe is God's, and
{75}
there is a place in heaven for men! It is entirely a question of God's pleasure as to what He may do with you. When God proposes a covenant He says, "All the earth is mine" (@Exodus 19: 5); it is entirely a question of God's pleasure. The gospel of Luke is really that section of Scripture which supports the gospel which Paul presents, and shows us there is a place in heaven for men. If you are brought to God, what will He do for you? When the seventy returned to the Lord they rejoiced because the demons were subject to them, which was a very great thing, but the Lord said, "In this rejoice not ... but rejoice that your names are written in the heavens". That indicates they were to have a place on high, a confirmation of the doctrine Paul preached. With Israel it was rather a question of God's faithfulness, that they should have that land according to the promises to the fathers, but with regard to the christian it is, "Because of his great love wherewith he loved us ... has raised us up together, and has made us sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus", @Ephesians 2: 4, 6. That is the place God has for us, the divine thought for us; it is the place of the believer in the Lord Jesus Christ. All you can do is to sit down in the presence of it and give thanks to God. The end in view is that in the ages to come there should be glory to God in the assembly. The exercise of divine grace is to take up such as we are and give us this place. God is entitled to do this and He will do it by His kindness in Christ Jesus. Such is what your soul is brought into as brought to God.
The apostle here as he touches on the Spirit of Christ is led to refer back to @Genesis 6. He touches on baptism, and brings in the truth that covers the present position of the believer. One would not engage you now with the divinely appointed ordinance, but with the spirit of it. "Which figure also now saves you, even baptism". Baptism saves us. Are
{76}
you baptised? If so, are you in accord with it? This has nothing to do with what is within you; that is all dealt with in the passover. Baptism judges what is outside of you; it is the answer of a good conscience towards God. A good conscience in a believer demands that he should be apart from the world. Perhaps you are saying, 'I love the Lord Jesus and His people, but giving up all those things, I do not know about that'. If you go in for the world, you go in for it at your own expense; but if you give it up, it is at the Lord's expense. You may say, 'I do not see the way'. Try it: if you give up the world, it is at the Lord's expense, not your own: He will make it good to you.
If you do give up the world, and confess the Lord publicly, you will bring down the reproach of the world upon you, but this reproach will be your salvation. There is something wrong if you have the favour of the world. Peter tells us that as a matter of course you will come into trouble, but adds, "The Spirit of glory and the Spirit of God rests upon you".
Can the world give you the Spirit of glory? The Lord Jesus can. The Spirit of glory and the Spirit of God rests upon you. Could you desire more distinction than that? You cannot conceive of greater distinction than the Spirit of glory and the Spirit of God resting upon the person who suffers reproach.
Angels, authorities, and powers are made subject unto Christ, and as you accept His rejection, the Spirit of glory and the Spirit of God rests upon you. There was not a more distinguished man than Stephen. His face was like the face of an angel: it shone with celestial glory. There was in that man the reproduction of Christ. The great end of the gospel is to reproduce the Lord Jesus.
When you come to the next chapter, you get the path of a christian opened up to you. It is not Peter's point to take you out of the world; it is that you should continue in that Spirit in which the Lord
{77}
ministered here. He died in it and rose in it. Now it is to be continued in those who live the rest of their time here to God's will. For the thief on the cross, there was no "rest of his time", but Peter contemplates a certain length of time to be lived down here to the will of God. That is the only object for which one can conceive the christian being left here-and it is a good purpose! We are left to continue the will of God, and as we do so we become vessels of that same light that shone in Christ.
One especially feels for young people. If the enemy cannot get the old, he will get the young. The continuance of the testimony is a divine principle, and the normal way is from father to son. The apostle handed it on to faithful men. It is for you to prize it. The effort of the enemy is to capture the youth by the principles of the world.
May the Lord grant He may have your heart!
{78}
DETACHMENT AND ATTACHMENT
@Zechariah 12: 9 - 14; @Deuteronomy 33: 7
I desire to show that the light of the gospel is intended to effect detachment and attachment. In other words, the light of the gospel coming into the world has the effect of detaching the heart, the soul, and the mind of man from all that he may be attached to hitherto, of completely isolating him. On the other hand it has the effect of attaching him to another system or order of things. So it becomes obvious that if we are to be in the good of what the gospel proposes we must be detached from things here. I refer to things used to render man self-supporting. You will recall that man deliberately gave up God. So in @Romans 1:28 it says, "And according as they did not think good to have God in their knowledge"; this is a remarkable statement: men put God from their minds; it was a matter of choice; they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, and God gave them up. God having withdrawn His support from man, man had to cast about for support. God would have supported Noah's line on the earth. What a wonderful position he would have had! God made a covenant with man, and God would have supported him. We should have had a world established by divine support, but men decided to eliminate God from their knowledge, and God gave them up. Man was left without support, and the result was the banding together at Babel, "Let us build ourselves a city and a tower ... and let us make ourselves a name", @Genesis 11: 4. I refer to that as the origin of the world as we have it today, when each nation desires to be self-supporting, unconscious of the need of divine support.
On every hand we see it in the brotherhoods established; not only one huge brotherhood of men, but
{79}
subdivisions appear, especially in the present day. You remember Jacob's prophecy in @Genesis 49: 5, "Simeon and Levi are brethren". The idea of brethren is beautiful where love is; such a brotherhood Christ has established; but it goes on to say, "Instruments of violence their swords". The prophet's eye sees them, but he sees cruelty there. What does God think of these brotherhoods? They are avowedly for self-support. Why self-support? Because they have no divine support. So the Spirit of Jesus is presented to that brotherhood saying, "My soul, come not into their council", but what do men think of that? So at Babel the families of the earth were dispersed. Every foreign tongue is but a token of the judgment of God, barriers contrary to love. In @Acts 2: 8 we read, "And how do we hear them each in our own dialect ... ?"; there are no such barriers where love is. There is a terrible day coming; the day of sentimentality leads on to that of apostasy and finally to open antagonism.
What did God say? "I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel".
When light comes into our souls we begin to think of these things. Today God has given Jerusalem up, and the assembly is now the object of attack. There is a day coming when God will revert to Jerusalem, and then it will have enemies, God's enemies. When the light of God penetrates into your soul, Satan will begin to attack you, as it will be with Jerusalem. Satan stands to resist, and so it is with every soul, as soon as God begins to work, Satan begins to resist. See what the Lord does, "Jehovah rebuke thee, O Satan! Yea, Jehovah that hath chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee!", @Zechariah 3: 2. The preacher here speaks from the Lord, for He is on your side. Jerusalem is lying waste now; when God reverts to it, the enemy will stand to resist; that is all future, but I refer to it now to show how God works. God raises the question with Jerusalem herself, with every family and with every individual.
{80}
There are great advantages in belonging to a christian household. The gospel announces blessing to the household, "Thou shalt be saved, thou and thy house", @Acts 16: 31. The head of the house may trust in God, and what God proposes in the gospel, He will carry out. As belonging to a christian household you are very near the house of God, but you have to do with God yourself; each member has to repent apart. Your father can have you baptised and count on God for you, but he cannot repent for you; you have to do with God for yourself. The light of the gospel is to separate you from others so that you may be alone with God. You have to get alone with God; that is the effect of light.
There is separate wailing and mourning for the Messiah. Each family and each member of that family repents for his guilt before God. God gives the spirit of grace, and it requires grace to judge yourself, "But he gives more grace", @James 4: 6. There is no lack. He says, "I will pour upon the house of David and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem the spirit of grace and of supplications".
The whole of your past history comes before you. The woman of Sychar says to the men, "Come, see a man who told me all things I had ever done", @John 4: 29. She had judged all; it was all out. In the case of the leper when the leprosy was all out the leper was clean. That woman was clean when she went back to the city. Wonderful grace! Not only does God forgive sins, but He gives grace to confess them. Man naturally would not own he had sinned, so we cover things up, but it is just as well to come to the light at once. Then you learn the means of removal. The effect of the spirit of grace is to lead to isolation of soul. You get into a corner by yourself and tell it all out to God. When the leprosy covered the man, he was clean. Hide nothing; tell it all out to God; the blood is there. @Leviticus 14 is the answer to
{81}
@Leviticus 13, "The blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin", @1 John 1: 7. The conscience is set up in the light of the death of Jesus; such is the effect of the death-the blood-of Jesus.
The passage in Deuteronomy shows the effect in the individual; it is the blessing of Moses, the man of God. In Genesis it is the blessing of Jacob, the father of the twelve tribes, speaking prophetically. In Genesis Judah is like a lion, "The sceptre will not depart from Judah ... until Shiloh come" (@Genesis 49: 10); royalty is there: Christ is the gathering centre, and Jacob sees this in Judah. It is the hope of Israel as seen in Christ. But when we come to Moses the man of God, Judah is seen in weakness. It is the experience of a repentant soul. There is repentance, a cry, and Moses, as it were, hears that cry, "Hear, Jehovah, the voice of Judah". If there is that cry, there is the intercession of Jesus. He has taken up a position in regard to men; you may reckon on His support in the faintest cry which He hears. You are detached, and now you want to be attached. God designed man for society; we all love companionship; this desire is in the heart of every man. It is God's thought to detach you from the brotherhoods of this world, and then your voice is to Him. My impression is souls do not cry to God enough. God will make out your cry, "Hear, Jehovah, the voice of Judah". He knows what you need. The light of God renders your conscience bad; the blood of Jesus makes it good. You want society; you can be attached to the Lord Jesus. What is said of Judah? "Bring him unto his people". If there is anything to be desired, it is the fellowship of God's people. Judah has his people, "bring him unto his people". There is to be a living link between your soul and Christ, but you want society, fellowship, companionship. God can give all this. You lose nothing, but gain everything. You are brought into a living system; the power of
{82}
the Spirit of God is there. One loves to see young Christians coming into that. There is a living order, and God would bring you into it.
In the case of the leper outside the camp the effect of the judgment of his sin is that he was not fit for the society of God's people. Remember what Ruth said, "Thy people shall be my people", @Ruth 1: 16. The Lord knows all about you; you come to know Him and you say, "Thy people shall be my people". Every society in the world is banded against Christ. Is it not a great thing to be linked up with a people that are living though hidden? Our time for display will be when Christ is manifested. Meanwhile He supports you. The Christian has His Spirit. The Shunammite woman, who is called by the Spirit "a wealthy woman" (@2 Kings 4: 8), is a continuation of the widow with the oil. Not only were her debts met, but she became a woman of wealth, and lived off the balance. If you recognise the Spirit you are spiritually wealthy. There is no claim against you, not a moral charge, if you live by the Spirit. That is your income, you live by the Spirit, and so you have a wealthy woman, but not too great to live amongst her own people. Judah is to be brought to his own people. You recognise the Holy Spirit, and now you have your hands, "May his hands strive". The Spirit of God becomes your means of support: "Be thou a help to him", that I take it to be the kingdom established in Christ. The Christian has the support of the Spirit and looks to the Lord for protection. You will be in reproach if you associate with the Lord's people, but you pray and the Lord protects you. It is by the protection of the Lord Jesus you are here looking to Him now; it is wonderful how He comes in for you, so that you are protected and supported.
{83}
HOW GOD HAS BROKEN OFF ALL RELATIONS WITH THE WORLD
@Zechariah 11: 4 - 14; @John 10: 10 - 16
I have before me tonight to seek to show how God has broken off all relations with the world. There have been three worlds with which God stood connected. The first was that which was before the flood. It was owned in a certain relation as proceeding from Seth, the man whom God gave to Adam and Eve instead of Abel. His name signifies that he was appointed, and his posterity is given in Genesis S. God stood in a measure related to that world. There was one man in it who walked with God, and in that way maintained what was due to Him, no doubt as a testimony. That man was translated, and another appears to take his place. The appearance of Noah became a resting-place for the heart and mind of God, and in Noah He perceives one in whom He could inaugurate and set up another world; hence He breaks His relations with the first world. He gave men one hundred and twenty years, and during all that time there was one man who was endued with the Spirit of Christ; he was endued with the spirit of evangelisation. What grace on God's part; but all in vain! There was a complete termination of that world; but then it was replaced by another, for @Genesis 9 records the establishment of another world. It was set up on another work, but owned of God, and He entered into a covenant with it. That would receive divine support. There was in the cloud the token of God's covenant. What was the result? We are told that men deliberately chose to eliminate God from their knowledge. The men of that world, in spite of all the kindness and power that God showed them, deliberately chose to eliminate God from their
{84}
knowledge, and God gave them up. He then called out Abram and, in calling out Abram, He judged the second world, and, in the seed of Abram, God established another world. God never gives up the idea of a world; He loves the idea of a world as it says, "God so loved the world, that he gave his only-begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him may not perish, but have life eternal", @John 3: 16. So that there is "the habitable world which is to come, of which we speak" (@Hebrews 2: 5), a world that abides, "the world of our Lord and of his Christ", @Revelation 11: 15. God never severs His connection with that world, but I want to show that God severs His connection with the world He established in connection with Abraham's seed.
If God gives up a world, what will men do? Men are banding together; what they did in @Genesis 11 is what they are doing today. If God withdraws His support, what will the world do? It must become self-supporting. It is a solemn day we are living in; it is a day of brotherhoods. But God not only severed His connection with the world, but He says, I will break up your brotherhoods (@Zechariah 11: 14). What are brotherhoods for? To make man self-supporting. They say in @Genesis 11, "Let us build ourselves a city and a tower, the top of which may reach to the heavens". Towers are witnesses to the esteem in which men hold themselves; their object is to exalt men to heaven. "Let us build ourselves a city"; it is the idea of centralisation, not simply binding together, but making themselves conspicuous. God paralyses the system. How easily God can do it! You remember what took place at the tomb of Jesus, as recorded by Matthew. It says that they sealed the stone and set a watch. What did the seal mean? It represented all the Roman power. But an angel came down and he set aside all that power! It says he "came and rolled away the stone and sat upon it",
{85}
and none dare touch him! He could have smitten all the legions of Rome. Do you remember how many one angel of old slew? A hundred and eighty-five thousand! (See @2 Kings 19: 35). So the angel sat upon the stone at the sepulchre in solemn irony. Suppose you take all the armies and navies of the world and bring them together, and God was to use lightning-the angel's look was as lightning-how quickly He could obliterate them! In a moment He could do it. But for the time being all are allowed to continue, and God uses all that power in support of the gospel. The Lord in resurrection sends the apostles to disciple the nations, not to destroy them, and says, "Behold, I am with you all the days, until the completion of the age", @Matthew 28: 20.
Now the prophet says, "I took my staff, Beauty". That staff represents what was in the mind of God with regard to Israel. They were taken out and set above all the nations, and divine beauty put upon them; the proposal of God was that Israel should be a nation of priests. Think of the beauty of Aaron's garments! That was what was in the mind of God for Israel. The Lord came, not to break up that covenant, but to make it effective. "I have given thee", says Jehovah, "for a covenant of the people". He came in as the expression of the heart of God for the people; but there was no response. He found the shepherds murderers and thieves, and as to the people, He says, "We have piped to you, and ye have not danced". Have you ever 'danced' to the gospel? David danced before Jehovah when the ark came into the city of David (@2 Samuel 6: 14). Christ came in with all the affections of God for the people. When He drew near to the city of Jerusalem He wept. He felt their sin, but what He did feel specially was their indifference. He says, "How often would I have gathered thy children as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye would not!", @Matthew 23: 37.
{86}
And so He breaks off His connection with them. There is one other staff remaining, the staff that symbolised the unity of Judah and Israel. If you maintain relations with each other when unity with God is broken, it is iniquity. Unities today are to render man independent of God. Where are you? Are you connected with any unity, any society, any brotherhood in the world? Jacob says, "Simeon and Levi are brethren"; the name is *external*, for it goes on, "Instruments of violence their swords". The name is deceptive, even if divinely given, when it is connected with what is contrary to God, "For in their anger they slew men, and in their wantonness houghed oxen". Self will is the order of the day, and God intends to deliver men from it. Jacob says, "My soul, come not into their council; mine honour, be not united with their assembly", @Genesis 49: 6. Whatever may be the pretensions, it only remains for God to bring in Christ, to bring out what is there. All will work out in the support of Him who comes in His own name. What are you going to do with Jesus?
He says in the language of the prophet here, "Give me my hire". Are you going to sell Him? Are you going to barter Him?
I would appeal to the young. Satan is seeking to gain your soul by something of this world, but the Lord puts Himself before you. What are you going to do? His voice appeals to you tonight, "Give me my hire". And so it says here, "They weighed for my hire thirty silver-pieces". What are you going to sell Him for? Are you going to give up Jesus for the world? The Lord had nothing but kindness in His heart for Judas. How much has the Lord given for you? I love to read Peter's writings for one reason; he uses adjectives by which he shows his appreciation of Christ. He speaks of "precious promises", and of being redeemed by "precious blood". He says, "Ye have been redeemed, not by corruptible things, as
{87}
silver or gold ... but by precious blood, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot, the blood of Christ". Has that any weight in your soul? Did you ever admit the Lord's title to you? He has redeemed us and He lays claim to His property. Do you admit it? If there is one thing I glory in, it is that I belong to the company of the redeemed. Young people are in danger of despising christians because they seem to be in the minority; but they are really in the majority. Enoch was in the sense of it when he says, "Behold, the Lord has come amidst his holy myriads", yet he was alone at that time. The prophet John too saw vast multitudes; can you number them? There are those who have admitted the Lord's claim and as recognising that they are His by right of redemption, He puts His seal upon them. The seal is the gift of the Spirit. Have you received it? At the end of @John 3 we read that "The Father loves the Son, and has given all things to be in his hand". That is what I would call an economy of affection.
Now, what is the result? In chapter 4 the Lord's proposal is to give living water to the woman at Jacob's well, and the giving is equal to the authority.
I want, in closing, to refer to the flock in @John 10. It was God's mind that His people should be banded together. The covenant is divine beauty put upon us; that is the staff called Beauty. Then there is the staff called Bands or Binders. What are the binders? The unity of the Spirit. In @Zechariah 11 God scatters, but there were "the poor of the flock". I used to be ashamed of the poverty of the Lord's people; but the Lord says, "The poor of the flock that gave heed to me". In @John 10 therefore the Lord brings in a brotherhood. In chapter 4 He gives the Spirit and that Spirit in you produces certain affections. You have the same Spirit with which Jesus was anointed, and Jesus gives it to us. The Spirit forms affections; and these affections crave kindred affections. Christ
{88}
as the Shepherd calls His own sheep out; He does not leave you alone, He gives you the Spirit, and He will care for you. The voice of the Shepherd is the voice of affection for your soul. But what will He do with you? It says, "There shall be one flock, one shepherd". Sheep are defenceless creatures; they allow their wool to be taken away. It says of the Lord Himself, "He was led as a lamb to the slaughter, and was as a sheep dumb before her shearers, and he opened not his mouth", @Isaiah 53: 7. But they cannot touch you spiritually; you belong to the flock, tended by the Shepherd. It is unity, unity of nature. That is the thought of unity in John's gospel. And you have the society of those that have the same affections as yourself.
May God bless the word.
{89}
DIVINE INTEREST IN MAN
@Genesis 28: 12 - 17; @Genesis 32: 1, 2, 24 - 31; @Genesis 35: 9 - 12
My thought is to speak about the divine interest in man. It is important, I think, to remember that whilst God's interest in His people is necessarily special, He is interested in all men, and for the reason that they are men, and I wish to show that His thought is for the moment to bring man into His house. The great evidence of His interest in His people is that He has got a provisional place for them now, pending the coming of the Lord when we shall be taken up to heaven. God has a house and distinction is seen between the two thoughts; that is to say, between our place in heaven and the provisional place which God has instituted down here. The distinction is seen in the two gospels-that of Luke and that of John.
The house from John's point of view is the Father's house; that is to say, it is the sphere of the family. The house according to Luke is God's house, the provisional order of things set up here in relation to the gospel. Hence it is that into which God would introduce man, and that is what I want to dwell upon, beloved friends, if the Lord help me.
I want to show you the interest that God has in man and I venture to select Jacob, because whilst he is a man of promise, the seed of Abraham and Isaac, yet he is a type of man that in no sense merited anything. Jacob in no sense presents to us a man that in himself merits anything. It is well to begin in that simple way lest you might have the thought that you cannot be included among those in whom God is interested. It is well to have the light of God, for there has been your past history; it is well to have it judged, but I do not dwell upon that. I wish you to understand that your past history has nothing to do
{90}
with God's interest in you; the occasion for the moment of God's interest in you is that you are part of the human race. That is a most comforting thing, to my mind, to receive into the soul. The fact that Jesus has become a Man and that God has placed Him in the highest place in heaven shows that it is the day of favour, all men are taken into favour. It is not the day of imputation, of reckoning, of judgment; it is the day of favour; that is to say, God would make it as easy as possible. He would remove every possible hindrance out of your way so that you might come into touch with Him. I have often compared the difference between the cherubim as seen in the tabernacle and as seen in the house according to the books of Chronicles or Kings. In the tabernacle the cherubim looked down upon the mercy-seat; in the house they looked out toward the door of the house. The position was thus changed; that is to say, on the ground of the sacrifice of Christ, the blood of Christ being placed on the mercy-seat, God is free now to look out and, beloved friends, He has a long look-out. He looks out toward the door of the house, which really implies that He is looking out upon humanity and His eye reaches to the utmost bounds of the race; there is none that escapes His notice. He looks out upon the whole race of man. On the ground of the death of Christ, the blood having been carried into the holiest and placed upon the mercy-seat, the cherubim of glory are now enabled to look for blessing, not for judgment, and directly there is a move in your heart Godward (and I would define that to be that you begin to think aright, you take account of things as they are in the world, and in yourself, and in your circumstances), directly any movement of that kind takes place in the soul, God sees it.
When you come to the New Testament, it is not only the look-out of the cherubim of glory, but there is God the Father, viewed as the father of the prodigal,
{91}
He is looking out. Wonderful thought! God is on the watch! The Old Testament speaks of being on the watch tower. Now think of God having placed Himself in that position! He is on the look-out and He is the first to notice a movement in your heart. He knows more about that movement than you do. He knows just what has brought that movement to pass there; He knows how to interpret it and He does not wait for you to come. It is not now simply that He is looking out; He moves out, He runs! Think of God running, beloved friends! I am using the figure. I am referring to things that are very simple and well-known to you all, but it cannot but be affecting to think of God looking out, and directly there is a movement-it may be of the tiniest nature -- He takes account of it. The prodigal made a speech as you remember, and God took account of that, but it says, "While he was yet a long way off, his father saw him, and was moved with compassion, and ran, and fell upon his neck, and covered him with kisses", @Luke 15: 20. I only touch on that to show you the situation, that God is looking out on the race of man, and He takes the whole race in His view. You remember what Simeon said of the Child, "A light for revelation of the Gentiles and the glory of thy people Israel", meaning that the gentiles have come into view; the cloud is lifted. Christ has brought them into view; they have come under the divine notice for blessing.
Well now, as I said, I would encourage you if there is a movement in your heart; it may be very tiny, it may be just this, that you have come to think of things seriously; you have been in the habit of looking at things in a very trivial sort of way, taking things up lightly, but you have become serious; it may be that you have begun to pray a little. God notices that prayer of yours at night, He takes account of it. Satan has not brought that to pass in you. God brings it to
{92}
pass in you. There is a certain regard for the things of God, a certain fear has entered your heart. Well now, in view of that change in your heart, God sets things in movement. A movement in God's heart in heaven is sure to bring to pass a movement on earth; the whole moral system is affected. I am not exaggerating, beloved friends, "there is joy before the angels of God"-not for one saint, but-"for one repenting sinner". There is a movement in the heart of God, and a movement there is sure to bring about a movement elsewhere.
Now see Jacob. I refer to him in @Genesis 28, to show you what divine interest is. Here was a lone man with a character not worth having! There was no merit whatsoever in the character of this man; he is a supplanter; he is a liar; he is a deceiver. I am not speaking now of the purpose of God, I am speaking of Jacob's conduct and what he was. He is fleeing from the wrath of his brother-a lone man with a stone for his pillow! Think of him there, endeavouring to go to sleep, and he did go to sleep, on that spot. Now think of the divine interest and of what ordering there was, as seen in the angels attending, the swift messengers of the divine will. They were attending and all their movements had in view a poor man lying on the earth with a stone for his pillow. He had nothing, no character, no friends, save his father and mother, and those who knew him best hated him! Think of that! You are not worse than Jacob. Think of the activity in heaven and that ladder being set up and, more than that, angels of God ascending and descending upon that ladder. And what was it all about? That man lying there on the earth, with his head on a stone and no one with him. Doubtless his father and mother had sympathies, but the world knew nothing of that man; there was no sympathy there. Look at the wealth of what is here, the angels of God ascending and descending upon that ladder,
{93}
and that lone man lying there, the object of all that attention! Does it not affect your heart? Christians ought to be profoundly affected by the thought of God's interest in them long before they knew Him. Alas! how little we do appreciate it. That same attention goes on day by day and night by night; it never ceases.
Now this was God's interest in Jacob when he was setting out, as you may say, to make his mark in the world. He was setting out as young men do; every young man has his own prospects, his own desires and expectations; he has got something before him. There were twenty years ahead of Jacob; God knew all about that. His heart was bent on something, but that did not prevent the divine interest in him. No waywardness, no crookedness, no wilfulness, can interfere with the interest of heaven in us. I am not encouraging these things, you know, I am only showing you what God is. God's interest was in that man, be that man's motives what they were, God had set His heart upon him. Jacob was in a poor way to appreciate it all. How many are like that! He says, "How dreadful is this place!". He had a right judgment of it, he knew what it was. I have seen many young people-they knew well enough where the truth was -- they knew the people of God were right-they knew the gospel was true, but it was all dreadful. Such was Jacob's state. This is a dreadful place!-and yet he gives it its right name: "This is none other but the house of God". God is in this place. Little he knew about God; he really knew nothing about God. Had he known the heart of God, he would not have thought of using the word 'dreadful' in regard of His house, the home of divine affections, but that was his judgment. But then that did not interfere in the least degree with God's interest in him. He says, 'I am going to be with you, Jacob, I know what is in your heart; you are going in for things, you are going to
{94}
have something'. Sure enough he did have something, he did not serve his twenty years for nothing. He got his salary; it was changed ten times; God allows that. Many of us have been permitted to secure something; we have set our hearts on it and we have attained it. It is remarkable how men attain to things, but what I desire to show, beloved friends, is that, whilst all that is not excusable in the least degree and you have to judge it, yet God's interest remains in you. He never gives you up. He allowed Jacob to go to Syria and to remain there twenty years, but He had placed in Jacob's heart an impression that he never got rid of; that is the effect of the gospel.
The light of God entering your soul places an impression there that is remaining; that is the work of God. That vision was not for nothing; there was a foundation laid in Jacob's soul that God could refer to twenty years after. God knows just what He has done; He produces an impression in your soul by the light, and that impression is there for ever. It is the work of God. Your will may be stronger than it for the moment, very often it is so; it was so in Jacob's case. Our will may be stronger than the light we have; it may be too strong for us and we go our own way; but God says, 'I am going to be with you'. The government of God is inexorable; nothing fails it; it touches you. But God's interest remains in you and He never gives you up till you are brought back to the first impression produced in your heart by the light of God. You are never recovered till then. Now in chapter 32, Jacob is on his way back. He has flocks and herds and wives and children; he is a wealthy man; he is well off. We must not think that because a man is wealthy God is not interested in him. Jacob was wealthy, he had not spent his time for nothing, but God's interest remained. What we find now is that Jacob returns, and he is met by two camps of angels-that is the word "Mahanaim". I
{95}
just want to dwell upon that, for it is, as it were, a full testimony of the interest of God. It says, "The angels of God met him". What a moment for Jacob; how he would be reminded of that night! He had seen those beings before; he had seen them on the ladder. Now he meets two camps of them, they come to meet him. I do not know exactly what I may call them in regard to the history of believers now; angels usually set forth what is providential. God gives providential evidences of His interest in you, but that is not Him self; He has not met you Himself yet. At Luz God was at the top of the ladder, but He did not come down then; the angels came down, there was testimony of God's interest, but not God Himself yet. So with Job, God testifies to Job by one instance and another, but finally He spoke to Job Himself. When God meets you face to face, and touches you, all is over with you; you have no more to say. You notice here that having met these two camps of angels, Jacob still speaks. He is wealthy, he would send to Esau a testimony of what he was, no ordinary man; he was not a poor man now. He was a man of means; he had secured wealth in this world and he would have us know about it. He was simply full of himself and his acquirements and even the meeting with the angels did not displace this in his heart. But all the droves of cattle and the wives and children go over the brook and Jacob was left alone, but left alone with God. No angels now, for it is really the Lord Himself.
Let me enquire as to whether you have had a direct transaction with God. It is of moment that you should hear the preacher, for the preacher is sent, such as an angel in that sense, the evangelist is exactly that, and it is well to listen to the preacher, but then the preacher is not God. It is well to get the light and to let it have a place in your heart, let it bring about repentance, but do not stop there, let God have to say to you. I do not undertake to tell you how; He has
{96}
His own way of getting at the soul. He allowed Jacob to get all that made him great in the world, but that had gone, gone over the brook, and he was left alone, but he was alone with God. Now you come to what Jacob really is according to God. God had been with him and had been working in him; God had produced an impression in his heart at Luz that never left him; it was divine. Now he wrestles with God till the breaking of day. How in earnest he was! Would that there were a soul in such earnest as Jacob now! He positively refused to let go until He blessed him. How one admires that! I believe it was delightful to God. It was God Himself there, and Jacob was so intensely interested now in the presence of God that he wrestled till the breaking of day. The man said, "Let me go, for the dawn ariseth", but Jacob says, "I will not let thee go except thou bless me". How delightful to God that was! You remember what Elisha's prayer was-I admire it! He said to Elijah, "I pray thee, let a double portion of thy spirit be upon me". A double portion! One cannot but admire the boldness of that prayer. If there is anything God delights in it is boldness in prayer on the part of man-you cannot ask too much! Elijah said, "Thou hast asked a hard thing". Nevertheless it was not denied him; he received it. It was a marvellous prayer! I believe Elisha understood what was coming, for a double responsibility was to lie upon him; he was to maintain the testimony of grace in the presence of Ahab. Elijah maintained the testimony of judgment, and Elisha was not to set that aside. But while that was maintained, he would add to it the testimony of grace and, in the double portion of Elijah's spirit, he had the means of maintaining it in the presence of the house of Ahab. You remember the house of Ahab remained during all the testimony of Elijah. Elijah was sent to anoint Hazael to be king over Syria, and Jehu the son of Nimshi to be king over Israel, and
{97}
Elisha to be prophet in his stead, and him that escaped the sword of Hazael Jehu was to slay, and him that escaped the sword of Jehu Elisha was to slay (see @1 Kings 19). Now what happens? Elisha's administration comes in first. All that is understood instinctively by the prophet and he asks for a double portion of Elijah's spirit. That is to say, he maintained the testimony of grace in the presence of the house of Ahab and when the reign of grace was over, he anointed Jehu to destroy the house of Ahab (see @2 Kings 9). That was Elisha's prayer.
Now look at Jacob here, he refuses to let the angel go until he blesses him. How one would encourage individual transactions with God. Turn to God, He is there to meet you. Jacob says, "I will not let thee go except thou bless me". Then he is asked, "What is thy name?". And it is all out; Jacob has to make a confession. You know we are often depressed in our souls and hampered, and progress hindered, because we do not make confessions. Now Jacob's confession of his name was really to confess that his whole course was a crooked one, Jacob, the supplanter, a crooked scheming man! He told it out to God.
What a relief! I believe it was a positive relief to his soul to have it all out. That is the end of Jacob's history as a crooked, scheming, wretched man, all that he was as a man in the flesh. Now God gives him a name. I would desire greatly to be able to convey to you the import of the name that God was pleased to give Jacob. He says, "Thy name shall not henceforth be called Jacob". What a change! What, am I to be relieved for ever of all the shame of my past history? Is all that to be cancelled? Yes, beloved friends, cancelled for ever as far as God is concerned! That name is cancelled: it is no more yours. You have owned to it; you have had it all out with God. Now it is blotted out for ever, the name and all the sins attached to the name gone into oblivion for ever!
{98}
That is the grace of God. He says, "Thy name shall not henceforth be called Jacob". Never mind what men call you, it is a matter of no consequence, it is a question of what God calls you. He only can give you a name that is to endure for ever. Now what was the name? It was 'a prince'. The word 'Israel' means that. What elevation! He says, "Thou hast wrestled with God, and with men, and hast prevailed". Would that one could convey to you what the word 'prince' involves. Christians are in God's account princes, because their names have been changed. God has changed our names and the new name involves that we are dignified and qualified for a place in His house. What I understand by that is that God gives us the Spirit. The past history is cancelled. God could not give the Spirit with *that* history. He could not seal *that* history; it must therefore be cancelled vicariously in the cross of Christ before God could give the Spirit. The death of Christ cancels that history for us, beloved friends, and so God gives the Spirit to us. Now the possession of the Spirit involves power. It says here, "Thy name shall not henceforth be called Jacob, but Israel; for thou hast wrestled with God, and with men, and hast prevailed". The possession of the Spirit enables the christian to prevail, so that he not only has the title, but he has the power. He has that which supports the title. One would enlarge upon that. You see a christian moving about in this world, entirely independent of the world, entirely independent of the flesh; he has access to God; he can, as it were, move God, speaking reverently. He has influence with God, he has prevailed; he has power with God and then, on the other hand, he has power with men. A christian is a man who has power with God; he has access to God, he prevails with God and with men. He has got very little if he has not power with men. If you have not power with God, you surely have not with men; but as having
{99}
power with God, you have power with men, and as having these things you are a 'prince', your name is 'Israel'.
Well, in this passage, Jacob has not arrived at the house yet, but he is on the way to it now. He is not yet qualified for it. I want you to see what I am saying, that God would bring you to His house; that is the great end here. Now Jacob asks, "Tell me, I pray thee, thy name". But God denies him His name now, but it was a desire that God did not spurn. God loves our prayers. He does not always answer them when we make them, for He reserves His right to answer them as He pleases, and what He pleases is perfect. Jacob's petition to know Jehovah's name was not answered till he arrived at Bethel. I need not turn aside to the sorrowful history of chapters 33 and 34. Alas! there is many a counterpart in christians! Instead of going straight to Bethel, he turned aside and bought a house; he came short of God's purpose for him. God had a house, and God had produced an impression in his soul twenty years before as to that house, yet Jacob turns aside to build one for himself. But God finally says, "Arise, go up to Bethel". That is what God would say to you tonight, wherever you are-"Go up to Bethel". I just hasten on to show you how Jacob buried the idols at Shechem and how he set out for Bethel. Now notice, directly he moves to Bethel, the terror of God is upon his enemies. God is bent on that man arriving at Bethel and the enemies are all terrorised: the terror of God is upon them.
Now upon Jacob's arrival at Bethel, God appears to him again, and He answers the prayer that he had made at Penuel, and that was that Jacob should know God's name. Have you such a desire? It is a most wonderful thing to know God's name!-the God who has interested Himself in you, the God who has given His Son for you, the God who loves you! Do you
{100}
want to know His name? Jacob desired it and God waited till he arrived at Bethel to answer that prayer. What you notice in verses 9 and 10 is, "Thy name shall not henceforth be called Jacob, but Israel shall be thy name. And he called his name Israel". The name is confirmed at Bethel, that is to say, in the house of God. The new name is confirmed to you so that you are certain about it; you have no doubt about it; you are in the presence of God in full suitability to God. Dignity is conferred upon you that constitutes you equal to the position. But now, God does not stop there, He said unto him, "I am the Almighty God", as much as to say, 'That is My name; your name is Israel; that is power, but I am Almighty power. You have power; My power is Almighty'. What a meeting that is! Those who inhabit the house of God are constituted men of power by God. Their name signifies that they are princes. They know God's name, and that name is Almighty God. I need not add that in christianity we have the name of Father. Here it is simply, "God said to him, I am the Almighty God". In order to know God's name and all the affections and the relationships that are involved in it you have to go into the house of God; you do not get that outside. God reserves His right to answer your desire in His house. If you want to know a man, you know him in his house, and when Jacob arrived at Bethel God disclosed to him His name. He opens up His heart to us; His name has been declared by the Son so that it may be known by us. In @Luke 15, the prodigal is inside and the Father's affections flow to him. What a scene it was! What kind of a son was he? He was a living son. He had been dead, but he was living. Such was Jacob in principle. The prodigal was a living son. The elder brother is not called a son, although the Authorised Version uses the word in verse 31, and Israel after the flesh had that place
{101}
with God. But it really is, "Child, thou art ever with me". The prodigal, however, was a son, and a living son. Such are the inhabitants, those who dwell in the house of God and they know God's name.
Well, all that is to show you what divine interest is and how it pursues its object until it establishes him in the house.
May the Lord bless the word to us!
{102}
HOW GOD MEETS IMPERIALISM
@Acts 2: 1 - 13, 33 - 38; @Revelation 19: 11 - 16
My thought in reading these two passages is to show you how God meets imperialism. I refer to that because it is in imperialism that Satan has sought to set aside the divine thought in regard to the race of mankind. God interfered with men when they sought to combine in a unity, and He set up barriers, so that the combination should be prevented. God will not allow of any universal combination of men, except as it is under the influence of Christ. He will not admit of any other, and any attempt to bring it about, He regards, to use a military term, as a declaration of war. Any attempt to bring about a universal unity, God regards as open opposition to Himself. Men may not intend that it is in opposition to God; they may endeavour to hide the real motive, or in other words, men may not quite know what the power by which they are controlled intends in the attempt; they may not be aware of it, but Satan is aware of it. Men do things that they are not quite intelligent about; they are impelled to do them by a power that is outside them, for there is a power in this world which is hostile to God, and its imperial motives always are antagonistic to God. All will appear nakedly in the future, when it succeeds in unifying the different nations of the world under one head. When the enemy succeeds in doing that, he comes out openly. That head is supported by him, whose names are given to us in Revelation, "The ancient serpent, he who is called Devil and Satan". He has got a variety of designations, and they are all given in that passage, so that there might be no mistake as to him, and he gives all his power to the beast. So that it is all now manifested. His great aim from the building of the
{103}
tower of Babel unto the end is to bring about a universal unity of mankind in opposition to God's designs. That is his aim.
Now God regards that as an open declaration of war, and the issue has existed from the kingdom established by Nimrod and will continue until the end of the present order of things. Nimrod's name signifies that he was a rebel, that is to say, he rebelled against the revealed mind of God. He controverted the revealed mind of God and he established an empire at Babel. Where God limited the nations, and circumscribed them, Nimrod attempted to unify them, and bring them under one head.
That is perhaps something that you have not thought much about, but that is what obtains in the world at the present time, an endeavour to bring about a universal unity. I want to show you that God has met that in Christ. It is always attractive to be diverted from what Satan is doing to what God is doing, and what God is doing is all centred in the Lord Jesus. The Lord Jesus appearing in this world was for God's pleasure. He is the Man of God's pleasure. We read in @Acts 17 that God is going to judge the habitable earth in righteousness, and it is by the Man whom He has ordained, that is to say, by Christ. Then it says, "giving the proof of it to all in having raised him from among the dead". Now, in that sense, the resurrection of the Lord Jesus was God's way of emphasising His approval of Him. The approved Man is raised, beloved friends, the *approved Man*! Now why was the Lord Jesus approved? We are told that He loved righteousness-He *loved* it -- and He hated lawlessness. He was the opposite of Nimrod. He was the opposite, in fact, of all the great rulers of antiquity. They did not love righteousness. Now what is said of the Lord Jesus is that He *loved* it. That came out in His path here; it came out in all His ways. Many of us are young people, and, I speak
{104}
feelingly, young people do right because they fear the consequences. Now I should not weaken that, beloved friends. It is well to do right, even if fear be the motive, but you can see at a glance that it is quite different to do it because you love it. Now what came out in Christ was this, that He loved it; He *loved* righteousness, and He hated lawlessness. Now, that Man is approved; the Man who loved righteousness and hated lawlessness is the Man to rule. Hence we read that God has undertaken to "judge the habitable earth in righteousness by the man whom he has appointed, giving the proof of it to all in having raised him from among the dead". In other words, the Man who is approved is the Man who is to rule.
Now, what I want to show you, beloved friends, is that He brings in a unification Of the race On the principle of blessing. That is @Acts 2. In @Revelation 19 it is the same Person. In other words, the Person who gives the Spirit is the Person who destroys antichrist; it is the same Person. If He destroys antichrist He will destroy what is opposed to Himself in me and in you. The Person from whom I have received the Spirit is the Person who destroys antichrist and He destroys him by the Spirit He has given to me. He destroys him with the breath of His mouth. Now, is He going to allow anything anti christian in you? Is He going to place you and me On the ground of anything in the flesh? Is it possible that I have received the Spirit from Christ, and yet be allowed to pursue my own course Of self-will? No! dear friends, it is not possible; my will has to go.
Now, how is that brought down in us? I do not know of anything more interesting than the wisdom with which the Lord Jesus from heaven brings about His sway in the heart of man at the present time. He proposes to bring about His sway in your heart and in mine, and, in effecting that, He brings about universal unification. His thought in the gift Of the
{105}
Spirit is that, that the barriers that had been raised up among the nations should be overthrown. If God raises up a barrier, He will not allow anyone else to overthrow it. Any attempt to overthrow it He regards as rebellion, but He has got title to overthrow it Himself.
Now what He does is this. He brings in a Man, and that Man becomes approved. I would advise everyone here to study the gospel Of Luke, and what the gospel of Luke presents is man reinstated. You will all remember @Genesis 40, where Joseph is found in prison with the two servants of Pharaoh. One is the chief baker of the king and the other is the chief butler Of the king. They were both found in prison with Joseph. What a wonderful thing to be found in prison with a man like that! More than that, Joseph was attending upon them. That is the present moment outwardly. Well, now, what I want to show you is this, that the light that came out in prison, the light that shines in that chapter, is that man is reinstated. But in whom is he reinstated? He is reinstated in Christ. That is the gospel of Luke. A Man appears whom God approved; God approves the Man, as Luke presents Him. After thirty years of private life it is announced from heaven that He is the Son of God. "Thou art my beloved Son, in thee I have found my delight", @Luke 3: 22. On the mount Of transfiguration, in chapter 9, He is owned as the One who is qualified to speak; He is qualified to be heard, the One who should be heard, and, in the last chapter Of the book, He is carried up into heaven.
Now, think of that, beloved friends! Think of the reinstatement of that Man in the presence Of God! He is reinstated. Does not that encourage your heart? Think Of a Man now extending His hands in blessing. That is what the last chapter presents to us. It says, "He led them out as far as Bethany, and having lifted up his hands, he blessed them" (verse 50).
{106}
What a Man He was! His hands extended in the blessing of men. *That Man* is carried up into heaven.
It is not simply *received*, but *carried up* into heaven.
Does that not encourage your heart? A Man who is engaged in the blessing of men here upon earth is, carried up into heaven. I have often thought of the breastplate. The breastplate signified that the Lord loved the saints, and the breastplate was for God. It was that which met the eye of God when the Lord was before Him. That is the Man that God delights in. A Man that loved the saints on earth is carried into heaven. Think of heaven being occupied and dominated by a Man like that!
You all remember @Psalm 24, "Be ye lifted up, ye everlasting doors, and the King of glory shall come in". The everlasting doors were opened to a Man like that. He was *carried up* into heaven, not only that He went up, as John presents it, for it is not a question of the dignity of His Person, but of a Man who can love. Is that how you apprehend the Lord Jesus? That is how I apprehend Him, a Man who can love, a Man that has got the breastplate with all the saints names there. That is the Man who is carried up into heaven. Is that not glad tidings? That is the approved Man. He is carried up into heaven, and He dominates heaven!
Now, when He goes there, the sphere of the blessing necessarily becomes extended. He intends to influence, in blessing, the whole race of mankind. The whole race of mankind is to come under that influence.
Suppose they turn their back upon that influence?
Alas! many are doing that. Suppose you turn your back upon the sun? It continues to shine upon your back! That is the present dispensation. The whole race of mankind is to come under that influence. I wish I could make that plain to you; it is the influence of a Man whose hands are extended in blessing, and that is what comes to light in @Acts 2, when the Holy
{107}
Spirit comes down. What does that mean to you and me? It means to me that Christ's influence in heaven is unlimited. You see what Peter says here: "Having therefore been exalted by the right hand of God". The approved Man is exalted, and, being in the highest place, He receives the gift of the Spirit, and the gift of the Spirit here implies that the blessing is to be universal. "How do *we* hear them each in our own dialect?". What language! and there were those hearing "from every nation of those under heaven". There are none others! *Every nation of those under heaven*. Who is in heaven? Christ is in heaven. And every nation under heaven must be influenced by Him. Bethany was necessarily a limited spot, although it was a very precious spot to the heart of the Lord. The blessing began at Bethany, but it was limited there. The Man who began to bless at Bethany is exalted to the highest place in heaven, and He continues to bless. Has He blessed you? That is the question. If you have not received the Spirit, I advise you to pray for Him. One loves to hear people asking, "What shall we do ... ?". The present is a time of giving. It is not a time of demanding, it is a time of giving. His hands are stretched out to bless. What an Administrator the Lord Jesus is! What are you going to do with such light as that? It is a time of giving, that is what it is, and giving from such a position.
I love that word, 'Heaven'! I do not know what you think about it. You will find here in the opening of this chapter that the sound is said to come out of *heaven*. Now suppose you had loved Jesus on earth; suppose you had loved Jesus as Peter had loved Him, and John and the other apostles, and you had seen Him go up to heaven as they did. What would you expect the next thing from heaven to be? What would you look for? I would look for some sign that would suggest something as to the One I had seen going in there. I would look to hear of something
{108}
changed there. There was a change in heaven when Jesus went in there; the One who dominates heaven is the Blesser. What an influence! What an influence upon earth! "Canst thou bind the sweet influences of Pleiades ... ?". You cannot bind them. The influence of Christ is irresistible; you cannot bind it. It is the influence of the Blesser. Well, the question is whether you have come under it. The Lord wants to influence us. Have you come under the influence of Christ in heaven? The sound, it says, came out of heaven. Oh! what a sound it was! It was no bruit of war. No! beloved friends, it was the Holy Spirit of God, and He came down in such wise as to fill. It says, "There came suddenly a sound out of heaven ... and filled all the house ... . And there appeared to them parted tongues as of fire, and it sat upon each one of them. And they were all filled with the Holy Spirit". The Lord Jesus showed by that one fact that the reign of blessing had begun. Now, I would appeal to you, have you received the Holy Spirit from the Lord Jesus? That is the greatest possible gift that He can give you. "Having therefore been exalted by the right hand of God, and having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, he has poured out this which ye behold and hear". He received Him, and shed Him forth. It was the administration of blessing. Now, what I want you to notice is that the gift of the Spirit here brings about the overthrow of human imperialism. If you are not possessed of the Spirit, it is as certain as anything can be that you will be incorporated in some society of this world. You will find yourself involved in it in some sense. The only hope for you is to come under the influence of the Lord Jesus in heaven. The gift of the Spirit implies complete deliverance from worldly combinations. You can understand these men of Jerusalem raising the question of what they should do. They were convicted, pricked in their hearts. It was one of the
{109}
most remarkable addresses that ever had been. There could not have been such a sermon preached before. It was the first sermon preached in the power of the Holy Spirit sent from heaven. Peter says that later, "declared to you the glad tidings by the Holy Spirit, sent from heaven", @1 Peter 1: 12. I want you just to ponder the situation. Peter stood up with the eleven, not with the one hundred and twenty. The one hundred and twenty had received the Spirit, but they were not all preachers. They were not all commissioned to preach. The twelve were commissioned to preach, and the preachers are to stand up. Peter stood up with the eleven, with the commissioned preachers. They were entrusted with the preaching. It is entirely a mistake to say that the assembly is entrusted with the preaching. Peter stood up with the eleven; he had the support of the eleven preachers.
It was a wonderful address. He preached the gospel by the Holy Spirit sent from heaven, and we are told that they raised this question, "What shall we do, brethren?". They were convicted, and Peter's reply is, "Repent, and be baptised, each one of you". There is no such thing as repentance in companies. There is such a thing as love in companies, but there is no such thing as repentance in companies; it is *each one of you*.
I wonder if anyone is convicted? Do you know what brings conviction? The goodness of God. And here was the most remarkable expression of the goodness of God. The Holy Spirit had come down from heaven. Jesus had received Him from the Father, and had shed Him forth, and there He was in their midst. It was the goodness of God. "We hear them speaking ... the great things of God". Suppose you search the profane histories of the world, what do you find? I do not say that we ought not to be acquainted with the histories of the world, in a sense, but you will find the record of the exploits of the men
{110}
of the world, the wonderful works of men. What is going to be the end of all that? Not one trace of it will remain, *not one trace*! Beloved friends, not one trace of the exploits of a man like Napoleon will remain. His name will never be remembered in the world to come, nor any other here before him. Every trace of these men and all others will disappear.
Now, what about God's imperialism? What about God's Emperor, I may say, because that is what the Lord Jesus really is? He is "King of kings, and Lord of lords". What about the record of His exploits? They will be the theme of our conversation in that day. And so it is now: "We hear them speaking in our own tongues the great things of God". That is the Christian's employ; it is what we are engaged with, the great things of God, and it is by the Holy Spirit sent from heaven. Those who have received Him are engaged with the great things of God. What employ that is! That is what will engage us in the future day. The records will be kept (there is no question about that), and the histories in that day will disclose to us the wonderful exploits of the Lord Jesus, what He did in the domain of death!
You remember in @Numbers 21 it says, "In the book of the wars of Jehovah". Did you ever read that book? It is the Christian's military literature. "The wars of Jehovah"-it is what *He* did. What did the Lord Jesus do? He went down into the domain of death, and He fought there. He went there for us. He met the foe there, and we are told that He annulled him through death: "Through death he might annul him who has the might of death". That is what the Lord has done for us. I advise you to read the book of the wars of the Lord. It will have a great place in the library of the world to come, and it will be a well-read book, but we have it already. They were speaking of the great things of God. In regard to that, unity is brought about just in that way. It is "from
{111}
every nation of those under heaven". I do not say that all the nations were brought in yet. That was looking forward to the ministry of Paul, when all these nations should be visited with the gospel, and should receive the Holy Spirit. Paul said "that the offering up of the nations might be acceptable". The apostle Paul received a commission from Christ, and he went out amongst the gentiles; he preached the gospel to them, and they were converted and received the Spirit. All the nations were represented, and were brought into a unity. They were sanctified by the Holy Spirit, and they were offered up to God, so to say, as a sacrifice: "carrying on as a sacrificial service the message of glad tidings of God", @Romans 15: 16. Now that is what was effected, and we have come into that. It is a unity. What kind of a unity? A unity of spiritual affections. That is what it is, and that is the great testimony to the imperialism of the Lord Jesus. I use that word advisedly; it is perfectly scriptural. Imperialism in the hands of the Lord Jesus implies a unity in spiritual affection. Who comes into that unity? Peter indicates here how it is come into; he says, "Repent, and be baptised, each one of you". Repentance is toward God; it sets you right with God morally. Baptism cuts you off from the world. Every Christian should be baptised. If you read the gospel of Mark you would be led to believe that, if you were not baptised, you could not be saved. "He that believes and is baptised shall be saved", @Mark 16:16. Repentance sets you right inwardly with God. You know that God has rights over your soul, and God forgives you, but baptism is the counterpart of that. Baptism is not for God; baptism is for man. Baptism sets you apart here in this world. It means that you have severed your connection with the world. You receive the Holy Spirit, but is it to set you up in this world? Is it to make you a great man in this world? Not at all; it
{112}
is to enable you to be true to your baptism. So he says, "Repent, and be baptised, each one of you". Many a man is content with repentance, without the confession that is involved in baptism, and so he never comes into the good of salvation. Baptism is a public severance from the world. It is "for remission of sins". You get a good conscience from God through the blood of Christ. I have often said you never get a good conscience till you get a bad one. The light of God shining in gives you a bad conscience. You are convicted as a sinful man, as Peter was in the boat, but the remission of sins through the blood of Christ gives you a good one. A good conscience implies that you can lift up your face in the presence of God as perfectly free in His presence. Then there is not only a good conscience but a full heart, for it says, "And ye will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit". What will the Holy Spirit do for you? He will fill your heart with joy and peace in believing. I do not say there are not other things, for there are. But it implies that He will fill your heart with Christ. You have got no more links with the world. He maintains you in accord with your baptism. You do not want the world now.
Were these people sorry for their decision? No, beloved friends, they were happy; they were contented; they were partaking of their food with gladness of heart. They were happy in this wonderful gift, in the remission of sins and the gift of the Spirit. That is the effect of the Lord's presence in heaven; it brings about unity here, the unity of spiritual affections.
Now, what is He going to do in the future? He is going to exercise the same power as He is exercising now. It says, "Whom the Lord Jesus shall consume with the breath" or spirit "of his mouth", @2 Thessalonians 2: 8. It is the same Spirit as He breathed into His disciples. He has not two spirits. It shall be His instrument of destruction. What is toward men now
{113}
in blessing shall soon be against men in judgment. It is because of open revolt against God. Now I want to make the point clear in @Revelation 19. The Lord Jesus comes out as the divine Emperor. The gift of the Spirit implies that He has power to bring about divine unity in blessing. In future, He comes out with the name written upon His garment and upon His thigh-"King of kings, and Lord of lords". He is upon a white horse, which is symbolic of imperial power, and His armies have white horses, all significant of imperial power. In connection with the opening of the seals in chapter 6 we have a black horse and a red horse, and so on, but Jesus has a white horse. It is significant of imperial power, and he who sets himself up as the antichrist is consumed by the spirit of His mouth.
My time is gone, but I want to make clear to you how God in Christ has met the conditions that have arisen in the world through imperialism, how testimony is seen now in the different nations being brought into blessing representatively and brought into unity in the power of the Spirit, and how in future when the mystery of iniquity comes to a head, it will be destroyed by the spirit of Christ's mouth. It will be destroyed by Him who comes out as King of kings and Lord of lords. It is here now, but it has not yet come to a head.
May the Lord give us, before that time, to receive at His hand! His hands are outstretched in blessing, and our part is to receive. May He give us simply to receive the blessing, and come into that blessed unity of spiritual affections!
{114}
THE VOICE OF GOD
@Genesis 3: 8 - 10; @Song of Songs 2: 8 - 14
It is of great importance to recognise that God has a right to a voice. The garden which God planted in Eden afforded Him an opportunity to assert His rights. God planted the garden. Adam did not suggest it; it was God's suggestion, and it was God's work. He designed it and He planted it. All the trees were trees of His planting. And having planted the garden, He caused a river to flow into it, thus asserting His right to influence the garden. It is a great thing to recognise that God has creatorial rights. All the planets and stars recognise these rights. The heavenly side ever remains intact, for in the heavens are placed powers of influence which men can never touch. Men may alter the course of rivers, but they cannot alter the course of the sun and the moon. The sun and the moon both exert an influence on the earth which is a testimony to God's creatorial rights. God thus holds in His hand the power to influence the earth.
So, in this way, the river in the garden testified to those rights. God's influence was to be supreme in the garden. It was as if God said to Adam, 'Dress the garden and keep it, but My influence is to be supreme'. And so the river flowed into the garden and out of it.
I do not wish to speak at length on the river, but you will notice that, after leaving the garden, it was parted into four, not one. This gives the thought of universality, and here you get a remarkable prophetic testimony. It typifies the downcoming of the Holy Spirit from heaven, producing an evangelistic spirit in man. That was the effect of the divine influence, beloved friends; and that evangelistic spirit went out north, south, east and west, especially to the west.
{115}
Thank God for the heart of Paul and for Peter, even if the latter was slow to act; thank God for his heart. Paul thought of every gentile; that is, the influence and power of the Spirit led him to think of all men. There was not a man in the west that Paul did not think of. I refer to that to show at the outset how God asserted His rights for good. Think of the sun! It indicates God's rights! It moves around; but what is the effect? It is for good; so with the moon and stars. All are for good. The psalmist understood something of this. He had interest in regard to them. Would that we had that interest! In @Psalm 19 he says, "The heavens declare the glory of God; and the expanse sheweth the work of his hands. Day unto day uttereth speech, and night unto night sheweth knowledge". What do the heavens declare? The glory of God! That declaration cannot be detrimental to man in any sense. Then in verse 3 it says, "There is no speech and there are no words, yet their voice is heard". How loudly that voice speaks everywhere!
What is the voice that speaks? It is the voice of God's creatorial rights, and it extends to the utmost limits of the human family, to every nation. None but are acquainted with the sun, and moon, and stars, all of them speaking one language! All have their distinctive voice, a voice of goodness! Paul appeals to these things when speaking to the Athenians. He tells them that God is not far from each one of us. He says, "In him we live and move and exist", @Acts 17: 28. He puts himself among them-he says, "we". God is not far from each one of us. In that sense God was as near to the Athenians as He was to Paul. The very breath we breathe comes from God. We live in God, move in God, have our being in God. He fills our hearts with food and gladness. That kind of voice, the voice of God's creatorial rights, is in the world, whether men take account of it or not. One loves to think of it-the sun with all its
{116}
regularity and heat, and the moon, both witnessing to God and His eternal power. Every time a believer looks at the moon it should remind him of God's goodness and His creatorial rights. So in the garden you get a testimony to God's rights.
Now God walked there, but it does not say Adam heard Him walking. He did not hear His footsteps. It says, "They heard the voice of Jehovah Elohim, walking in the garden". It is a remarkable expression. It does not say, 'They heard Jehovah Elohim walking in the garden'. It says, "They heard the voice of Jehovah Elohim, walking in the garden". It was God coming into the garden and asserting His rights there. It was as if He said, 'I have a right to speak here'. Have you recognised that right? Where did God walk and speak? He walked and spoke in Jesus. John the baptist was the best testimony to that walk and the best testimony to that voice. He looked on Jesus "as he walked". He admired the walk of Jesus. Now to admire the walk of Jesus, and to see that walk, you have to read the gospels. John, looking at Jesus as He walked, said, "Behold the Lamb of God". Chapter 1 is God's account. In chapter 3 John rejoices because of "the voice of the bridegroom", and he says, in effect, 'That voice is all I want; it satisfies me'. He says, "This my joy then is fulfilled". What marvellous progress he made! I have often thought of John the baptist and Moses -- what remarkable men they were! Of all the men who had the greatest opportunity to make much of themselves, they were perhaps the first, yet each of them disappeared in the presence of Christ, and disappeared in entire satisfaction! There will be no grumbling in Heaven, no complaints there! Men disappear in satisfaction! What was the cause of their disappearing? The voice of the Bridegroom! "The friend of the bridegroom", John says, "who stands and hears him, rejoices in heart because of the voice
{117}
of the bridegroom": and John's joy is thus fulfilled, and he says, "He must increase, but I must decrease". John disappears, but disappears as satisfied with the voice of the Bridegroom. If you could but hear that voice, if you could but see that walk, if you had but a heart like John, you also would disappear! I often think of John, the greatest born of women! What a splendid opportunity of exalting himself he had! John had the opportunity of being regarded as the Messiah. Yet in thinking of the coming One, he says, 'I am only a voice'. In chapter 3, you see his growth. No doubt the voice which he was in himself was important, but he heard another voice. He tells us that he had heard the voice of the Bridegroom. There is no voice like that. That is the voice of affection! The blessed Man, who has that voice, has the bride, so John can disappear, and he does so as perfectly satisfied. I have no doubt in eternity heaven will be filled with people like that, people who have disappeared in the presence of Christ, and disappeared with satisfied hearts.
But to return to our chapter. In connection with Adam, I should like to call attention to the misuse he made of the trees. The trees were never intended by God to hide sinners. Trees were created by God to give pleasure and satisfaction to man, so that you find Adam was taking advantage of God's goodness to hide himself from God. Every one of us is surrounded by the goodness of God. How are we using it?
There is the voice; it is audible. Paul says, "Have they not heard? Yea, surely, Their voice has gone out into all the earth", @Romans 10: 18. But hearing is not enough. The very hearing may lead you to hide, that is, to use those things which God has given you for your comfort to hide behind from Himself. Are you doing that? You may even hide behind your parents. Perhaps you are using them as a place of concealment. It is quite right to respect your parents,
{118}
and great rewards are promised to those who do so, but parents cannot give you a good conscience. They can pray for you and influence you, but they can never give you a good conscience. Adam here understood the voice. It was the voice of God. If you are to have a standing with God, you must have to do with God. Your parents can keep you from the world, but they cannot give you peace with God; they cannot give you heaven, nor can they give you the best robe. A christian household is a wonderful blessing, but you may hide from God behind your parents. Come out of your hiding-place! I have the greatest possible respect for christian parents, but they cannot give you the best robe. They have not got it in their houses!
It is in God's house. If you are to be clothed for God, He must Himself do it. Come out of your hiding-place! Adam said, "I heard thy voice in the garden". He was utterly inexcusable. Paul says, "There are, it may be, so many kinds of voices in the world, and none of undistinguishable sound. If therefore I do not know the power of the sound, I shall be to him that speaks a barbarian, and he that speaks a barbarian for me", @1 Corinthians 14: 10, 11. It was not so with Adam. He understood the power of the sound, the voice of God, and he hid himself behind the trees which were intended, by the goodness of God, for his comfort.
I would strongly advise you to come out and meet God for yourself. It is wonderful to be prayed for, to be taught and nurtured in christian principles; but, remember, you have to do with God in your own soul, if you are to be clothed divinely and have any standing with God. If your parent was Peter or Paul, it still remains true that "that which is born of the flesh is flesh; and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit". Who can bring that birth about? Only God.
Who can give you a good conscience? Who can clothe you with righteousness? Only God. The
{119}
righteousness of God is "towards all, and upon all those who believe". It is wonderful to be a believer in God. And who is a believer in God? One in whom God has wrought. "The wind blows where it will, and thou hearest its voice, but knowest not whence it comes and where it goes: thus is every one that is born of the Spirit", @John 3: 8. Satan has his winds. When the Lord and His disciples were in the boat on the sea, Satan acted on the wind, and the wind acted on the sea, and the sea in turn acted upon the boat and the disciples cried out for fear. That was Satan's work; that wind came from Satan. But God has His wind, and God's wind comes down. Satan's wind did not come from heaven, but at Pentecost there was "a sound out of heaven as of a violent impetuous blowing". We are familiar with the effect of a wind. It overturns and brings down houses, trees, and so on. We can see all these things around us. In the same way God's 'wind' brings down men. We can see, for example, when a young man is brought down he has given up his vaunting, his ambition to be something in the world, and love for God's people has come in instead. How is this bringing down brought to pass? No power in creation could effect that, nothing but the wind which came down from heaven. Nothing can stand before it. You cannot tell "whence it comes and where it goes: thus is every one that is born of the Spirit". You can tell the effects of the wind in those who are the subjects of it. The heart now has distinctive longings after God. You do not want to hide now. God is your Friend! What is produced refers to God. It is "spirit". You may not know this, but others know and rejoice in it. You remember in @Acts 2, those who were affected by Peter's preaching said, "What shall we do, brethren?". They did not run off to the high priests and ask them what to do, nor did they go to the scribes. They asked Peter and the other apostles
{120}
what to do. They knew instinctively whom to ask. So a soul turns to God, and also to those who believe in God, for they can answer his questions. Peter can tell them what to do. He has the Spirit and he says, "Repent, and be baptised, each one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for remission of sins, and ye will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit". I would advise you to come out of your hiding-place and turn to God. The voice of creation ought to lead you to know that He is only thinking of you in goodness.
When you come to Pentecost it says, "There came suddenly a sound out of heaven as of a violent impetuous blowing, and filled all the house". Thus the voice of the gospel has filled all creation already. The Holy Spirit has caused the sound of the heavenly testimony to be heard everywhere. The testimony of the gospel is a voice of love. How attractive it is! Again, Saul was brought down by the voice. Think of it as it addressed Saul! How full of love and consideration it was for the most obstinate of men! "It is hard for thee", the Lord says, "to kick against goads". What attraction it possessed! Nothing commends the voice of Christ to me more than that. There is the utmost consideration in it. "It is hard for thee to kick against goads". So it was, and it is hard for you to go on year after year refusing the divine voice that calls; to go on hour by hour and day by day refusing the light. It is hard, and the Lord Jesus, in the consideration of His heart will tell you so. Saul was brought down. How? By the voice from heaven. Saul heard a heavenly voice, and the voice spoke in the Hebrew tongue, the tongue he respected most. Thus we see the Lord's consideration for Saul in speaking in Hebrew. He was a Hebrew of Hebrews, a most patriotic man, and he respected his tongue, and the Lord had regard for that. He had the utmost consideration. There has never been anything in the ways of God to compare
{121}
with the gospel! Whatever right thing you may have respect for, God respects it so as to gain you, and thus Saul was brought down. He says, "What shall I do, Lord?". What a lot there was to be done! But how glad the Lord was to hear Paul's voice. The Lord Jesus had the delight of hearing his voice; and I believe that Saul's voice contained more music for God than God's voice did for Saul.
To refer to the passage in the Song of Songs, the Lord typically says, "Let me hear thy voice". The voice of whom? Of the very one who had said, "The voice of my beloved!". How He longs to hear your voice! The bride recognised His voice. How different the effect from that in Adam's case! He said, "I heard thy voice ... and I feared", and well he might have feared, for what could the trees do for him? How foolish to think that the trees could hide him from God! His wisdom was to come out into the open and there meet God; when he does that God clothes him. How different with the bride! A feminine expression is used. It refers to what shall be brought to pass with men like ourselves in the future. If they come out of their concealment, God will meet them and clothe them, and then they who had said, "There is no beauty that we should desire him", will come to see that there is beauty, such as Isaiah saw in his vision, "Mine eyes have seen the King, Jehovah of hosts", @Isaiah 6: 5. How like our experience! We may get tired of listening to our parents talking about Jesus. We may wonder why they go to the meetings so often. They have seen the Lord! He has become the treasure of their hearts! "Mine eyes have seen thy salvation", Simeon said. So it will be with the remnant of Israel in the latter day, when God will work with them and they will see beauty in Christ. And so those who said, "There is no beauty that we should desire him", call Him their 'Beloved', and know Him so well that the very sight
{122}
of His hand will lead them to delineate His whole Person! What a change to effect! If there is one people more than another far away from Christ at the present moment it is the Jews. But there is to be a mighty change! And how will this change be effected? By their seeing Christ and hearing His voice. God shall bring them to see Christ whom they crucified.
They shall wail because of Him. They shall see the beauty that Isaiah saw, and shall read in chapter 53 of his prophecy with delight. It is like the eunuch (it was remarkable that he should be reading this chapter), who asked the question, "Concerning whom does the prophet say this? of himself or of some other?". The answer is, "He saw his glory and spake of him". So the remnant of Israel shall read that chapter, and will know. They shall feast their eyes by faith on the Man outlined there, and shall come to love Him so that His voice shall be to them "the voice of my beloved". Instead of hiding, they will delight in the voice of the Bridegroom.
Now, supposing you love the Lord, how different everything is. Instead of hiding, you delight in His voice. You sit down now with your parents, and listen to the word with delight; you listen to the voice of the Bridegroom, you are not hiding now.
The bride knew the "power of the sound". It was her Beloved's voice, and she distinguished it and says, "The voice of my beloved! ... My beloved is like a gazelle or a young hart". How swift that is! Asahel was likened to a gazelle; he was swift of foot. That is just what Jesus is spiritually. He is attending on you in all the agility of His affection for you. Supposing you have soul trouble (and you will have-who has not?-there is far more of it than we allow to be known-far more soul trouble than is spoken of), do you think the Lord does not know? Of course He does, and He is attending on you in regard of it. You do not have to send for Him. In all the agility of His
{123}
affection He is waiting on you. Is there any sorrow or affliction you have passed through (I am speaking now to believers), which was not lit up by the light of His love? In every circumstance, "He looketh in through the windows, glancing through the lattice". But there is more, for the circumstances of the speaker in this passage are not right; her associations are not right. The remnant of Israel shall find themselves in associations not according to Christ. So with a young believer. It is almost a certainty that you find yourself in circumstances not according to Christ. Now, your love is tested by His voice: "Rise up, my love, my fair one, and come away". He says, "Come away"; the Lord looks for movement. Do not rest content with faith in Christ and the guarantee of a place in heaven. Move out now! The Lord looks for a movement, and if you do not move, you will have no joy. Indeed, the little you do have by faith at the moment will become dim. Look at the passage, "He standeth behind our wall, he looketh in through the windows, glancing through the lattice". He shows Himself. It may be in some affliction or circumstance in which you are bound up. He shows Himself to you. He wants you to see Him. He seeks to become attractive to you, and then He speaks, "Rise up, my love, my fair one, and come away". It is not His voice now simply, but what He says. You must make a difference between the two. He has something to say to you now. "My beloved spake and said unto me, Rise up, my love, my fair one, and come away". Perhaps laziness and satisfaction in your present circumstances may hinder, but the word is "Rise up", and what also? "Come away". Mark that He does not say 'Go away'; He says "Come away". He offers His companionship in the journey, and it is a journey from your place of slothfulness to His abode, but He will be with you. You will not go alone. He supports you as you move. Did you ever try? Perhaps
{124}
you may say, 'It is too difficult, and more than I can undertake. See what confronts me!'. But you try! He says nothing about any difficulties. However dark and dreary the path may be, you will never be alone, for He will always be with you. The Lord says to you, "Come". If you come, you will be conscious of His support. And then He gives you the reasons why you should come away with Him. He enlarges on the reasons why the Bride should come; there are flowers, birds, the voice of the turtle-dove. How encouraging! Never a word about difficulties. You may speak of them, but all is bright on His side. "For behold, the winter is past, The rain is over, it is gone: The flowers appear on the earth; The time of the singing is come, And the voice of the turtledove is heard in our land: The fig-tree melloweth her winter figs, And the vines in bloom give forth their fragrance. Arise, my love, my fair one, and come away!". Who cannot testify to all the Lord indicates here? What sorrow have you been into that has not been lit up with joy? What difficulty where you have not had the company of the Lord? Did He ever forsake you? Never! Whatever you may think of your deformities, to Him you are a "fair one" -- "For sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance is comely". He wants your companionship. He wants to have you all to Himself. He wants to hear your voice.
I add a word on the other side. He says (verse 14), "Let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice". He would have you all to Himself. The Lord loves to hear one pray for the first time. He loves to look into the countenance, for the first time turned upward. "Sweet is thy voice", He says, "and thy countenance is comely". Where did He find His beloved? She was "in the clefts of the rock", a most dangerous place. If you are hesitating between this world and Christ, you are in a dangerous position. So He says
{125}
to you, "Come away". Will you not give Him your companionship? Will you not come to where you can be alone with Him? He longs for you. We must all give an account of ourselves to God, and how much better to do so now while His voice is heard in grace.
You will see that I have connected my remarks all through with the idea of a 'voice'. It is encouraging to see that though the Lord's voice causes fear and terror to begin with, yet in the end it is a source of delight. It becomes "the voice of my beloved". Instead of man hiding now, you have man speaking to God. Man can speak to God, and God delights in hearing man's voice. Thus you see the great end with God, according to Balaam's statement, "At this time it shall be said ... What hath God wrought!".
@Numbers 23: 23. So with every one of us. Take a man or a woman formed after Christ, I say, "What hath God wrought!". See the handiwork of God. He has so wrought for His own pleasure and satisfaction, that man can be His companion. Will you not leave your shelter? Will you not come away? May God enable you to do so! May He give us to hear His voice and come out from everything that hides us from Himself, for His name's sake.
{126}
THE COMPASSIONS OF GOD
@Luke 7: 11 - 16; @Luke 9: 37 - 42
My thought is to say a word to you about God's compassions. I have selected these two passages because they serve, among many others, to illustrate what I have on my mind. The one, as you will observe, refers to a mother, a bereaved mother, a mother deprived of her only son by death. The other refers to a heartbroken father, a father whose heart was broken by the influence of Satan on his only child. In other words the attack in both instances was carefully made. Death attacked the woman's heart and was successful. Satan attacked the father's heart and was successful. There are many parents here, many children here. Mothers hearts are attacked through their children, and fathers hearts are attacked through their children. I desire to show you, if I can, how God meets that.
God, beloved friends, had compassion. Those of us who are in the blessing of the truth of Romans will understand the compassion of God. The apostle besought the Roman church "by the compassions of God" (@Romans 12: 1) as something well known to them; he besought them by that which was known to their souls. The gospel, having become effectual in their souls, enabled them to understand the compassion of God. There is nothing that can touch men more than that it had pleased God to be sympathetic with them.
I used the word advisedly. It came out at the beginning: although God had to pronounce sentence on sin, He feels for the sinner. His government moves on: you sow your seed and you reap bitterly, but God feels for you. He felt for Adam, and made him a covering. Adam devised an apron (the first invention in Scripture was the invention of an apron), making
{127}
a device to cover up sin, to cover nakedness! Every sinner is a deviser in that way. Every sinner is an inventor; he devises something to cover every sin he commits, unless like a swine he revels in his pollution! Adam and Eve would live in respectability in spite of their sin; therefore they devised a covering. The whole system, religious, political, and social, with which we are surrounded, is a device to cover up sin. But your sin is there, whether a month ago or a week ago; it is there and God requires it; He brings it to light. But He has provided a covering, or you would suffer under it. God felt for Adam as He drove him out of the garden. His majesty required that the garden should not be occupied by such a creature, but He sent him out covered with clothing. Even for a man like Cain there was sympathy with God. 'Why is your countenance fallen? Why do you droop? There is a sin-offering at your door'. You have committed a sin and God knows it; He has put a sin-offering at your door. In spite of that word of comfort, we read, Cain talked with Abel his brother. Outwardly, he was quite brotherly, inwardly he was a murderer; it was deliberate, consummate wickedness. Think of God looking on! Think of all the violence going on now in the world! Great diplomacy between nations, but the murderers heart beneath. In spite of Cain's murder of his brother, God put a mark on the man to stay the avenger's hand. Such is the compassion of God with regard to man!
Anyone can have compassion on a widow who has lost her only son. It is very much easier to weep with those who weep than to rejoice with those who rejoice.
So we find this widow at Nain had a goodly company with her at this funeral. We read that much people of the city accompanied her to the grave with her son; it was a very commonplace occurrence. I passed three funerals today here in Belfast. It is only neighbourly to attend a funeral. Many sympathised with
{128}
her to the extent of attending the funeral of her son. The Lord Jesus met her and met them. He met the funeral; He was not alone. At Jacob's well He was alone. Here there were much people with Him; He had a company with Him. Thank God, He has them now! One takes pleasure in being there. The Lord is not alone now; He has those whose hearts are actuated by His Spirit. One is met not only by Christ but by a company with Him. You remember how Jacob was met. Laban was not a man of much sympathy; he was a selfish man and Jacob had very little sympathy there, but when he returned, in @Genesis 32, two hosts of God met m; they were sympathetic. It is a great thing to be surrounded by sympathetic hearts. God has no sympathy with your worldly calculations; He had no interest in those flocks and herds of Jacob. Jacob had got wealthy during those twenty years, but the two hosts had no interest in this. They had interest in Jacob, and so it is tonight. Every saint is genuinely exercised about you; there is sympathy with regard to your soul, with regard to your spiritual requirements.
So here, much people were with Him, we are told.
The Lord looked into that widow's heart, and He looks into your heart now; He knows the desolation there, and He knew that widow would return to that city alone. When the funeral had dispersed, she would go home to a husbandless, sonless house; the Lord Jesus knew all that. The pall-bearers thought nothing of that, but the Lord Jesus looked into the widow's desolate heart. The compassion of God moved Him; He had compassion on the widow, divine compassion. Who has not lost a loved relative?
Presently this woman would return to her house, a house without a husband, without a son! What a fit illustration of man, bereft of every affection of his heart spiritually! God has compassion, and the compassion of God flows out in the heart of a Man down
{129}
here on the earth. His compassion was for the widow, "Youth, I say to thee, Wake up". The young man "sat up and began to speak". I know of nothing more interesting than that he began to speak! One loves to hear a young christian begin to speak. Do not be timid! The evidence of intelligent life is that you begin to speak. The Lord would illuminate that desolate house by listening entranced to the conversation between the mother and raised son. Who can conceive it? He is going to speak to her now; it is recovery in Luke. In John, Lazarus, when set free, went to the supper table with Christ, but this young man is given back to his mother. You are never fit for the assembly till you are right in every natural relationship. God has respect to everything He has created, and we must get right at home first. The Lord will reinstate the object of that mother's heart. He "began to speak". Are you accustomed to speak?
Are you converted? Tell your parents about it. You must recognise every divinely instituted relation ship. There was no defect in Lazarus; he loved his sisters, he owed nothing to them in that way, but he owed everything to Christ; he became a witness to Him and is found at the supper table. You can go to God, and adjust matters with Him; but see to it that you adjust matters *here* first. This young man was brought back from the dead by His word. He is a speaking young man; there are no foul words in his mouth; his spirit is pure. He was alone in that widow's house by reason of his conversation. What tales he would tell her! What experiences he would relate! The Lord Jesus having raised him up from the dead lays no claim on him, for the mother must have her right place. Do not presume to serve Christ till you recognise every natural claim first; God adjusts everything on earth first. He brought the young man back from the dead, speaking, and delivered him to his mother.
{130}
In chapter 9 we have a *father*, not a case of desolation as pathetic as in chapter 7. There are two enemies: "The last enemy that is annulled is death", @1 Corinthians 15: 26. Death is treated in Scripture as an enemy of man, and is the last one to be destroyed. The young man in chapter 7 was simply taken out of it. Christ in coming out of it annulled it, and He will take all His own out of it presently-"the last enemy". So this chapter 9 shows an emissary of Satan, a demon. Satan is a being who is head of a principality with many ramifications; he sent one of his agents to attack this father. "And lo, a man from the crowd cried out saying, Teacher, I beseech thee look upon my son, for he is mine only child: and behold, a spirit takes him, and suddenly he cries out, and it tears him with foaming, and with difficulty departs from him after crushing him" (verses 38, 39). Such is the picture presented here, and the Lord Jesus takes account of that father's heart.
Mark tells us of the man (chapter 9: 22 - 24) that he cried and "said with tears" beseeching Jesus, "if thou couldst do anything ... help us". It was the cry of despair. Was there ever such a cry escaped from your heart? "If thou couldst do anything ... help us". How much can Jesus do? He upholds all things by the word of His power. "If thou couldst believe" is the reply; "all things are possible to him that believes". The Lord says, "Bring him to me". How one loves that thought! Parents, bring the children to Christ! "Bring him to me". We are told that, as he was yet coming, the demon threw him down. Did you ever try to come to Christ? I believe in exercise; you do not get anything without it, you do not really. Directly the exercise begins, Satan renews his activity; he left him as dead; he stayed long enough to control him. Sin is intermittent; presently Satan may come back. He may depart for a moment but returns; how is it? Arise, make a
{131}
move toward Christ! Directly the exercise begins, you are conscious it is not simply a propensity to evil, but Satan's power actively dominating your spirit. He may depart for a moment, but only to return. Sometimes God in grace gives you a long respite. We read of the evil spirit actually going out of a man, but, returning and finding the house swept clean, brings in seven more demons. *When God gives you respite from Satan, draw near to Christ*, or Satan will return with sevenfold power, and the case at last becomes hopeless.
He came to Jesus, but as he came the demon threw him down and tore him. Think of the satanic opposition to the relief brought in by the Lord Jesus Christ! That continues; it is as active *now*, as then. Directly there is a bit of exercise for relief, Satan throws you down and tears you. Think of the soul agony of many. It is Satan's opposition to the compassion of God in Christ. The Lord "healed the child". How many truths in that word! He simply *healed the child*. When God has to do with Satan, the work is short. Christ lay dead in the tomb; there was no struggle at His resurrection. Look into the tomb: everything is in order there. And so as faith exercises the soul, it is the same. He "healed the child". What a sigh of relief comes into the heart as the gospel is received and the soul is healed and is set at rest. There is no struggle, He simply heals the child. One loves to dwell on the superiority of Christ in all His doings. Satan's power is broken; the avenue by which he came in is closed, for self-judgment has taken place. He "healed the child and gave him back to his father". What dignity marked all His doings! Things were done in the most dignified yet superior fashion. "Gave him back to his father"-what a happy man now! The compassion of God works out in recovery. Things are reinstated; they are set up as they came from the hand of God. Everything is adjusted, and
{132}
recovered according to God. What would that father do with that child? What would that mother do with that son? She is a type of a relieved person. If the Lord gives everything back to you, what are you to do with them? Give them back to Jesus! The power of the father could not keep that evil spirit away, so he gave him back to Jesus for safe keeping. He reinstates the child in the house. Luke does not present the side of what the *father* would do with the child. If you could trace the history of men whom God has used, you would find they were children who had been delivered up to God. If God comes in on the line of compassion and heals the child, *give him back*. Do you undertake to protect that child? Only the Lord can keep him. Hence the woman would deliver that speaking young man back to the Lord.
He is now to talk of Christ.
A woman is fever-struck; that is Luke's presentation. The Lord stands over her and commands the fever to stop, and she arose and served everybody.
He sets her up in service. So He took Peter, 'I will make you a fisher of men'. If the Lord restores the child to the parent, the parent's wisdom is to give it back to God. If you cannot protect the child in its childhood, how can you in its full age? He has respect for your exercises and answers them, but He can do much better for you than you expect.
The compassion of God is seen in what it worked out in Christ for the recovery of man, in the mother's heart and in the father's heart, for the restoration of human conditions as God ordered them at the beginning. May we each know the compassion of God!
{133}
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE BELIEVERS
@Luke 8: 41 - 56
My exercise in regard to this meeting is that there are many believers in Christ, who are private believers, whereas the Lord's thought is that one should be a public believer. The instance of this girl of twelve years, and her resuscitation, shows that there is a great deal that is private, but the Lord's intention is that every believer should be public; that is to say, you should be ranked among the public followers of Christ. If you are a believer He will expose you; He will not suffer you to remain hidden. That is what I have in my mind.
Now Christ has what is private. He works in private, especially in households. Household affairs are not to be published, but individual believers must come out into the open in order to be led into the private apartments of Christ. There, you will be clothed in raiment of embroidery (@Psalm 45). "All glorious is the king's daughter within" (within the private apartments of Christ). "She shall be brought unto the king in raiment of embroidery". The Lord will not suffer you to remain in your own private apartments! If your faith is genuine He values it, and it is so precious to Him that he desires it to be displayed, to be known. If this is not the case with you, He will drag you out of your hiding-place through some course of dealing. How much happier to begin with some public acknowledgment of what Christ has done for you! The Israelites did not go out privately. They are, as we know, typical of a believer in Christ at the outset of his faith, going out of the world. Did the Israelites go out privately? They went out "in the sight of all the Egyptians". They were not ashamed; they were very glad to get out. Now,
{134}
before proceeding further, I would say, you will never experience the full joy of salvation until you come out into the open. Are you timid, fearful, afraid to say a word for Jesus? You will never come into the good of His protection, nor will you realise His sympathy, till you come out.
To refer to Jairus (as the woman with the issue of blood comes in incidentally), he was a remarkable man, and the Lord's thought, in reviving the girl, was to re-establish conditions that existed here according to God. Luke gives this side; John gives the heavenly side, the new order. In Luke, the Lord re-establishes relationships which God had formed on earth, then He leads men to the light of the heavenly. Jairus daughter was only twelve and she was about to die.
It does not say she was his only child, but she was his only daughter. In the next chapter you get an only child. Luke presents the effect of sin in extreme cases.
In chapter 9 the man who brought his son possessed with a demon to the Lord, says, "He is mine only child". In chapter 7 you get an only son and the mother a widow; in other words, the incident in that chapter presents an extreme picture of desolation and destitution, a widowed heart, bereft of everything, bereaved of an only son. In the case of Jairus only daughter, there was disease working, but in chapter 7 there was death, absolute death, and the Lord met the funeral. Death had done all its work, and as the dead man was carried out "a very considerable crowd" was with the widow, and "a great crowd" too with the Lord. The daughter of Jairus had not as yet died; she was about to die; all that appeared to be life was ebbing away. Her father Jairus was a man of note, a ruler of the synagogue, and he falls at Jesus feet and beseeches Him that He would come to his house. It is a household affair, and the Lord's intervention here is of a private nature.
Well, I leave that for the moment, but I would
{135}
like to call attention to the remarkable way in which children become a means, in the Lord's hands, of reaching the parents. It is very humbling to admit it, but it is found in Scripture; the Lord uses children to get at the parents. Very often it is because the children are regarded in the light of nature, for, at the outset, parents take them up on the ground of nature. Take, for instance, Job; he had seven sons and three daughters, a very creditable family, as regards numbers! We are told of them *after* we read that Satan got his commission from the Lord, for we must remember he *did* get a commission from the Lord as regards Job. Satan is only a servant in that way, and will do his worst; he will go to the utmost limits as regards *that*, if allowed by the Lord. After he received his commission, the first record we have is that, on a certain day, all the children of job were feasting in their elder brother's house; Job was not present. There was some discrepancy there. Why was Job not present? Evidently the family thought they could get on without him! When such is the case there is something wrong. It was not the divine intent, for they were not married, but what you notice is the feast was celebrated in *the house of the elder brother*; it was all on the ground of nature. All seemed very fine, seven sons, and three daughters, but they left their father out. You may depend upon it, God is displeased with that. It is to Job's discredit, but much more to the discredit of the family. And I would say this, any son who disregards father or mother is apostate in principle. God has placed authority in the parents where it is most likely to be sympathetic, in the one who loves you most, and the disregard of that is, in principle, apostasy. "Without natural affection" (@Romans 1: 31) is one mark of apostasy in the last days. I warn you, if you are a child, that if you disregard the authority and the claims of parents, you disregard the claims of Christ.
{136}
I warn you to regard authority and recognise divinely ordered relationships. Satan struck that house, and Job suffered in his fine family. It was wiped out, and Job was left alone. God did not charge the "wicked one" to spare Job's children; He charged him to spare Job. Job was preserved and the family goes. It was not destroyed first; it was destroyed last, for the flocks and the herds went first. Pious as Job was, his greatness was all based on nature. The feast was in the elder brother's house, as I was remarking. The elder brother nearly always goes wrong in Scripture, not the younger, because the firstborn is always certain to be taken up on the line of nature. The eldest son of Abraham and the eldest son of Isaac were born after the flesh. Jacob just narrowly escaped: he was a twin and was crooked, but he was not the firstborn. The eldest brother is almost always marked by want of sympathy with his father; that is what you find in @Luke 15. Not to have sympathy is next door to apostasy, and, as a matter of fact, the elder brother of the prodigal was left outside. It is dangerous to be in the elder brother's house, for the influence of the elder brother is not to be trusted. The father's house is the place for you. I am not speaking literally, remember, but rather of the spirit of things as presented in Scripture; that which is first is natural, always; and beware of it!
Now job's recovery was marked by a household.
The household was restored; thank God for that!
There was the same number of sons, and the same number of daughters, and the latter were the fairest in all the land. It does not say anything about the eldest son in the last chapter of Job, and what you find is that the daughters are given an inheritance by job among their brethren. In the first chapter he did not direct his children to meet in their elder brother's house, whereas in the last chapter all is directed and regulated by Job. He "gave them inheritance among
{137}
their brethren", not in their elder brother's house. All is now on the ground of purpose; the second family are given an inheritance entirely on the ground of gift, not on the ground of nature. When Job is restored, all his relatives come to him, his brothers and sisters and acquaintances; then his family is reinstated according to God. It says, "Jehovah blessed the latter end of Job more than his beginning", so that in the last end of job he was blessed, and he had his place in his house. God restored him, but He also restored his house to him, and job had his place there. He gave a portion to his three daughters amongst their brethren. His family is now regulated by himself, and the divine institution established in man is recognised and recovered. Then Job having his place, his daughters are richly endowed amongst their brethren; that is where we ought to be endowed spiritually, among our brethren, not in the world. The Scriptures are not meant to be read in the letter, but in the spirit. All is brought in on spiritual lines. Satan attacked Job through his children but God came in and restored everything; the family is brought under the authority of its proper head and Satan is completely defeated. Satan was only a servant, but God used him, and allowed him to do his worst on Job. Then God deals with job directly.
Now, in the incident in @Luke 8, the house of Jairus is invaded, and the Lord is on His way to re-establish things as they ought to be. I will come to that presently. Incidentally, this poor sin-diseased woman in the crowd touches the hem of his garment. 'My disease is private', she says, 'and I want to get relief privately and to go home and enjoy the relief and say nothing about the Reliever'. Is it so with you? I am persuaded that there are a great many private believers, and the Lord wants you to come out in the open, and to confess with your mouth Jesus as Lord. You say, 'My quiet and unobtrusive life is enough'. Is it
{138}
enough? Certainly, in a woman nothing is more delightful than a meek and quiet spirit. God loves that; it is the spirit of Christ, and, in the sight of God, it is of great price. But what about those people who live near by? Yea, what about the *throng* of people-for here, there was a crowd-what about them? Apparently *they* were getting no good from the Lord. Peter said, "The crowds close thee in and press upon thee", but no one got healing. If you have got healing, why not make it public, so that others can see how it is to be had? If you have got it, tell it to the next person you meet! There is a crowd; those who compose it are not changed; they are simply curious. Millions of people are interested in God in *some* way, but they are not changed a bit. Why not let them know there is a change to be had, that there is virtue there? Tell them how to get it.
Well, the Lord said, 'Something has happened'. He was the only One who knew-thank God He did know. I believe in having a secret with the Lord; that is what the "white stone" sets forth, for there is a white stone spoken of in Scripture. No brother is any good unless he has such a secret, but the white stone, I need not say, is not conversion. It refers to some exploit of your own, when you stood for Christ, that only He knew about. The world knew nothing about it, and you did not want them to know. That service you rendered, you did not want *any* to know but the Lord. But this peculiar disease others have, others are suffering just like you. All the crowd has it! If you have got healing, then *let others know*. Power, however, *has* gone out; "Power has gone out from me", the Lord says. In spite of Peter's protest the Lord held to it, "Some one has touched me". Who that someone was, is another matter; He sees to it that she comes to light.
"The woman, seeing that she was not hid, came trembling, and falling down before him declared
{139}
before all the people for what cause she had touched him, and how she was immediately healed". She did not say first of all that she was healed; she tells the *cause* of her coming first, she tells Him all that He knows; that is self judgment. There is the frank acknowledgment of the secret trouble you had; others did not know of it; your walk was fairly commendable, more or less righteous, but there was this secret disease which was not known. Men are very superficial; it is wonderful how people pass muster before an unexercised crowd, but are we to pass muster before the eye of God? "We must all be manifested before the judgment-seat of the Christ" (@2 Corinthians 5: 10), we are told. The word also says, "Each of us shall give an account concerning himself to God" (@Romans 14: 12), and that "the Lord shall ... make manifest the counsels of hearts", @1 Corinthians 4: 5. So too, "what ye have spoken in the ear in chambers shall be proclaimed upon the housetops" (@Luke 12: 3), where the congregation gather, where the gossip goes on. "All things are naked and laid bare to his eyes, with whom we have to do", @Hebrews 4: 13. It does not simply say 'open to God', but "to his eyes with whom we have to do". He sees it all.
So here, the woman turns and tells the Lord before *all* the people what had taken place. The Lord did not take her aside and say, 'Tell Me privately'. We might have said it was rather hard on the woman, but the Lord loved her, and He wanted her to get all the benefit of her confession, of her light; and you want to get it. So "falling down", it says, "before him declared before all the people for what cause she had touched him". That is, she proclaimed before the Lord and before the crowd all about that secret disease, that sin that worked within her members, in spite of her fair exterior. That sin working in your members, the Lord forces you to tell it all out. She told "for what cause she had touched him". It was
{140}
a frank acknowledgment of the inward sin-stricken state of the woman. It is not here a confession of *sins*; the woman was not marked by transgression. It was a question of an inward secret state, sin working in the members, and she told the Lord all about it, why she touched Him, and that publicly. She told Him, too, how she was healed. Others would get the benefit of that; it was as good as a gospel address, better in fact. We do not know how many were there, but there was a crowd there, and the woman was forced to tell out what was wrong and how she was healed. Suppose there was one there like her, such an one would get the benefit of the secret. How important to make a public confession! In @Romans 10: 9 we read, "If thou shalt confess with thy mouth Jesus as Lord". I would not disparage the testimony seen in your life; if there is not that you are not a christian at all. God will use your life, but confession is with the mouth and public. It says, "If thou shalt confess with thy mouth Jesus as Lord, and shalt believe in thine heart that God has raised him from among the dead, thou shalt be saved. For with the heart is believed to righteousness, and with the mouth confession made to salvation". You *believe* in the *heart*, but *confession is public*. The woman was as justified and healed before the confession as after. Belief of the heart sets you right with God, but confession sets you right among men down here. You do not want to be numbered as one of the world, and you are until you confess publicly. To refer to the type, you have gone out in the sight of all the Egyptians. The Lord went out of Jerusalem publicly, but He did not go to heaven publicly. There is plenty that is private; the Lord went to heaven privately; there is much that is private, shut in with Christ, but the Lord demands the public things. I would add another word, He calls her 'daughter'. You own Him publicly, and He owns you publicly, it is the beginning
{141}
of relationship. The Lord is not ashamed of you now. He would have been ashamed of you with that foul internal sin working in your members; but He is not ashamed of you now as healed, for it implies the gift of the Spirit. No one is fully healed except by the gift of the Spirit.
To go on now to the girl, she was twelve years of age, and the woman had been ill twelve years. This girl was the only daughter of her parents, so it was an urgent case. It was a household affair, and most urgent. So we find the Lord is on His way to it. When He comes He assures the father, "Fear not only believe, and she shall be made well". Then it goes on, "When he came to the house he suffered no one to go in but Peter and John and James and the father of the child and the mother". It is now entirely different, the crowd is shut out; even the friends are shut out and only the parents and Peter, John and James are admitted. The Lord takes with Him His three great apostles and the parents of the maiden. It is quite obvious that it is a private matter. The maiden is simply a continuation of the woman, healed as regards the working of sin, but now made whole, revived and brought into life. You make a public confession and the Lord owns you publicly in relationship with Himself. 'Now', He says, 'I want to introduce you to what is private'. The public are shut out now; they are not to hear what is going on inside. Family relationships are private, not public; family affections are all private. He took the father and mother, Peter, John and James, and put the others all out. Well! He takes the girl by the hand saying, "Child, arise", and then it says, "Her spirit returned, and immediately she rose up". She was made to live in the family circle. You will get all that is private there; there is no need to say much. The girl is set in relation to her parents in life. It really is a continuation of the woman with the issue of blood; she is
{142}
healed of a disease and made to live in family relations. One other thought, the next thing is "he commanded something to eat to be given to her". In spite of the fact of being healed and made to live, she must eat. The question arises as to what kind of food you are to give your children, or to have in the assembly. It is quite obvious that you must eat; if not, the life will ebb out again; it must be sustained. What one finds is that a great many christians devour poisonous food, and it really eats the vitals out of them. Satan is dealing out literature at the moment, positively poisonous; if he cannot keep you from confessing Christ, or from the family circle, he will endeavour to poison your mind with bad literature. You may be subject to your parents, and yet devour poisonous literature. "He commanded something to eat to be given to her". The parents are the best judges as to the best kind of food. You should not take any food which your parents do not pass. So, in another sense, God provides food, and it is life-giving, health-giving, "the bread withal which I shall give", Christ says, "is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world",
@John 6: 51. He gives His own flesh; He comes down from heaven and dies that we may have food to eat, so that we might live.
What a remarkable girl this was! We find in Luke that where children are restored, the responsibility remains with the parents. In chapter 7, the young man is given back to his mother; in chapter 9 the boy is restored to his father; and here it is the same, the girl is left in the house. In John's gospel, it is the reverse, the point there being, you do not go back to nature. Thus Lazarus in @John 12 is found with the Lord. It is not the reinstatement of divine institutions, but the becoming attached to Christ. *He* is the great centre in John, and if Lazarus is let go, he is found with Jesus. So that John gives us that point of view, whereas in Luke, it is the gospel, hence relief,
{143}
and if a parent's heart is wrenched, the Lord will restore the child. So here, the young girl is revived, made to live, and was to be sustained by good food. The Lord only can supply good food, and it is for each of us to see to it that the light He has given us should be sustained by good food. Let us seek the food Christ provides!
{144}
THE RICHNESS OF DIVINE THOUGHTS IN BLESSING
@Zechariah 3: 1 - 10
I suppose the duty of the preacher is to make things clear. He can do no more than that-to make the situation from God's side clear so that it is comprehensible; and not to overlook the conditions on man's side, for they have to be made clear, or rather exposed.
'Exposed' is the best word for that, for the true conditions in this world are not always on the surface.
The veneer has to be removed, and I understand that that is the duty of the preacher. God, in His government, allows things to occur which tend to destroy the veil that covers over the actual state of things that exists. It is a very great mercy from God when He allows the actual seething corruption that is below the veneer to break out. In that way people are aided -- some of them aroused and awakened from among the dead. There are many sleeping among the dead among God's people, and these governmental occurrences wake them up, and that is a mercy! Then men generally are aroused, so that it becomes a sort of extremity, which is always an opportunity for God.
Now, the conditions under which God carries on His work in our favour, in man's favour, are clearly set out in the passage I have read from Zechariah.
God is acting, that is the first thought. I believe that ought to be made clear-becoming Man, and anointed by the Spirit. We are told that Jesus went about doing good, for God was with Him. His good works were the good works of God. God was acting and the actings of God were all in man's favour.
Now, if God is acting Satan is acting. This is a fact clearly indicated throughout Scripture; so that Satan always attends gospel meetings, at any rate,
{145}
meetings that are characterised by any measure of divine grace and power. Satan is always there, we may be sure of that. And so, if God is working with any individual, Satan is active; he soon perceives it. He quickly perceives whether you are growing discontented with things in the world, whether you have begun to pray, perhaps privately it may be, unobserved by any but God Himself, yet observed by the wicked one. He observes a discontented air about you where hitherto you had been satisfied with things, indeed enjoyed things, in the world. If thus as a christian, you are moved a bit by the testimony, by ministry, and God becomes of importance in your mind, you think of God a little, you take Him into your calculations; you begin, in other words, to be godly in some measure, Satan will take in all that, too. In fact, he takes note of every item of the divine work, whatever it is, his great aim being to resist what God is doing.
Even if, as we see in the book of Job, the sons of God come up before God, Satan comes too! So you see his incessant activity to resist the work of God.
Well now, beloved friends, I want to show you how God, in carrying out His work, has set up an order of things down here which enables Him to carry it on without being disturbed; there is that which represents God down here in the way of power. I hope you have got hold of that. It is in the light of the kingdom that every intelligent preacher stands up; in other words, the preacher is *clothed* with salvation.
He himself is *free*; he lifts up his head; he has got the helmet of salvation on: that is to say, he is in the light of the kingdom, he knows the kingdom. It is a bulwark here against attacks, so that he carries on his work in the Lord's name and is unmolested: the Angel of Jehovah stands by, that is the comfort.
One, such as Paul, was not sent out into the gentile world, as it were, alone; there was One who stood by "The Lord", he says, "stood with me, and gave me
{146}
power, that through me the proclamation might be fully made", @2 Timothy 4: 17. He had the helmet of salvation on, the Lord was by, and so Paul carried on his glorious work. He went to Corinth, a town of Greece, and the Lord says, "No one shall set upon thee to injure thee", @Acts 18: 10. What a stay to him!
But what for? He says, "I have much people in this city"-'they must be all secured for Me'. Therefore, if a gospel meeting is of any account it secures something for the building, for God is aiming at securing material. So the apostle laboured on under the wing of Christ, and all the power of the empire of that day could not touch him. Even when he stood before the emperor himself, whose mouth was like the mouth of a lion ready to devour him, he says that the Lord stood just there by him at the lion's mouth, and the lion's mouth was powerless, just as powerless as were the lions in the den with Daniel. The Lord stood just there and delivered Paul. "I was delivered", he says, "that through me the proclamation might be fully made". The Angel of the Lord is standing by. I would not venture to stand up before you here did I not believe that; I do believe it. I believe, so to say, that the Angel of the Lord is standing by.
Now, there may be some Joshua here, who has had a place of dignity, but whose clothes are tattered, whose dignity is lost and has departed from him; in fact he is one who is in the fire; he is in terrible straits! The Angel of the Lord is standing by for your deliverance! It says, "He shewed me Joshua the high priest". The sinner is in the eye of God; man, in his dire necessity, is first in the divine mind. Joshua the high priest is seen, it is said, standing before the Angel of Jehovah; so far, so good. Thank God, you have come into the meeting, at any rate. It is of great importance to get souls in under the sound of the gospel. You may have come by invitation, but if you have come out of exercise so much the better. I
{147}
would remark that there is nothing without exercise, nothing for God without that. To one who has come in to hear the message, under exercise, I say, you are an object for the mind of God; the attention of heaven, in fact, is called to you. Here the prophet's attention is called to Joshua, not to the Angel first, but to Joshua. It is Joshua that is before the mind of the Spirit. The next object is the Angel of Jehovah; the Angel of Jehovah is there and Joshua before him. Have you ever been before God? For the Angel is simply God Himself, representatively. It is God with whom we have to do: "All things are naked and laid bare to his eyes, with whom we have to do", @Hebrews 4: 13. Those garments that you are wearing may suit outside, but not under God's eye.
But before I come to that I want to speak a word about Satan. He is the adversary; he too is there, as I was saying, and he is there to resist. Beware! Beware of suggestions whilst you are before God. Satan whispers things to you, for he is there to resist. It is a great encouragement to me that Scripture does not close without giving us full light on the end of Satan. He is but an instrument in the divine hand for the carrying out of God's government. Such is the greatness of God that His arch-enemy is an instrument for carrying out His government in regard of men on the earth. So you see at the end an angel with a chain-what irony is in that! We read in Scripture of God laughing, "He that dwelleth in the heavens shall laugh, the Lord shall have them in derision", @Psalm 2: 4. There are those who would break the bands, the divine limitations which are really a mercy for man, for all divine limitations are simply to restrain lawlessness, "Let us break their bonds asunder, and cast away their cords from us!", @Psalm 2: 3. But what about the chain that the angel in @Revelation 20 has? Satan is bound; then the beast and the false prophet are taken alive. There is no chain needed. Think of
{148}
the power in the hand of Christ! All the political and military power of the world centred in two men and they are cast alive into the lake of fire; not stricken with death, but taken alive and cast into the lake of fire! Where is the pretence now of breaking the divine bonds, the divine limitations? What derision on the part of God! These two men in all their boastfulness were cast into the lake of fire. In the first verse of that chapter an angel with a great chain comes down from heaven and the arch-enemy of God Himself is bound. He has not merely been marshalling human kings, and potentates, but marshalling the unseen hosts against God and against Christ. But an angel comes, *one* angel (one angel, you know, scattered 185,000 Assyrians at once; @2 Kings 19: 35), here *one only* takes that mighty being, the adversary, and chains him. What a testimony to power! Just as one angel sat upon the stone that sealed the tomb of Jesus, as if to dare the power of the empire! What irony, but how encouraging for us who believe in God! What can Satan do with that chain *which* the angel uses to bind him, to limit him for a thousand years? It is simply a limitation by God, beyond which he cannot go for a thousand years.
God allows him at this moment a wider area, *although* his head is crushed; in fact, his power is annulled for the believer, for faith. He is now allowed down here for the carrying on of the divine government amongst men; that is what Satan does. Nevertheless, beloved friends, his virulent opposition to God is in him; there is no change, his true character is ever-present; he is the adversary. Well now, what I want to point out is that the Lord said unto Satan, "Jehovah rebuke thee, O Satan!", and then it says, "Yea, *Jehovah* that hath chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee!". Jerusalem is the great divine centre on earth, I need not remind you; it is that *which* will presently become the great centre on earth. But our Jerusalem
{149}
is above; and if God is selecting now, if He is drawing souls out of the fire now, it is for the heavenly Jerusalem, not for the earthly. It is that you and I might shine *there*. The heavenly Jerusalem is composed of such as you and me, drawn out of the fire, beautified, mitred, clothed with festival robes; such are they that shall inhabit the heavenly city. Hence it is said, "Jehovah rebuke thee!". The *Angel* does not, it is the Lord Himself that rebukes the wicked one.
Well, Joshua is there, Satan is rebuked, and the work goes on. It is a happy stage in your soul when it is so, when you have, as before the Angel of the Lord, recognised your true state, for you are shorn of all your dignity. True humility, true self-judgment is to acknowledge that man is shorn of all his dignity, it is all gone! His clothes are tattered, are soiled, unfit. It is a great moment when you arrive at that stage; for the Lord has His eye on you. He has a place for you somewhere; He loves you! He is going to dignify you, He is going to beautify you, He is going to clothe you, and He is going to place you! How wonderful it is to be thus in the divine mind-that the mind of God should be so set on every one of us! It has been so with every Christian here, however little we have accepted it. Even the very initial movements in your soul exercise are taken note of there in heaven; they are the occasion of joy there! You will observe it says, "And Joshua was clothed with filthy garments and stood before the Angel. And he spoke and said unto those that stood before him, saying, Take away the filthy garments from off him". There are those that stand before you, for God has His own agents through grace down here and they are a great aid. You know that, in the case of Lazarus, the Lord did not take off the grave clothes. There are certain things that God allows those that stand before you to do. Would we were more up to it! The Lord says of Lazarus in @John 11, "Loose him and let him go".
{150}
Now, these filthy garments have to be removed. How removed? Their filthiness has to be pointed out; and surely all these righteousnesses of yours are nothing else than filthy rags, as the scripture says. There is an attempt you know at robes; the idea of clothes began in @Genesis 3. I have often pointed out that the first device of man was to make clothes, the first invention was clothes-making, making aprons! Many others followed, but this was the first. The law helped on that line, so the Old Testament supposes a wardrobe, a place for clothes; Job of all men had access to such a wardrobe! But what did *he* have, and what had you got, if you have been clothing yourself out of the wardrobe of the law? Poor tatters they are! It has to be pointed out to us. Thank God for the light! The Lord would use one and another that stand before you to point out the filthiness. "All our righteousnesses are as filthy rags", @Isaiah 64: 6. It is well to admit it.
Now, the Spirit of God addresses the individual; it says (verse 4), "And unto him he said ...". How precious it is to be spoken to directly! There is the Angel, and Jehovah Himself, and Satan. But here now Jehovah speaks directly to the soul; the Spirit speaks directly to the soul; I do not know exactly how it happens, but there is a direct speaking to the soul. He said, "I have caused thine iniquity to pass from thee, and I clothe thee with festival-robes". Such is the magnitude of the divine proposal! And what a robe it is that God proposes for us! For He has His own wardrobe, as you all know. In Luke there surely was a wardrobe, for the best robe was carefully kept; "Bring out the best robe", the father said; and the servants knew where it was. It was as if it were something well known in the house, kept in reserve: how wonderful is the richness of the house! Mark you, presently Joshua was to rule in it! Presently he is to see to it that others are to be robed, and he is to have
{151}
fellows. But how rich is the house, stored up with clothing! But there is the *best* one! I do not doubt but what there will be an inferior robe for others in a future dispensation, reserved for them too, and suited to them, suited to their station. It is a wonderful thing to get into your soul the idea of rank. God has the idea of rank or status in His mind. And how rich the *best robe*! We can dwell on the superlative, when we think of Christ, of the dignity of Jesus, of the life of Jesus, of the walk of Jesus as a Man down here. He was a Man out of heaven, "the second man, out of heaven", not that He has come *out* of it-that is not the point-but He is of it. He belongs to heaven; it is His own place. "If then ye see the Son of man ascending up where he was before?", @John 6: 62. There He is as Man!
The Spirit brings in that Man, and clothes you with His worth. There is the testimony of His death, for there could be no clothing without death; God made that clear. The moment that clothing was introduced in Scripture, God made it clear that if there is to be clothing according to Him, it must be through death. @Genesis 3 does not speak of the beauty of the clothing; it does not present clothing in the way of adornment; if a person is naked, it is not a question of adornment; it is a question of covering the nakedness. But with Joshua it is more than that; it was not simply a question of covering the prodigal's nakedness; it was a question of adornment according to his rank, according to his station. In the mind of God we are called to heaven. He has nothing lower in His thought in the gospel at the present time, and He has laid the basis for that in the death of Christ. So that everything is adjusted down here in your soul through the righteousness of God revealed in the death of Jesus. No one dare point a finger at you; with garments of righteousness you are invulnerable against all attacks. But then you have garments of glory and beauty!
{152}
Think of that, beloved friends! There is the mitre; it is really a diadem, alluding to the priest, to the dignity that God puts upon us. What is the dignity of the believer? That he is a son of God; that is his dignity! Well, I must not linger on that, although it is most precious. There is a fair mitre put upon his brow. Where is the dignity of this world when com pared with that, beloved friends? A fair mitre put upon your brow by the blessed God! You are a companion of Christ! You are a son! Your place is in the house for ever, as it says, "The son abides for ever", @John 8: 35.
I want just to say a word more about Joshua. It goes on to say in verse 5 that the Angel of Jehovah stood by. The protection is there during all this wonderful procedure in regard of Joshua. How restful the soul is as God carries on His blessed work with the believer; the Angel of Jehovah stands by. And then it goes on to say, "And the Angel of Jehovah protested unto Joshua, saying, Thus saith Jehovah of hosts: If thou wilt walk in my ways, and if thou wilt keep my charge, then thou shalt also judge my house, and shalt also keep my courts; and I will give thee a place to walk among these that stand by". Some of you here may think that what I am saying is for the people of God only; but the gospel supposes all these things. If you are taken up at all, you are taken up for the house, and not to be a servant in it, but to be in it in dignity; and you view all the Lord's people who are there in the dignity that belongs to them. Joshua is mitred, and he is clothed, and now he is to rule and to order the house of God. Think of the honour put upon us down here! Then He says, "I will give thee a place to walk among these that stand by". You are now among those that are standing by! I love to be amongst those that are standing by; if I am not preaching, at any rate, I am standing by, I am supporting it and protecting it and aiding it in
{153}
every possible way. God would have His people to be evangelical whether they are preachers or are standing by. You can easily stand by. Joshua is to be privileged to have a walking place amongst such. Such is the order of divine development in connection with the gospel; you are amongst a company. Joshua is to have fellows, or companions, and they are men of portent, they are signs. What are we in this world? Part of it? Going on with it? We are set here to be signs, *signifying* something. 'Men to be observed' is the rendering here, men to be noted. Such is the divine thought for us, beloved friends! How great is the proposal!
Then following after all this great privilege that is accorded to us in connection with the gospel, we are to be caught up into glory, to be received up into glory presently and presented faultless in the presence of it!
I cannot proceed further, but I desire to leave it with you, how God, in taking you up, proposes that you should have a place of dignity in the house. How many of us are content with a servile place, afraid to lift up our heads, whereas God would have you with a mitre! One loves to see a company of mitred people, diademed people! It is not now the helmet of salvation, that is, for the outside, to resist attacks. A diadem is not for that. A helmet is for war; a diadem is for dignity! What a company! Heaven will be adorned with mitred people, people dignified after the pattern of Christ! What a glorious proposal! how the Spirit of God would magnify the gospel! The great divine thought of snatching a brand out of the burning, and dignifying him, giving him a place in the house and a place to walk in according to his dignity! Where do you walk? What kind of society do you keep? If you are a christian, if you are snatched out of the fire, where do you walk? Here it is said to Joshua, "I will give thee a place to walk among these that stand by". Is that where you walk? Do you
{154}
find your society amongst those that stand by the testimony of the gospel, those who would stand by and see a soul snatched from the fire? Is that where you walk? That is where you are called to walk; it is your privilege to walk there. You are in the company of the Angel of Jehovah, for He was standing by. What glorious company! We may say it is the Lord Jesus now, for who but He could represent God in His glorious work? Only He! It is not entrusted to angels now; they are sent out as ministering servants to those who shall be heirs of salvation. But Jesus is our Captain: He is the Captain of our salvation. He is the One who stands by us, and if you want to walk amongst these that stand by, you will find yourself walking in company with Him, for He is standing by.
Now there is just one more thought in the passage. You will think I am simply giving you an exposition of the passage, but it is not my thought at all. I want to show you how God works, and the development of His work, and how His work leads to completion. What marks the present time is *incompleteness*; "I have not found thy works complete", was said to Sardis. Come on to the end, beloved friend, let God lead you on to the end. And so He brings in the "Branch", that is the next point. Christ is brought into evidence now, and what marks the whole scene is dependence on God; dependence on God is the idea of a branch. A branch is dependent. The blessed Lord took that place in grace, He was dependent down here, and now He calls us into that. It was dependence on God that marked Jesus when He was down here. Then you have other wonderful things that I cannot dwell upon, but they are worthy of note. "For behold, the stone that I have laid before Joshua -- upon one stone are seven eyes"; there is every perception now! Things do not pass unnoticed now; alas, so much passes unnoticed! But nothing passes unnoticed by the eye of God, depend upon that!
{155}
The rims of the wheels of God's government, we are told, are full of eyes (@Ezekiel 1: 18). There is not a thing happening under the sun that is not noted by God, and there is nothing that comforts me more than that; He takes note of everything! But how important that there should be a stone laid before Joshua, laid before this brand plucked out of the fire, and the stone with seven eyes upon it; it is "the seven spirits of God", it is the all-seeing discernment of the Spirit. How wonderfully fortified is the position! So that there is watchfulness.
Finally, you have the principle of care for others, for the passage goes on to say, "In that day, saith Jehovah of hosts, shall ye invite every man his neighbour under the vine and under the fig-tree". There is the thought of care. How great the design on the part of the blessed God to take up any one of us, to take up a brand like this which is plucked out of the fire, in His faithfulness, and set him up in relation to all this! Where are you in regard of all this light that God is pleased to vouchsafe to us in these last days? Have you responded to it? You may depend upon it that God is acting governmentally, and He is acting by the Spirit for the deliverance of men at the present time. We must not overlook His governmental dealings. He is taking note of everything, but in the midst of the wheels, you know, there is the figure of a man, and the hand of a man, and above it on the throne there is the appearance of a man. There are all the sympathies of Christ in the government of God. In the midst of the government of God there is the Man; and it all, for the present, is in view of the rescuing of men. Then there is the blessed Spirit operating directly in the Lord's people so that you might be brought into all this glory, to all this dignity and blessedness.
May the Lord bless His word to each of us!
{156}
GOD'S PRINCIPLE OF RULE SET OUT IN CHRIST
@Mark 1: 27; @Mark 4: 41
I want to say a word tonight as to the effect of the Lord's ministry on the lives of those who heard it, to say a word first as to the impression it produced, that it was new, different from what had preceded it.
Now the ordinary religionist may have his peculiar religion; but on general principle he is simply a religionist. Religion is very old. Of course the very word used for it is of God, "Pure and undefiled religion before God and the Father is this: to visit orphans and widows in their affliction, to keep oneself unspotted from the world", @James 1: 27. But religion by itself is a very old thing in the world and will remain in the world even when God is refused and the Holy Spirit is refused. When the Holy Spirit shall leave the world and the church shall leave, religion shall remain; but not the "pure religion" James speaks of. "Pure and undefiled religion before God and the Father" will not remain; that is dependent on the presence of the Holy Spirit. "To visit orphans and widows in their affliction, to keep oneself unspotted from the world" belongs only to christians; only christians are religionists after that fashion.
But there is the other religion of Cain which is equally old with the pure religion. Cain's religion, as you know, was made dependent on cultivation. That was not pure religion but it was religion; it was a recognition of God and of God's rights to receive a sacrifice; but it was not pure. It was impure; but being impure it nevertheless is old, and continues in the world until this time. Very often it is seen in people who come to gospel meetings out of custom, because it is customary to spend an hour or two on Sunday evening at a meeting. Now, beloved friends,
{157}
I would like to be very simple, and I would say to you, if you are here tonight on those lines, there is nothing *new* in that at all; it is as old as Cain. It is seen in China, Japan and other heathen countries; it is doing things out of custom. The Lord found it at Jerusalem. Jerusalem was full of it; they were religionists, they went to the temple, they kept the passover, there was the synagogue in which the Lord cast out demons. The synagogue was not new; a man possessed of a demon, that was not new; but one thing *was new*, and it was recognised to *be new*, and that was the doctrine the Lord Jesus Christ taught and the manner of His words. That was new and it was recognised to be new. As you will observe, it says, "What is this? what new doctrine is this?".
Now it is a very good thing, even if you are a religionist, to begin to enquire, "What is this?". It would be a very long address that would answer that question. It takes all the ministry of the twelve apostles to answer it, and added to that it takes all the ministry of Paul to answer that. It is a very great thing. I wonder if you know anything about it? This thing is very wonderful. "What is this?" is the question in the synagogue. Has it been answered to your satisfaction? It is different from what you have been accustomed to. What is it? It is the presence of the Son of God here in this world. *He* who by His Spirit hath garnished the heavens; *He* by whom it says, "all things were made"; and *He* by whom they are upheld. They *are* upheld: "upholding all things by the word of his power" (@Hebrews 1: 3), by His power. "*He* spoke, and it was done; *he* commanded, and it stood fast", @Psalm 33: 9. What God speaks is the expression of His mind; His commandment is that it should stand fast. The expression of God's mind must stand, and it stands fast. Other things may go; but what He commands, what He has spoken, stands: "*He* commanded, and
{158}
it stood fast". Take the very best watch made, in time it goes wrong. Consider those marvellous heavenly bodies; our chronometers are to be regulated by them, they are fast in their orbits; accuracy marks them; inaccuracy would bring confusion and destruction. Well, they are held by the word of Christ's power. This is the Man who is speaking to the demon in the synagogue. Do you not think He does it in a new way? It *must* be so. Think of the Person who was there! The Son of God in the synagogue! The synagogue was a sort of branch of the temple; the temple was the centre of the synagogue. The Lord went into the synagogue, a meeting house in Capernaum, but a new thing was there. "What is this?", they said, "what new doctrine is this?".
Now have you made enquiries like that? Have you satisfied your soul about them? For this thing has come into the world. Solomon said, "There is nothing new under the sun", @Ecclesiastes 1: 9. The gospel of Mark is the counterpart of that. Mark shows that there is something new under the sun, and that new thing is Christ casting out a demon in the synagogue. And that "new doctrine" is what He spake. It was new. I ask you here tonight before God, Have you settled this question? In other words, are you converted?
We are living in a time in which great influences are at work in order to affect people. I was only speaking today about Jephthah, the Gileadite, one of the judges of Israel (@Judges 11). A section of Israel in his day was attacked by the children of Ammon, and they had a considerable array, there was no lack of men; but there was a lack of *one man*; what man is going to lead? That sort of thing is going on at the present time. There is no lack of men: there are some fifteen hundred millions of men, women and children in the world, but there is no *man*, people say, no *one*
{159}
*man*. There is going to be one! That is the danger that is ahead of us and I want to speak seriously tonight to you, that you may be sure that you have got the right man in your soul. I have seen it lately in public print, the demand for one man; it is perfectly intelligible, they want a man, they want a leader. Now you want a Leader in your soul; Jephthah was the leader the Gileadites selected. I wonder whom you are going to select for your leader? It is a serious time for the world; the danger is making room for antichrist. He comes, we are told, "in all deceit of unrighteousness", @2 Thessalonians 2: 10. That is how he comes, and he soon discerns there is a place for him, there is a vacant seat. People are saying so, and we are all apt to be carried along with the tide, and I speak to you in the way of warning, especially to the young people here.
But God has brought in a Man; according to Mark He began in a synagogue in Capernaum; He went in and cast out a demon; He did not touch the demon, He commanded the demon and the demon went out, hence the question, "What is this? what new doctrine is this?".
Now the "man of sin" shall come and he makes an impression. We are told he comes "in all deceit of unrighteousness", he sees and seizes the opportunity. His coming is said to be "according to the working of Satan in all power and signs and wonders of falsehood, and in all deceit of unrighteousness"; that is how he comes. Well, the seat is vacant (the leadership is there) without an occupant; will he take it? He does take it. He does not content himself to be simply a man, but he "opposes and exalts himself on high against all called God, or object of veneration; so that he himself sits down in the temple of God",
@2 Thessalonians 2: 4. Think of the presumption in a man; but men want that, they want a leader. They want *their man* and they are going to get him. God can
{160}
forestall that; He has forestalled it in my soul, through the gospel!
Some of us were talking this afternoon about the superman (a current expression in the world) meaning a man that is more than a man, he is a product of development. He is a man who will have six fingers on his hand and six toes on his foot; it is not natural but moral. His number is 666; he is a superman. Have you not heard that expression? It is worthy of note; it is a sign of the times. He is a man who can marshal the forces of nature, who can harness them. He is evidently scientific, utterly without principle, has only one aim and that is his own advancement, like Simon Magus, "saying that himself was some great one", @Acts 8: 9. He is called a beast in @Revelation 13: 11 - 14, and God permits it to work "great signs, that it should cause even fire to come down from heaven to the earth before men. And it deceives those that dwell upon the earth", @Revelation 13: 13, 14. Do you think you can stand it? Now if you reject Christ you can never stand against that, you will submit to it, it is just what you will desire.
We are on the eve of these things. One would like to tell these things to every person in christendom if one could; but one feels one's obligation to tell it everywhere one can, as we are on the eve of these things. The vacancy is there only waiting the man to come forward, and Satan will bring him forward. He will be an advertiser saying, "that himself was some great one". He is a superman, as I have said, prefigured by the man in @2 Samuel 21:20, who had six fingers on each hand and six toes on each foot. The Lord Jesus came on the line of seven, and what you get here is the power of the Spirit. "If I by the Spirit of God cast out demons" (not by the power of Satan) "then indeed the kingdom of God is come upon you", @Matthew 12: 28. In @Revelation 5: 6 it says "I saw in the midst of the throne and of the four
{161}
living creatures, and in the midst of the elders, a Lamb standing, as slain" (wonderful expression), "having seven horns and seven eyes, which are the seven Spirits of God". How attractive a Lamb is, nothing to repel! He had been slain, He had been down into death.
The antichrist will not go down into death for anyone; there will be no marks of suffering in his hands, nor spear mark in his side; alas, many will have been pierced by his spear! The Lord Jesus came not to destroy men's lives, but to save them, and He gave Himself a ransom for all. The antichrist comes to kill and destroy. He rises to the zenith of man's glory over many a corpse, but the Lord is seen in the midst of the throne standing as a Lamb slain. He has "seven eyes, which are the seven Spirits of God which are sent into all the earth". To slay? No, to enlighten people, to bless people. It is the perfection of spiritual power exercised by such a one as He. Every one who is a believer on Christ knows what perfection of spiritual power is in the hand of the Lamb; He "received of the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, he has poured out this which *ye* behold and hear", @Acts 2: 33. The Spirit is here in perfection, perfection of divine power exercised under the Lamb, that is the Lord Jesus. He is the great opposite of the superman that is spoken of later in the book of Revelation.
Now, "What new doctrine is this?". It is this Man's doctrine, the doctrine of Christ. "The Son of God has come", @1 John 5: 20. "Jesus Christ come in flesh", @1 John 4: 3. Do not receive anyone who does not bring that doctrine. "Do not receive him into the house, and greet him not; for he who greets him partakes in his wicked works", @2 @John 10, 11.
The doctrine of Christ is *new*; it is to be received implicitly in the soul of the believer. "Jesus Christ come in flesh", come "by water and blood", @1 John 5: 6.
{162}
Shall the antichrist come that way? No, he does not come that way. God's Man came that way; He came by the means of expiation, the means of cleansing for your conscience and your heart; He is God's Lamb. It is He who takes the book, it is He who opens the seals thereof; He has title to do it, for He came and died. That doctrine is to be received implicitly in your heart and conscience. The water flowed from His pierced side, and the blood, too. In the gospel it is the blood first, expiation is first; the conscience is relieved by the blood, and the affections by the water. The christian has a purged conscience his sins are all put away by the death of Christ, and the Holy Spirit is a witness that they are effectively put away. A christian has pure affections; he loves the brethren, he loves them for their own sakes and for Christ's sake. Brethren are lovable for their own sakes, for they are born of water and the Spirit; they are pure, and he loves them. A purged conscience and love for the brethren mark a christian. It is a man after Christ. Now the Lord Jesus Christ, beloved friends, effects that for you.
One loves to think of the Lamb standing as slain in the midst of the throne, having seven eyes which are the seven Spirits of God. He is seen in the perfection of spiritual power as having effected atonement. That is the Man that is presented to you in this "new doctrine", so gloriously for the christian. Paul says, Ye "have obeyed from the heart the form of teaching into which ye were instructed", @Romans 6: 17. Have you obeyed it *from the heart*? Paul says, "from the heart", heart-wise, from the inside, not from the outside. Earthly religion operates from the outside, it does nothing permanently, but God works from the inside; there is the blood for the conscience and the water for the heart. The heart is sprinkled from an evil conscience, and finally the body washed with pure water, so there is a man here for Christ.
{163}
In the fourth chapter we have this word, "Who then is this?". What sort of man are you? In Matthew in the parallel passage the word is "sort", "What sort of man is this?", @Matthew 8: 27. What sort of man are you? The only way to find out is to come and live with you; you have to live with a man to know what kind of a man he is. It is one thing to see you at the meeting; what kind of man are you at home? In the second chapter of Mark the paralytic was raised up and the Lord said, "Arise ... and go to thine house". 'Be a man like Me *there* first; shine *there*'. "Who then is this?". That is the question raised. It would take a long address to answer that question, What sort of Man is Christ? We shall know what He is like presently in the glory, in the Father's house. What a future is before the christian! We shall see the Lord there. He is chief in the Father's house, He orders everything there, He gives me my place and gives you your place. That is what is before us. What tenderness of affection; we shall see all the Father's affections on Him and His affections on the saints. What sort of Man was He down here? That is the question to be answered for the moment, and it is to be answered, among other things, because the believer himself is to be after that sort.
Gideon said to the kings of Midian, "What sort of men were they that ye slew at Tabor?", @Judges 8: 18. They could give an account of them, "As thou art, so were they; each one resembled the sons of a king". Would to God men could talk of me as they did of them; they were forced to confess they were after the pattern of a king. How one would love that the enemies of the Lord's people at the present time should be compelled to make a confession like that, if the question was raised as to what the saints are! Alas, we are so often unlike the Lord Jesus!
What sort of Man is He? The four gospels answer that question, and Paul delighted to bring Him forward.
{164}
"For God is one, and the mediator of God and men one, the man Christ Jesus", @1 Timothy 2: 5. The Man, that is the One "who gave himself a ransom for all". That is the sort of Man He is, "Who gave himself a ransom for all". That is the kind of Man. He dies, not only for the saints but for all. And then the apostle says elsewhere that 'this is the One Man I desire to know'. "But surely I count also all things to be loss on account of the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord ... to know him, and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being conformed to his death ... I pursue, looking towards the goal, for the prize of the calling on high of God in Christ Jesus", @Philippians 3: 8 - 14. That is what Paul wished, his heart was enamoured with that Man!
That is the sort of Man Christ was, beloved friends, and, as I was saying, the effect of the gospel rightly received is to bring about a man like that, in measure a man like that. The idea is to bring in a man like Christ, not a monstrous man like the Philistine giant, not the result of cultivation and the like, but a spiritual man. See therefore that you are spiritual. One looks at the Lord's people and feels for oneself how unspiritual we are. We look at things in such a natural way. The Lord never did. The Lord always looked at things spiritually. He had seven eyes, spiritually, of course, "which are the seven Spirits of God which are sent into all the earth". If one has seven eyes, what are they for? To meet the need of the world. I was referring to Gideon and I do not know of any better illustration. Gideon said, "What sort of men were they that ye slew at Tabor? And they answered, As thou art, so were they; each one resembled the sons of a king". These Midianites were enemies of God's people. So there are today enemies who would slay us, if they could; but they were forced to confess they were like Gideon, "each one resembled the sons
{165}
of a king". Gideon's father was not a king, he was a poor man of Manasseh; he was no king, but Gideon was like a son of a king. He had that likeness from God. "And the men of Israel said to Gideon, Rule over us, both thou, and thy son, and thy son's son also; for thou hast saved us from the hand of Midian. And Gideon said to them, I will not rule over you, neither shall my son rule over you: Jehovah will rule over you". Show me a professing Christian who wants to rule and I will show you a thorn bush; show me a Christian who is content to be ruled by Christ and I will show you a vine. So in the next chapter, @Judges 9, Jotham speaks of the vine, saying, 'I will not be a king over the trees, I shall stay just as I am, I will furnish wine which cheers God and man'. "Should I leave my new wine, which cheers God and man, and go to wave over the trees?". That is a spiritual man's judgment. The fig tree said, "Should I leave my sweetness, and my good fruit, and go to wave over the trees?". But the thorn bush said, 'I want to be king'-a bush that tears and scratches-that is antichrist.
So do not desire to rule, desire to be ruled. The Lord Jesus Christ is the Ruler, He is the appointed Ruler among men. He is that among men. He has died for us. He has title to our affections. He has title to rule us, and if we retain our place of subjection we are beneficial to others and minister joy to God and man.
{166}
THE SPEAKING AND THE BLESSING OF GOD
@Zechariah 12: 1, 7 - 14; @Zechariah 13: 1
There are three points that I have on my mind to speak to you about. The first is the title that God has to address men; the second that He blesses on the ground of sovereignty, and the third is the means by which He blesses. The title that God has to speak to men in this chapter is founded on very great things. Firstly, that He stretched out the heavens; secondly, that He laid the foundations of the earth, and thirdly, that He formed man's spirit within him. No one has such title to speak as that. So we would be encouraged to bring forward these great thoughts, for the things that God refers to here are witness to Him.
One cannot enlarge on the points; but the stretching out of the heavens is a very interesting thing. It has reference, I suppose, to house-furnishing, as the foundation has reference to building, whereas the spirit of man being formed refers to the inmates, to those who are to dwell in that which is built and furnished and ornamented. So that God in laying the foundation of the earth has wisdom by Him. I do not know that the foundation was laid by pattern; I do not think so, for where you come to pattern you come to moral things. Christ is pattern of everything in the moral system. The physical is very much like the scaffolding of a building, that is, it is that by which God brings about a system that is to abide. And when the moral structure is builded, the scaffolding will be removed. But then the scaffolding is very wonderful, and indeed, as one may say, it was a sort of prefigurement of the spiritual. The tabernacle was to represent all things and He who builds all things is God. But I do not suppose there is anyone who has
{167}
got eyes and ordinary intelligence but who admires the wonderful sight that the heavens present; when the clouds disappear and one looks up into the firmament, the sight is indeed glorious, the infinite variety of bodies, denoting this wonderful stretching out that is alluded to here, by the hand of God. David admired it in a spiritual way. He says, "When I see thy heavens, the work of thy fingers" (@Psalm 8: 3), and, "In them hath he set a tent for the sun, and he is as a bridegroom going forth from his chamber; he rejoiceth as a strong man to run the race", @Psalm 19: 4, 5. This wonderful curtain, as one might say, stretched out, as it is said elsewhere, "By his Spirit the heavens are adorned", @Job 26: 13. That is the first point. God is here addressing men, every one of whom can see that He has a right to speak to them on the ground of this. Then as regards the foundation of the earth what a wonderful conception it must have been, from the standpoint of height and measure. Think of the wonderful poise by which God has manipulated all these uncountable bodies, and the earth that is prepared for the children of men! He brought it forward in speaking to job, and when He had finished His address to Job on the ground of His creatorial power and rights, Job put his hand upon his mouth; he had no more to say.
What is puny man, dear friends, as one looks at these things, as one sees the sun in perfect regularity, and the earth, all moving according to infinite accuracy of time! Who in his senses could doubt the intelligence that is behind it all? But when you come to man, you come to what is poor physically as compared with all these things, and yet of him alone it is said that he is "fearfully, wonderfully made"; he is the divine masterpiece! The "potter" is the allusion that the apostle makes to God, who takes a piece of clay and forms it; that was Adam, God making a vessel. It is one thing to make these great orbs in
{168}
the heavens, and the earth, but to make a vessel which He is to use for His pleasure, which He is to have in His house, is something different. And what a vessel! His countenance denoted the intelligence that God had placed within, his very physical structure suggested that he was to look into the countenance of God, that as God looked down, man could look up, for that was the divine design. God could come into the garden, and He sought man in the cool of the day. I have often remarked that Adam was never a boy; he was formed, but the passage here does not speak of the physical formation of Adam, but of the spiritual. God formed man's spirit within him. It is God's portion of the man. The body returns to dust, but the spirit to God who gave it. You have got a spirit, even in your unconverted days, formed in you by God. You did not get that from your parents, for the man's spirit is derived from God; God gives it to him, and that returns to God, and in that he is responsible to God. Hence there is that in me that answers to God, even beyond my parents. If I derived my spirit from my parents, then I would be responsible to them, but I get my spirit from God, and hence I am responsible to Him and that responsibility remains for ever; you can never escape it, it is with you in your unconverted days and your converted days. God warns you in regard of it; on account of that spirit you have an intelligence that the lower animal has not, and so you are responsible for whatever you do now. The remarkable thing is that God in giving man a spirit also gave him a conscience. One may speak of three things in a man: his spirit and his soul and his conscience. The conscience, I suppose, is bound up in the spirit of a man. Of course there is the body, too, "spirit, soul and body" is the formula that the Spirit uses; but in the spirit that He has formed, He has set a conscience, and that conscience, if left to itself, is a constant accuser of the man. If
{169}
you take @Romans 2: 15, the thoughts of heathen are "accusing or else excusing themselves"; that is, in the Greek philosopher, his thoughts either accused or else excused him. The conscience continually accused, for God had that witness there. Thank God for that; were it not for the witness that God has set down here in men, what would the world be! In the darkest parts of the earth there is some recognition of God. So that God has an avenue by which He approaches man with His message.
But now when a man is converted, or rather, when a man is born anew, it is not only that he has a conscience, the conscience remains, the spirit remains, but he is *born*. Mark, it is not only something in him; it is something in him, but it is not *only* that; the man is born; every fibre of his being comes under the influence of the new birth. It is not simply that the natural man receives light and makes up his mind to confess Christ; it is not that; the natural man is unable to discern what is of God; he is unable to take it up, although the conscience accuses him. It is only as I become a subject of new birth that I have got divine sensibilities. Now, if there is one here tonight who has been brought up under light, I would appeal to you as to whether you are conscious of divine sensibilities. You may enquire what I mean by divine sensibilities. Well, are you happy with the Lord's people? Is the fear of God before your eyes? Do you pray secretly? All these things, if they are found with you, are an evidence that God has been there, and so there is hope for you. I say that for your encouragement. If you have got these divine sensibilities, they are not to the flesh, they are a fruit of the work of God. So that as God formed man's spirit at the beginning, He works again in a man. "The wind", says the Lord to Nicodemus, "blows where it will", @John 3: 8. Man cannot effect it; all the legislation in the world could not change the
{170}
course of the wind. Hence, it is a suggestion of the sovereignty of God. Man cannot interfere with it. That is one of the greatest comforts that we can have as engaged in the service of God. "The wind blows where it will, and thou hearest its voice, but knowest not whence it comes and where it goes: thus is every one that is born of the Spirit". That is, he is born of something that man cannot account for; it is outside the range of man, nevertheless the effects of it are apparent. The effects are seen in the way of divine sensibilities. There is a sense of sinfulness before God; there is a desire to be near God, and to be near the people of God, and so the gospel is for you; you may be one of the elect, but you are not to rest there.
Well now, in the next passage that I read it says, "Jehovah shall save the tents of Judah first". If He has wrought in my soul sovereignly, then He saves me, and He does it according to His sovereignty. If there is one thing next to what I have been speaking of that encourages, it is the thought of God's elect.
I do not know them. In the second epistle to Timothy the apostle is exercised about them, and one is encouraged to believe that that is what should be upon our hearts now, the principle of a lighted candle, sweeping the house in order to find the lost piece; that is the elect: "For the sake of the elect", says Paul, "that *they* also may obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory", @2 Timothy 2: 10. What a thought he had! Not simply 'Some lone place within the door', but "Eternal glory". And so here, God says, 'I will save the tents of Judah first'. Judah in the Scriptures stands for God's sovereignty, for God's counsels, and so, if you have got these sensibilities of which I have spoken, you are a subject of divine grace; God has begun with you. But then He presents to you the light, the gospel, and as Paul says, "For Moses lays down in writing the righteousness
{171}
which is of the law, The man who has practised those things shall live by them. But the righteousness of faith speaks thus: Do not say in thine heart, Who shall ascend to the heavens? that is, to bring Christ down; or, Who shall descend into the abyss? that is, to bring up Christ from among the dead. But what says it? The word is near thee, in thy mouth and in thy heart: that is, the word of faith, which we preach: that if thou shalt confess with thy mouth Jesus as Lord, and shalt believe in thine heart that God has raised him from among the dead, thou shalt be saved", @Romans 10: 5 - 9. Mark you, the word being in your mouth and in your heart will not save you. What saves you is that which becomes active in you, that which produces an effect in you, so that you use your mouth. The word being "in thy mouth" is a negative idea; it is just there, you are not saying it; and "in thine heart", it has not taken root there; you have got to confess. If you are to come into salvation you *must* confess. "For with the heart is believed to righteousness". God has wrought in you sovereignly. He has put the word in your heart; He has put it in your mouth; what are you going to do with it? You say, 'You are preaching works'. No, I am preaching from the scripture and the scripture says, "If thou shalt confess ...". That is public. Let your christianity be public. The Lord Jesus Christ suffered publicly. He died for you publicly, and He looks for you to make a public confession. "For with the heart is believed to righteousness; and with the mouth confession made to salvation". The apostle is referring to what was going on in those days, and what, thank God, is going on now. Men are believing unto righteousness, and they are confessing the Lord Jesus publicly. "God has made him ... both Lord and Christ", @Acts 2: 36. That leads to baptism. But everyone is baptised in these countries, you may say. That will not do. It has become a
{172}
dead letter, there must be more than that. Baptism is not with your mouth; in fact, you do not baptise yourself at all; somebody else does it. Nevertheless you are committed to the death of Christ in it. But you must confess with your mouth besides that.
Let me appeal to the young people here tonight. Have you confessed with your mouth? Do you say, Must I tell the Lord Jesus? Yes, I do mean that, but tell your parents, tell your friends, make the thing known publicly, but be sure that you believe with your heart. As I speak to you tonight, God is looking into your heart, not into your countenance simply, although I love to look into your countenance, and so does God, but He searches the heart. He says, 'I have put My word into your heart; I want to know whether you are believing it'. What use are you making of the light you have got? Believing with your heart and confessing with your mouth, you come into salvation. So He says, 'I will save the tents of Judah first'. The principle of priority is a great principle with God. It cuts across all human thoughts; it is not what you expect; it is what God does. As I said, you are conscious of divine sensibilities; these are not of the flesh, but of the Spirit, for that which is born of the Spirit is spirit; that is, it is naturally so. That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and you can do nothing with it at all. God has shown that in the Old Testament, so that now He has brought a new principle into man, and that is the principle of spirit. I am not now speaking of the spirit that every man has; but a principle that is brought in in the new birth that that which is born of the Spirit is spirit, and it answers to God; so that if you are conscious of divine sensibilities there is great encouragement for you, you belong to the tents of Judah and God is going to save 'you first'; He is going to save you now; I suppose "first" was that very minute, it is not tomorrow; there shall be many saved before tomorrow, that I am
{173}
assured of. God is prepared to save you now; there is no waiting with God really; it is the swiftness of the eagle with God when work has to be done, and work *has* to be done if you have not yet confessed Christ with your mouth and believed in your heart that God has raised Him from among the dead. So that He saves on these principles.
I have anticipated somewhat what may be the next part of what I had in my mind, namely, the pouring out of "the spirit of grace and of supplications"; that is what God does too. He stretches out the heavens; He lays the foundations of the earth; He saves the tents of Judah and now He pours out the spirit of grace and supplications on the house of David and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem. It is not universal. If God did this universally, then I suppose everybody would be saved, but God works on the principle of sovereignty, and, at the same time, He addresses Himself to *all* men. The "righteousness of God" is "towards all, and upon all those who believe", @Romans 3:22. The principle of sovereignty is behind it, so He pours out the spirit of grace and supplications on the house of David and on the inhabitants of Jerusalem. Has He poured it out on you. It is an additional thought to the new birth. It seems to me that God has to give a man a spirit to enable him to judge himself. I would urge you to ask God to help you to judge yourself. You need to judge yourself, as I do, and one is really not able to do it without the help of God. So He pours out the spirit of grace and supplication. The *spirit* of grace, that is a very good expression and alongside of that is the thought of supplication, that is to say one turns to God. And now the judgment is in regard of Christ. How have you been treating Christ? Every time you refuse the offer of salvation in the name of Christ, you have *ill-treated* Christ; you have despised and disregarded Him. "They shall look on me whom they
{174}
pierced, and they shall mourn for him, as one mourneth for an only son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his firstborn". You may have turned a deaf ear to His ministers, but how have you been treating Christ? The spirit of grace and supplications which God gives you enables you to recognise not only that you have been depriving yourself of the blessings of the gospel, but that you have been ill-treating Christ; and so you judge that.
Then I wanted to show you that whilst that is poured out on the house of David and the inhabitants of Jerusalem only, yet it has to take a regular form -- you have to judge yourself alone. "The land shall mourn, every family apart: the family of the house of David apart, and their wives apart; the family of the house of Nathan apart, and their wives apart; the family of the house of Levi apart, and their wives apart; the family of Shimei apart, and their wives apart". The royal family, the prophetic family, the priestly family, the levitical family all have to come in before God separately. The husband and wife are not to come together. The father and child are not to come together; each one is to do it for himself, that is the divine order, and so it was when Peter preached in @Acts 2 on the day of Pentecost. The thought of this comes into the heart of the listeners. I suppose God had poured out the spirit of grace and supplications, and so they were *pricked in their hearts*, a remarkable way to put it. I suppose the pricking was through the conscience, but the point was that they had put that blessed Man to death, and that is what many are doing in principle today, and so they say "What shall we do, brethren?". You are talking about 'doing', you say. Scripture talks about doing. The element of responsibility in a man necessarily raises the question: Peter did not say to his hearers, 'You must not say that'; he says, "Repent, and be baptised, each one of you". That is what you
{175}
have to do. And then he says, "For remission of sins, and ye will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit". Have you got remission of sins tonight as you sit there? As a known thing in your soul? and have you got the gift of the Holy Spirit? These are realities. I am not speaking of something that is merely theoretical. One knows what it is to be forgiven by and through the blood of Christ, and one knows what it is to have the love of God in the heart by the Holy Spirit. These are wonderful realities, and they are presented to you now in the gospel.
Think of a man going about the streets of London with the consciousness in his soul that God has forgiven him all his sins! What do you mind what the world thinks about you? The Spirit witnesses that our sins and iniquities are remembered no more; you have the consciousness in your soul that you are forgiven through the blood of Christ, and you have the consciousness at the same time that His love is in your heart. It is wonderful that one's heart is actually receptive of the love of God by the Spirit, and so in the first verse of the next chapter, it says, "In that day there shall be a fountain opened to the house of David and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem for sin and for uncleanness". Whether it is what one may call primary cleansing or whether it is the effect of the death of Christ on one daily, there it is, a fountain is opened.
Now all this is from the divine side: the stretching out of the heavens, the laying of the foundation of the earth, the spirit of man formed within him. He saves the tents of Judah first; He pours out the spirit of grace and supplications and He opens a fountain; all that is done by God on our behalf through the death of Christ and it is available. Now our side is that the thing is brought by God Himself into your mouth, the testimony of it, that is, and into your heart; now what are you going to do with your mouth and with your
{176}
heart? God says: I want both. I want your heart to be receptive of My love; and I want your mouth to be a witness to it. Are you prepared for that? God grant that you may be! He wants the vessel. Paul says, We are "vessels of mercy", fitted for glory. The answer to that is that one has a treasure in one's heart, the love of God in Christ, and one has to be a witness of that, and confess Christ as Lord. I put these things before you, especially the young; because I notice in moving about that the enemy is especially after the young; he was of old, when the people were about to leave Egypt; Pharaoh proposed to Moses that they should go and leave the young behind. That is Satan's proposal. No right-minded father and mother is prepared to leave his or her young in the enemy's land. The Spirit of God is working with the young so that not a hoof should be left behind; we want all gathered in. We have reached the borderland of the "world to come", the coming of the Lord, and we do not want a single hoof to be left behind. We want all gathered in. This chapter speaks about families, every family apart; the families must all be saved. I may tell you frankly that I much prefer hearing about the blessing of a child of a Christian than even those outside. One wants everybody; everyone who loves God wishes that men should be saved. But I regard a child of Christian parents going into the world as a double triumph of the enemy. It is very serious if you have been brought up in the light, and the word is in your mouth and in your heart; it is for you to use that heart and to use that mouth for God.
May God bless you!
{177}
"THY NAME, O LORD, ENDURETH FOR EVER"
@Exodus 2: 23 - 25; @Exodus 3: 1 - 15; @Psalm 135: 13, 19, 20
I thought that the Lord might help us in considering this section in Exodus in connection with the psalm. Exodus presents things as it usually does from the divine side and the Psalms from our side. The Psalms present the result in those who wrote them of what God presented on His side, so that the psalmist says here "Thy name, O Lord, endureth for ever, and thy memorial, O Lord, throughout all generations". The psalmist says it endures. That is, he has found out its durability as compared with seen things, things that pass away. He had found out the durability of the name of Jehovah, and that His memorial should remain. So the Psalms are our side, the result, so to say, of what we have found God to be; whereas the Pentateuch, the books of Moses, presents things from God's side.
The section I have read brings to our attention the sympathies of God in connection with the sufferings of His people. In a way nothing could be more touching than the fact that it is said that their cry came up to God by reason of the bondage. That is the power of the cry: "God heard their groaning, and God remembered his covenant with Abraham, with Isaac, and with Jacob. And God looked upon the children of Israel, and God had respect unto them". That was His side. The cry was so real, so genuine that it came up; it ascended to where God was. This is what God intends. God allows affliction, and He intends that it should be felt. It should not be accepted lightly, but it should be felt as sent of Him, and the cry produced ascends up as it says, "Their cry came up unto God by reason of the bondage". The cry was so forceful that it came up unto God.
{178}
That refers to how much they felt things. Then verse 24 says God heard. He heard their groanings and then He remembered His covenant. That is He remembers what He said to Abraham, to Isaac and to Jacob.
I commend to you, dear brethren, the importance of feeling a thing rightly, taking it rightly from God and the result of that is that there is a force to the movement of your heart. As it is said, the Spirit makes intercession with groanings which cannot be uttered. Those are movements in the souls of God's people that are the outcome of pressure, the sense of the impossibility of the situation unless God comes in. So there are feelings and exercises which cannot be expressed in words. The Holy Spirit in us expresses them with groans, and the groans come up before God. So it says, "He who searches the hearts" God looks into your heart and searches it and it pleases Him to find groans. The groan is through our hearts. The Spirit makes intercession in our hearts. "He who searches the hearts", it says, "knows what is the mind of the Spirit, because he intercedes for saints according to God". And then we have that simple statement that although we do not know what to pray for in detail, yet "we do know that all things work together for good to those who love God". This is common to all christians. "We do know that all things work together for good to those who love God". And so God, it says here, "heard their groaning, and God remembered his covenant with Abraham, with Isaac, and with Jacob. And God looked upon the children of Israel, and God had respect unto them": it mentions His hearing and looking upon them and His respect unto them. They come before Him now in the light of His covenant. They were children of promise. I refer to all this because it brings before us the idea conveyed by the name 'Jehovah', His faithfulness. We rest
{179}
in that, so the next chapter brings out the situation as regards the people: they were suffering people. The Lord's people are ever that in truth; it marks them. The bush suggests that thought; they pass through affliction; they are not consumed. Thus that is the difference between the application of judgment to God's people and to others. "In the greatness of thine excellency thou hast overthrown them that rose up against thee: thou sentest forth thy wrath, which consumed them as stubble". The bush burns and the bush is not consumed. That is a sign to Moses. That is so to speak his gift, the impression God would produce on His servant: there should be continuous fire but although it burned it should not be consumed. All extraneous matter would be burned up. The bush would represent what is of God, because it says, "When the Lord saw that he turned aside to see, God called unto him out of the midst of the bush". He does not call out of heaven. "In all their affliction he was afflicted", @Isaiah 63: 9. God is with His people throughout the whole of the desert journey. Although there is discipline, and God never withdraws His hand in that respect, yet He is in the midst of those whom He chastens. The principle is that a father chastens a family. He dwells with them and as dwelling with them they come under His discipline. God is with us.
Although He chastens He is with us. "I will not leave thee, neither will I forsake thee". He is with us in the thing. Although you take it from His hand He goes through it with you. He spoke to Moses from the midst of the bush. Very touching. "The angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a flame of fire out of the midst of a bush: and he looked, and behold, the bush burned with fire, and the bush was not consumed". And Moses said, "I will now turn aside, and see this great sight, why the bush is not burnt". That is what struck him. When the Lord saw that he turned aside to see, He called to him out of the
{180}
bush. And now He outlines the thoughts He had about the people, that He had surely seen their affliction and had heard their cry. How very touching that is. I "have heard their cry by reason of their taskmasters", and so He says, "I am come down". There is another beautiful thought. Not, I have sent down, but, I am come down. God came down in Christ to effect deliverance. It is a principle of His ways with us that He comes in Himself. He does not send; He comes in Himself. He comes into our circumstances to effect deliverance. But in coming in He does not spare the flesh. The fire keeps burning.
He goes on to the thought of His name. His name is bound up with all this. God would have us to know Him in all this discipline. He has got His name before Him. He would have us to know that it is a question of His name. And so when Moses questions He says, Go to the people and say to them, "I AM hath sent me unto you". Then "Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, The Lord God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, hath sent me unto you; this is my name for ever, and this is my memorial unto all generations". God has His name. He gives us each a name but evidently the first thing is His name and discipline, so as to bring about in us a clear knowledge of God. A knowledge of God involves His name, and discipline clears the vision; so it says that without holiness no man shall see the Lord. We come to see the Lord in all that but it is only as we have holiness. One might say that, perhaps, that which is least known among the Lord's people is holiness. Righteousness is generally apprehended and love is apprehended, but holiness is perhaps that which is least understood among the people of God. So that the necessity for it is in view of the discipline in order that we might be partakers in His holiness, and so as partakers of it we see Him. Now seeing the Lord does not refer to
{181}
God, it refers to Christ. It is the holiest. God is apprehended in the soul as one draws near, as one draws near in holiness. You cannot be at ease in the holiest without holiness, and discipline involves that one is qualified to enter the holiest and to look there to see what God is in Christ. Nothing can be more wonderful. I believe it is that which stamps the christian; he has seen the Lord. As David says, "I have seen thee in the sanctuary", @Psalm 63: 2. God is seen in His attributes and nature as shining in Christ. I refer to that because of the great value of holiness in the believer as fitting us to see the Lord. That leads me to the psalm which as I said presents just that side. The Psalms may be said to be the product for God of the light vouchsafed in the Old Testament. One ought to read them in that way and ask oneself, What is there in me that corresponds to that? I believe we should be psalmists. "I speak of the things which I have made touching the king", @Psalm 45: 1. There was something which he could speak of that he had made, had composed himself. It was that which he had composed touching the king. The Psalms suggest that the people of God should have a psalm; each has a psalm. It is an experience, dear brethren, with God, and when we come together each of us has a psalm. Now you bring forward a psalm. The thing is to have one. There is a yield for God. And so in this psalm the psalmist says, "Thy name, O Lord, endureth for ever". You will remember the passage in @Exodus 3, "This shall be the sign to thee ... ye shall serve God" (verse 12). That would be sign. That is, the result in them of the deliverance would be that they should serve Jehovah upon that mountain. There would be a return to Him from those who were delivered. He looked for a return from Jacob, and there was a drink-offering. Where He discloses His name, where He reveals Himself, He looks for response. The sign would be "Ye shall serve God upon this
{182}
mountain", that is Horeb, the place of the covenant. It is one thing to speak out of Sinai, and it is quite another to speak out of the burning bush, that is God Himself in the midst of His people enduring things with them. He looked for a return for that, that they should serve Him "upon this mountain". How much went between we cannot go into. Just one point when they were going out of Egypt Pharaoh said, "They are entangled in the land, the wilderness hath shut them in". Satan judges of us as if we were men. He cannot take account of us as born again or weigh the instincts of the divine nature in us, for he judges according to the flesh and he says virtually, 'That young man cannot go into the wilderness, he cannot live without the things of the world'. The christian can live without the things of Egypt; he has got other instincts. The desert does not shut him in at all. The desert is the place for him now because God is in it. He has got the meetings, the brethren, and above all he has got God. The wilderness had not shut them in. Instead of the wilderness shutting them in we find God in it. The psalmist here is looking back on the results that flowed from @Exodus 3. God had said, "I AM". He is the unchanging One. The covenant held good, "Thy name, O Lord, endureth for ever; and thy memorial, O Lord, throughout all generations". He is not giving up. Christianity remains. The Holy Spirit is here. The apostle says, "Our word to you is not yea and nay ... but yea". The name of God is bound up with His everlasting faithfulness; for the Son of God that was preached by Paul, Silvanus and Timotheus "was not yea and nay, but in him was yea". Every promise of God is secured infallibly in Christ. So the psalmist is a spiritual man. Now the memorial should appeal to us as christians because it is bound up with the Lord's supper. It is not only what Christ is to me but what God is to me in Christ. Therefore we have the
{183}
Supper weekly. We look upon it every week as the evidence of the unchangeableness of God in Christ. His love is in our heart and it does not grow old; it remains for ever. We regard the Supper in that light. It is a memorial to us of what God is to us in Christ. The Supper is a memorial to us of Christ, and then in the cup we have the love of God in Him. Every time we drink out of the cup we realise its freshness.
All of us can verify this. We may say with the psalmist, Thy name is for ever and ever and Thy memorial unto all generations.
This psalm, which is a praise psalm, comes in after the purpose of God is established in Zion, through the Songs of degrees. @Psalm 134 is the service of God carried on in night: "Bless ye the Lord, all ye servants of the Lord, which by night stand in the house of the Lord. Lift up your hands in the sanctuary, and bless the Lord". It is, I suppose, suggestive of our position during Israel's night. @Psalm 135 continues it in verses 1 - 3, where the service of God is carried on in the sanctuary. "For the Lord is good sing praises unto his name". See how the name is before the speaker. And when idolatry has been disposed of, in the end of the psalm, he says, "Bless the Lord, O house of Israel; bless the Lord, O house of Aaron; bless the Lord, O house of Levi; ye that fear the Lord, bless the Lord". That is, he calls upon us as viewed in different aspects in which the christian is to be viewed down here, as the houses of Israel, Aaron and Levi. The house of Israel is what we are viewed as as having the Spirit. The saints of God are dignified in the possession of the Spirit ("A prince ... with God" ) and in that capacity we are called upon to praise Jehovah. The house of Aaron refers to us as all being priests, and as such we are to praise. The house of Levi views us as servants, for every christian is a servant in some sense. Every christian is a levite. He is held from infancy by the
{184}
Lord so that He can put His hand upon him when needed. He has a result from us as viewed in these three characters, as princes, priests, and levites, serving the saints. And then it says, "Ye that fear the Lord". What is that? It is your ordinary employment, however menial or dignified. You are regarded as one that should fear the Lord. It is the beginning and end of wisdom. It applies to us all. In the presence of evil we are to fear God, not in the sanctuary, mind you, because there you have boldness, but outside. We have to fear God in view of the flesh, but in that fear to be something for God. We are called upon as those that fear the Lord to worship Him and to praise Him, and then it says, "Blessed be the Lord out of Zion, which dwelleth at Jerusalem". He comes back to the great thought of God's purpose. I suppose that should ever be in our hearts. I ever revert to the thought of God's purpose in whatever circumstances and nothing can change it. God dwells among His people in connection with mount Zion. "Here will I dwell; for I have desired it", @Psalm 132: 14. Why does He desire it? Surely there must be something there that pleases Him, and in applying it to ourselves there is something that pleases Him, what we are as subjects of sovereign mercy (@John 3). He has a company founded on sovereignty.
Well I thought, dear brethren, it would help and encourage us to see how God is with us in the sufferings and in discipline for through them we acquire a knowledge of Himself. His name is revered in our hearts. It becomes a memorial and it endures. We look at it from the experimental side, and we see what it is. A memorial should be in our hearts, a memorial of what God is in Christ. May God bless the word.
{185}
PRAISE ARISING FROM PRESSURE
@Jonah 2: 1, 2, 7 - 9; @Acts 16: 25
I thought it would encourage us to look at these passages as setting forth the way in which the praise of God ascends to Him out of circumstances extraordinarily trying to the flesh. We are reminded of the Lord's word to the woman in @John 4 as to the worship of God, "Neither in this mountain nor in Jerusalem". No, it is not a question of place but of the state of the worshippers: "They ... must worship him in spirit and truth".
These three men furnish us with examples of that state of soul which answers to God's mind, and that not in easy but extremely trying, indeed unparalleled circumstances. Certainly Jonah's position was a unique one although it was a fish "prepared"; it is well to note that he had to accept the judgment of God, denoted in the "waves". They were more powerful than the men's oars, and were God's means of thwarting Jonah's self-will. Jonah accepted the judgment of God. God had anticipated him, and had prepared a fish to swallow up Jonah. In that way it was a vessel in God's hand for the preservation of His servant, but, though an instrument of salvation, it was also one of discipline to him. Jonah had to learn in those extraordinary circumstances the bitterness of his own way, what folly it was. But in learning he turned to God "Then Jonah prayed unto the Lord his God". Jehovah had not ceased to be his God. He prayed to God out of the fish's belly. What extraordinary circumstances! Yet the work of God in him was such as to enable him to recognise Jehovah as his God at the bottom of the Mediterranean, for he says, "I went down to the bottoms of the mountains". The circumstances were not great enough to prevent
{186}
his crying to God; the light was not dimmed, rather the reverse: Jehovah is before his soul, "Jehovah his God"; as Paul says, "My God". Jonah cries out of the fish's belly: "I cried by reason of mine affliction unto the Lord, and he heard me". I want to notice that among other things the worship of God is not affected by outward circumstances. It is the state of soul He is concerned about; circumstances may be used to bring to account, but what He thinks of is His own product that He has formed within. It is that formation He takes account of. So Jehovah heard. Then Jonah says, "Thou heardest my voice", not only prayer, but "my voice". It was altogether outside the range of science, it could not be heard naturally, but Jehovah heard his voice; it was pleasing to Him: "Let me hear thy voice", @Song of Songs 2: 14. He loves to hear it, and Jonah is conscious of that, and so he says, "When my soul fainted within me I remembered the Lord". There was first the affliction and then he begins to faint in such unparalleled surroundings, consciously alive in the fish's belly. But, "I remembered Jehovah" overcame the fainting: "And my prayer came in unto thee, into thy holy temple". Though he is in the fish's belly, his prayer finds its way into God's temple. It is not an outward visible building, but ourselves, the church; it is not controlled by place. God's work in the soul finds connection with His temple. So it must be a prayer devoid of all selfish motives to find a place there, in His holy temple. There was no disparity between the prayer and the temple. The product of the work of God in him becomes at home in that which is of God. I speak of that because of what holy prayer is. God is before his soul.
Now look at verse 9: "I will sacrifice ... I will pay that which I have vowed". He resolved to do that, so God brought about a *worshipper*, not only a servant. The circumstances in which we are help us
{187}
not only to be in subjection to the Lord, but to be constituted worshippers. The result is a voice, not only in prayer, but of thanksgiving, not words but a voice. God loves that. Hence our hymns afford means by which our voices are heard by God, tuned by the Spirit and mingled together by Him.
So I go on to @Psalm 22, where we get a parallel; our Lord is heard from the horns of the buffaloes. Think of such circumstances; caught in the horns of the buffaloes. That is where He was. But He says, Thou hast heard me from there. Again it is not out ward position that is of account, but state. The Lord was heard from there. Now the next verse, "I will declare thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the congregation will I praise thee". Now He is in the circumstances of praise in which He desires to be, leading the praise in the midst. He declares what He knew infinitely. He prayed to the Father from the cross. Now in resurrection He declares the name to His brethren, so that all may be in accord with His thoughts. There is no discipline in singing. The praise of the assembly is conducted by the chief Musician, and God now dwells amid the praises of the assembly. That is where praise is henceforth.
And so it occurred to me that these cases in which worshippers are seen, show us that our outward circumstances, though used in discipline, do not interfere with God's obtaining from us what He seeks "The Father seeks such", @John 4: 23.
I might add that in @Revelation 11: 1 the worshippers are measured, not only the temple and the altar, but the worshippers themselves. That is they correspond with the temple, all divinely measured. It is very comforting.
So I would link on @Acts 16 as a further illustration of praise ascending to God from circumstances of adversity. It says, "Paul and Silas, in praying, were praising God with singing". They were conscious of
{188}
need but their prayer led to praise, and the prisoners listened to them. And God was listening too. The praises of the two martyrs found their way into the holy temple and were fragrant to Him. Their prison, so to say, becomes a temple; there is complete triumph and the prisoners get the benefit of it. The words show it was not forced on their ears; they listened. It was a pleasant sound.
This is all intended to encourage us to see what a yield there is to God in adverse circumstances. They are intended to bring that about. The "sweet psalmist of Israel" was a great sufferer. "Remember for David all his affliction". Great sufferers spiritually are great singers. In them God gets His pleasure.
It will help to have this before us. The circumstances here are extraordinary but they have served to draw out the sympathy of the saints; I speak from personal knowledge. You are much on our hearts. But it is the divine yield, that which is for God, that is the great thing, and we are encouraged to believe that it is so with you, that He is getting His yield, and that it will be so.
THE SUCKING LAMB
@1 Samuel 7: 9
When the Philistines came up against Israel such was the confessed weakness of their position that Samuel, instead of arming himself, ceased not to cry to the Lord for them. In keeping with the situation and their condition, he offers up a sucking lamb as a burnt-offering to the Lord. It was that which spoke of the preciousness of Christ to God. God was the Judge, and the action was in keeping with the condition which existed. "And the Lord heard him".
{189}
MEMORIAL
@Exodus 3: 13 - 16; @Psalm 135: 13; @1 Corinthians 11:23 - 26
J.T. What is to be remarked in regard of Exodus is that in it God prescribes or stipulates what things are to be. Whether it be a memorial or an altar, or whatever it be, He stipulates; He does not leave things to His people. Whereas in Genesis, generally speaking, things are left with the saints. Wherever an altar is built there is nothing said about a specification; nor did Joseph suggest anything to the chief butler as to what means should be employed to remember him. In Exodus it is not the subjective side that is in view, but what is from God towards us. And so with regard to the Lord's supper, the Lord did not leave it with the disciples to devise something whereby they should remember Him; He Himself devised that which was to convey what He was towards them, and what God was towards them.
J. S. Would it be connected at all with the fact that in Genesis there is no system set up by God? He did not come out setting up the tabernacle system, whereas in Exodus He did. Also in Corinthians there is the assembly of God in the place. Do you connect it at all with that?
J.T. Yes, and what is to represent God must be according to His specifications. If God leaves me to do anything, what I do tests my spiritual stature.
W.H. And as it is towards us no conditions can come in in any way to alter it; whereas if the truth is on the other side we have to take into account the conditions that exist in christendom in carrying out the divine mind.
J.T. Yes.
{190}
-.W. Does it not help therefore to remember that the books of Moses stand in relation to the rights of God?
J.T. Well, they do, especially what is called the law, including Exodus.
-.W. I was thinking, with regard to what Mr. S. referred to, that what is set up here, if it is to be representative of God, must be expressive of what He has stated.
J.T. The memorial must convey what He is and His name; it is not what we are; it is not the stature of the saints. The memorial is in regard of what He is: "This is my name for ever, and this is my memorial unto all generations". He had taken a new name, a name which included the promises of God, and the power and patience of God.
J.S. "The God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob": Abraham, the promises, Isaac, the power, and Jacob, the faithfulness of God that went on with the crooked man. Is that the memorial?
J.T. Yes, that is what is referred to here; but we have more than that, have we not, Mr. B.?
R.B. Surely, since a divine Person has become Man.
-.P. I would like to ask, Do you connect what you were saying as to these three features of the name of God with "I AM"?
J.T. Yes, but He is also Jehovah: "Jehovah, the God of your fathers". That was new. His memorial must carry with it in what it represents the revelation as far as it has gone, and hence when you think of the Lord's supper you can thus appreciate what is in it. Moses was concerned as to what he should say when the children of Israel enquired, "What is his name?". "And God said to Moses, I AM THAT I AM. And he said, Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel: I AM hath sent me unto you. And God
{191}
said moreover unto Moses ..." (verses 13 - 15). So Moses may be taken here as a type of the Lord Himself; he is to be fully acquainted with the revelation, so that the desire to convey the name was a very right one on the part of Moses, and God evidently valued it. Therefore in addition to the thought of "the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob", there was the thought of Jehovah, meaning that He was now come to fulfil His engagements; that is what the new name means. It is everlasting faithfulness: "Jehovah ... hath sent me unto you".
J. S. Was "moreover" an expansion of what is contained in "I AM"?
J.T. Yes, it was an expansion of the thought of "I AM". "I AM" is the ever-existent One-the same yesterday and today and for ever. But you see, although He is the same yesterday and today and for ever, the time had come when He would fulfil what He had promised: His power and faithfulness on their behalf was to be shown them.
J.S. How should we get on without His being the same yesterday, and today, and for ever; but then He waits on one who is never the same any day, like Jacob, and brings such an one into blessing?
J.T. Quite.
-.P. How is that name to be the memorial for ever? Do you say that the name was the revelation of God up to that time? Does this verse suggest that the name is to be a memorial for ever?
J.T. What He is in Himself as revealed. I think it is the name 'Jehovah' He refers to when He says, "This is my name for ever" (see verse 15, New Trans.). God never recedes from the position He has taken up; hence when He brings in the word 'Jehovah' that is an advance; it means to abide. The law, and the prophets and the Psalms would only attest it, would only fully develop it, so that in Nehemiah's time after many hundreds of years of Israel's unfaithfulness,
{192}
one says, "Thou art the Same". That is the One Israel recognises, the speakers recognise; they had come to that, in spite of all their errings; the reality of the presence of God remained for faith.
J. S. Whatever they had been doing in the interim?
J.T. Yes; God remained; what He was remained a memorial, and that is so in the psalm that we read from (the Psalms come last-in the last division of the books of the Old Testament). The Psalms show that faith had respect to the primary institution and valued it.
R.B. The allusion you made to Nehemiah is a wonderful illustration of what you are saying, because when things had been forgotten they were remembered again and a memorial was kept; the idea of the memorial is that the revelation, however far it may be, is kept, is remembered.
J.T. Yes; do you not think that is one great feature of the Lord's supper at the present time, Mr. B., that it keeps ever fresh in our souls the fulness of the meaning of the death of Christ, in which His love is disclosed and the love of God; these are kept fresh before us?
R.B. Exactly, not only when we eat the Supper, but all the time the memorial is kept; that is what you mean?
J.T. Yes. "He is the true God and eternal fife",
@1 John 5: 20. The knowledge of the true God is preserved amongst the saints in this way. "I AM" is a primary thought of God, His memorial unto all generations. So that if the Lord's supper is apprehended, it preserves the true knowledge of Himself amongst His people. There is doctrine; there are doctrines in all the denominations, but the doctrine in itself does not convey God. The Lord's supper and the Spirit of God with it would preserve the true knowledge of God amongst the saints. No one can convey a right idea of God, a right impression of God,
{193}
except in that way. "He is the true God", it says. John enlarges on the fact, as we know. He says, "We know that the Son of God has come, and has given us an understanding that we should know him that is true; and we are in him that is true, in his Son Jesus Christ. He is the true God and eternal fife". So he says, "Children, keep yourselves from idols". I think the Lord's supper would fit in there because it keeps the true God before us.
-.W. In that way it is in the Supper that the apprehension of the true Man and the true God appear to us.
J.T. I think that is very good. What comes before us is what Christ is as Man, and what God is in Christ. "That we should know him that is true ...", meaning that the true God is there in Him, because it is in the covenant really that the true God is apprehended; that is, God in love. The true God is the God whom we know in Christ.
-.W. So that your thought is that, until the soul has reached the point conveyed in the Supper, the true Man and the true God are not fully apprehended.
J.T. No.
-.P. The Supper then preserves the death of Christ before us; love keeps us in our affections free from false gods.
J.T. That is just what it is. It preserves the soul in relation to God in the death of Christ; it preserves it in constant freshness, so that it is not simply a doctrine or a system of doctrines, but living persons in their specific relation with Him, that is what christianity is essentially.
H.W.S. It suggests the necessity of a memorial; it is in view of what we are.
J.T. Yes, and in prescribing what the memorial should be God would have Himself fully before us. It is His own device. If we had been left to devise what the memorial should be it would be very defective;
{194}
it could be only our conception, man's art or device, as it says. That is what you get in the cathedrals, things that are intended to remind people of God and divine things; they are only human conceptions and very defective; some of them are pagan. Whereas what God devises is complete; He presents Himself from His own side.
W.H. So that His people say, 'This is our God'; they recognise Him.
-.R. Human devices appeal only to the sentiments, but divinely ordered things appeal to divine affections and produce response.
J.T. My appreciation may be less than yours, or *vice versa*, but the thing, the memorial, is there in its completeness; it is from God's side and in making a specification God intends that the thing should be presented from His side.
W.H. The question of apprehension does not come in there.
J.T. No, it is the thing from God's side; the stature of each one may differ, but the thing itself is from God's side and therefore perfect. It is a full memorial of God in Christ. God and Christ are kept before us fully-the true God. That is what God intends, would you say that, Mr. B.?
R.B. I would, quite.
J.T. Do you think it important to have it from that point of view?
R.B. I do, otherwise we should become lawless or get astray.
-.W. Is that why the Spirit of God has laboured so much of late years to get the saints into the good of the Supper, so that the memorial might have its proper force and right place in our hearts?
J.T. Yes, and it results in church affections in us, and in affection to the people of God as well.
-.S. Do you think that in the psalm you get the appreciation of it on the part of the people?
{195}
J.T. I think the Psalms represent that. The Psalms represent the subjective result, therefore the writer of this psalm shows that he valued what God said to Moses.
R.B. Is it not a most affecting thing that God should have placed a memorial with us, that He should desire to be known and to be remembered? It affects one's heart very much to think that God should place a memorial with us, does it not?
-.R. The perfection of the memorial is true to us by the way that it appeals to our hearts and if our affections are preserved in that way, are not our feet preserved?
J.T. Yes, quite so, and when you speak to God, as the psalmist does here, you indicate just how much you appreciate what is presented in the memorial.
-.W. Did Abraham, in @Genesis 22, in relation to what he had, have some idea of what you have been bringing before us, an enlargement of things in connection with the name that you spoke of, "Jehovah-Jireh ... On the mount of Jehovah will be provided"? Did he see the expansion of the thing coming in, in that way?
J.T. Whether he understood it or not, he prepared the ground for further developments. It is an extremely touching narrative, and its being given by Moses makes it all the more interesting, because he had already had to do with God on the mount; in fact what is recorded here took place on the mount, the mount of God, which conveys a moral thought as well as a geographical thought. It says, "And Abraham ... took Isaac ... and rose up, and went to the place that God had told him of", and "on the third day Abraham lifted up his eyes and saw the place from afar". It was a spiritual journey that he took with Isaac. "And Abraham said unto his young men, Abide ye here ... and I and the lad will go yonder and worship". 'Bow down' the literal word is,
{196}
meaning worship God. Then it says, "they went both of them together". That is what it says in that short record. And Isaac said, "Where is the sheep for a burnt-offering?", and Abraham said, "My son, God will provide himself with the sheep". So that there is a spiritual development in view of something later. And he binds Isaac and takes the knife, and then the angel calls out of heaven to him, and the ram is seen caught by his horns in a thicket, and he offers the ram. And then it says, "And Abraham called the name of that place Jehovah-Jireh", meaning 'Jehovah will provide', and then the writer Moses adds to that "as it is said at the present day". That is after the forty years. He had been there forty days, and another forty days, and had received all the wonderful communications from God, the wonderful provision that God had made in the mount of the Lord, so that you can understand the expression "as it is said at the present day". So that @Numbers 10, Mr. W., would refer to all that had come out on the mount of Jehovah. It says, "they set forward from the mountain of Jehovah" (@Numbers 10: 33), and there is all that entered into this wonderful name of Jehovah. It is not simply the mount of God, but the mount of Jehovah; it involves the full revelation of God up to that time, so that they moved from that point, and then "the ark", it says, "went before them in the three days journey".
R.B. You connect the thought of the covenant with the mount of Jehovah. I think you referred just now to the thought of God's engaging to carry out all that He had intimated, so do you connect the thought of the covenant with it?
J.T. Oh, clearly. The covenant was given there, and it is remarkable that it says, "God is faithful, by whom ye have been called unto the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord", @1 Corinthians 1: 9. That is set down at the very outset of the epistle, showing that
{197}
it enters into what he had to communicate, that the Lord's supper carries with it what God is in His love and faithfulness; hence he says in the second letter, "For whatever promises of God there are, in him is the yea, and in him the amen, for the glory to God by us". Every promise of God has been verified; Christ is the 'yea' of it and the 'amen' of it, and therefore the faithfulness of God, necessarily, enters into the truth of the Lord's supper, what God is in Christ. In the first letter he says, "This is the new covenant in my blood", because the Yea and the Amen is there. Then in the second letter we have not only the new covenant, but the spirit of it, the administration of it; the Lord administers it. He has made the love of God effectual in dying. But I think the mount is the way that He brings the love of God into our hearts, so that all the people say 'Amen'. I say 'Amen'; it is through Christ's administration. What do you say to that?
R.B. Yes, I see that, and the new covenant is connected with the memorial which we have, but we have very much more, would you not say?
-.P. I was just going to ask, Mr. Taylor, if you connect the memorial with the name of 'Father'?
J.T. That is the family thought.
-.P. I wanted to be clear, because you said it was the revelation of God up to a certain point.
J.T. The thought of 'Father' comes out in revelation, but I think the death of Christ has to do with God more; the truth of the 'Father' came out at the Lord's baptism.
Ques. Would not that name involve all that God is? I was thinking the memorial is a very wonderful thought in that way, as conveying what God is in a name.
J.T. The name of 'Father' necessarily carries with it all that God is.
-.P. I was not thinking of the name of 'Father',
{198}
but the name here; you said there was something further than what we have here.
J.T. I was going to say that the 'Father' includes all that God is, only it is God on the side of grace, not family affections; because it does not say that the Father judges anyone; it says that God judges. -.R. Do you mean that in the Supper God is distinctly before us?
J.T. That is what I intend to convey. 'God' enters into the covenant; the 'Father' would go beyond that.
B.I. So that in giving thanks for the cup, would you address God, really, and not the Father?
J.T. Well, I think so, because it is between God and the people, not between the Father and his children.
B.I. So God is before you in giving thanks for the cup?
J.T. Yes.
-.W. That helps in regard of what you brought out some time ago as to the difference between family relations and covenant relationships.
J.T. Yes, and it is a very important distinction.
J.S. I have connected family relationships more with the Lord's message, "Go to my brethren and say to them, I ascend ...". "*The* Father" in a way connected with God revealed: "To us there is one God, the Father"?
J.T. Yes, John never refers to our Father, except in that one instance in chapter 20, so far as I remember. J. S. "One God, the Father" is connected to a certain extent with revelation.
J.T. "The only-begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, *he* hath declared him", @John 1: 18. It is that Person in the revelation of the Godhead.
J.S. Would you say that when the time comes for
{199}
God to be fully known in all that the memorial suggested, He comes to light as the 'Father'?
J.T. Yes, that is the memorial; we are speaking now of the covenant that God has entered into, where it is God more that is before us. Still, there is one God, the Father, and when it has the article before it, it is God, that Person viewed as God.
Rem. It does not say the 'Father' and 'a people', but "God and his people".
J.T. Quite. I think that is scriptural. An important point to remember in connection with the 'mount' is that it is said that "on the mount of Jehovah will be provided". That was a saying current in Moses time, and a saying which he had fully verified as no other could have done, because he had seen what God was to His people on the mount; they had pitched before it, and remained there a long time, and in that long encampment God discloses what He was to them.
-. R. Would that be in the way of encouragement, that God had pledged Himself to carry out His thoughts in regard to His people notwithstanding all their crooked ways?
J.T. That is what I think comes out at the mount. The word was current; they referred to it.
Ques. Does the memorial suggest the way that things are maintained?
J.T. I think it does, and God having prescribed it, they would be maintained in a spiritual way. Of course christendom is a testimony to the departure from this; they have taken things up on their own plane.
-.R. You mean that in the bread the love of the Lord Jesus towards the saints is before us, and in the cup the love of God towards us is before us?
J.T. Yes, and it is the "new covenant in my blood". The memorial is fully maintained, essentially, not generally. It is preserved in however few, but the point is to have the thing; it is nothing less than
{200}
that. I often feel encouraged in that way, that what we have got is nothing less than what the Lord instituted; if it is not that it is nothing.
R.B. That imparts great preciousness to it.
-.S. The Lord, as it were, conferred the privilege of a memorial on Mary: "Wheresoever this gospel shall be preached throughout the whole world, this also that she hath done shall be spoken of for a memorial of her", @Mark 14: 9.
J.T. It is as if He would have that devotedness preserved here; it shows how He valued it.
-.W. Is that why you say sometimes that the covenant is formative? Does the Lord bring it out in its fulness in that way?
J.T. It is formative, only the movement from the mount would signify that the people had spiritual power; they were to take three days spiritual journey, showing that we go beyond the mount spiritually; then it says, "The ark ... went before them in the three days journey, to search out a resting place for them". That gives the Lord Jesus His own distinctive place as leading us in a spiritual way.
-.R. Does He find a resting-place in the affections of His people?
J.T. Well, it was to seek out a resting-place for us, and a resting-place for Him. I think they are found together. But if He is seeking out a resting-place for us, where will He lead? He will lead you to the very best according to His own thought. "Come ye yourselves apart into a desert place and rest a little",
@Mark 6: 31. He knew the kind of place to take them to. We might say a desert place is not a desirable place for rest, but spiritually it is, because there is nothing in it for the flesh; it is well there should not be, because if the flesh is enticed there will not be rest.
W.H. I think you intimated that God was pleased with Moses movements at this point and that he was a type of the Lord; would you say the same in regard
{201}
of the Lord Jesus instituting the Supper? Would it be a pleasure to God-bringing the disposition of God to the people?
J.T. Moses wanted to be in a position to speak definitely-"What shall I say unto them?", @Exodus 3: 13. But then if you apply that to the Lord, He did not have to be told anything. I am not referring to what you were saying-it is only to bring out a point myself. The Lord knew the Father perfectly; that is what gives the gospels such wonderful interest "We speak that we do know, and testify that we have seen". The Lord spoke with the authority of one who *knew*, so it says, "The only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, *he* hath declared him". And he says, "I have declared unto them thy name". He could do it very definitely, and He did. The gospels, of course, give us the details as to how He did it. Then He says, "and will declare it", because the declaration makes room for more, "that the love wherewith thou hast loved me may be in them, and I in them", @John 17: 26.
R.B. Would you say just a word additional to a remark you made as to the Mediator; that is an interesting point in connection with the memorial?
J.T. Yes, "The new covenant in my blood", it says. That is His part in it.
R.B. So that in viewing the cup, and in partaking of it, our thoughts are not wholly of God, but of the Mediator through whom God is known.
J.T. Quite, because the Mediator is the true God. The Lord has His own place there. He fills His part in it too.
J.S. Question as to partaking of the loaf and the cup-as to whether there is the element of food in it. In the three days journey they were to eat and drink. Would you say the Lord strengthens us in that way?
J.T. I suppose there must be support. You
{202}
remember that Elijah in going to the mount had to be supported.
J.S. He went in the strength of that food forty days and forty nights.
J.T. Yes, he received two breakfasts, as someone has remarked, and went in the strength of that forty days and forty nights to mount Horeb; that was a humiliating situation (see @1 Kings 19). @Numbers 10 tells us they moved from the mount; there was no need to go back to it, I mean in the sense that Elijah went back to it. He went back to say to God that things were hopeless; he says, They "have forsaken thy covenant, thrown down thine altars, and slain thy prophets with the sword; and I, even I only, am left; and they seek my life". He did not say, "On the mount of Jehovah will be provided". He had lost that, whereas God says that virtually to him. God says, 'You have given up, Elijah; I have not given up'. So He sent him back to Hazael and Jehu and Elisha; 'These', He says, 'will carry out My will'. And they would carry it out according to that very provision which is in the mount of Jehovah. Because Elisha is the great one of the three; he is the final, and he sees through all that the others leave; but how?-on the principle of grace.
-.R. Would the three days journey suggest movement from covenant relationships to something beyond?
J.T. That is the significance of that particular position. It is not that you leave the other in a definite way; it is simply that there are two lines running together; if you leave the mount of God, the covenant line, it is to go into something beyond for a moment, because you cannot leave it permanently while down here. It may come to an end finally, when we enter into our eternal portion. I suppose the mount of the Lord will not be in evidence then. We have the family relationships for the moment, however short.
{203}
The experience you have there lends a wonderful colour to all that you do here in the wilderness.
-.R. When David recovered the ark he wanted to find a place for it. Would that answer to having a permanent place in the affections of the saints?
J.T. I think there you come to the other side. @Numbers 10 is His finding a resting-place for us, but in @Psalm 132 David finds a resting-place for God, "Arise, O Lord, into thy rest; thou, and the ark of thy strength".
J. S. I was going to remark, that when the ark goes before to seek out a resting-place for them, it is a moment, however blessed, in the provisional period here. The primary eternal portion of the church is not exactly 'rest'. But, being introduced in this blessed way, during our sojourn here, it is called "a resting-place".
J.T. Yes, it is provisional; "Rest a while", He says to the disciples.
J.S. Properly speaking the *millennium* is the rest answering to the intrusion of evil into creation.
J.T. The resting-place is a provisional thing, and it keeps us going in heavenly lustre and power.
Rem. The psalmist says, "For a day in thy courts is better than a thousand", @Psalm 84: 10.
J.T. Just so, a day in them.
-. R. If we take the three days journey and find that rest, does not the Lord find something to rest in then?
J.T. I think He does rest when we rest.
R.B. Do you not carry the thought "On the mount of Jehovah will be provided" along with the memorial? If we come together with a sense of the memorial we can ever count upon provision, so that we need to wait for the provision to be given.
J.T. There is always the sense of that, you mean, there is a new supply always which keeps you fresh.
{204}
R.B. The memorial is there, but there is the sense of waiting, is there not?
Rem. When the Lord says, "My Father and your Father", does He give you the thought of the covenant?
J.T. Oh, He does, but I think that is God as we shall know Him eternally.
Rem. That would be connected with the three days.
J.T. That is the way you are led into it. @John 18, 19 and 20 present the New Testament answer to @Numbers 10. The Lord had been speaking to the disciples inside and unfolding the divine thoughts to them and then having spoken these things He moved out and the enemy comes, and He says, "If therefore ye seek me, let these go their way". He had provided for them, so that nothing happened to them, and then in resurrection He goes the three days journey Himself and He brings them into the result of it in chapter 20.
J.S. "If therefore ye seek me"-the ram was caught in a thicket. It says the sheep will be provided, but it turned out to be a ram.
J.T. But the point in @John 18 is power, because the ark is not held, that is not the idea of it: "Rise up, Jehovah, and let thine enemies be scattered".
J.S. I thought perhaps it was the Lord held by His affections for them.
J.T. That may be. That would probably come in in Luke, but the ark is the power of God; it is not held, it is power to go forward. "They went backward, and fell to the ground", it says. "Rise up, Jehovah, and let thine enemies be scattered; and let them that hate thee flee before thy face"-and they fled before Him, so to speak. They were not destroyed, because it was to make a way for the disciples; that was all that was needed then.
{205}
LETTER ON CONVERSION
464 East 26th Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. October 8th, 1922.
My dear Brother,
I have your letter of September 20th and I am interested in its contents. The expression that the children of the saints do not need conversion is misleading and indeed literally untrue, as many, alas! get far astray; but even as to those who do not go into the world the statement is misleading, unless guarded. I do not recall making this statement-if I did it would be to call attention to the difference between those wholly away from God and the children of believers who have proceeded outwardly with their parents in the truth. It is really a question of the right use of words. The word 'convert' or 'conversion' has reference to persons who by *profession* or *conduct* are wholly away from God. The word therefore could hardly apply to Timothy, for there is no evidence that he had turned away from the faith of his mother and grandmother.
But then "that which is born of the flesh is flesh", and hence the children of believers need to be born again as others, and this, I think, is what needs to be pressed. The fact that the flesh profits *nothing* should be pressed on children and the necessity not only of being born of the Spirit, but also of *water*. It is in the evidence of possessing spiritual instincts and pure instincts that the children of believers, who have not by word or deed adopted the world, should be accepted as eligible for christian fellowship. And I believe a young person should be able to give *some* account of when he began to experience the effect of the work
{206}
of God in him. Besides, as you say, most young people commit sins of various kinds secretly and are sinners according to @Romans 3 and so are in need of the *change* effected by the work of God in them as others.
With love in the Lord, I am, Affectionately in Him,<br>(Signed) JAMES TAYLOR.
{207}
DISCIPLINE
@2 Corinthians 4: 1 - 18
The chapter shows that discipline is the order of the day. God's way is that we should all go through discipline. It is the feature of the testimony. The apostle was going through things, and he wished they might be comforted as he was. We are brought together on the ground of mutual acceptance of discipline. The apostle did not escape discipline; he was brought low to death, and he recounts it all; he is not writing from a pinnacle, but from the lowest point, like Jonah; he is writing from the depths, and recounts the comfort and mercies of God. The soul of the apostle is full of the sense of mercy. No one is effective who has not been down. The Lord Jesus first descended.
The apostle links the saints with himself in what he was passing through. In christendom the clergy are above the laity, but the Leader of our salvation is made perfect through sufferings. He descended first. He takes the lead in suffering, "As the sufferings of the Christ abound towards us", the apostle says. The thing is to accept discipline, and to see how blessing comes in by going down. The apostle despaired even of life. Discipline is preservative and formative. In bereavement or sorrow, we may go down to the gates of death; we may even be brought down to that ourselves. Hezekiah is an instance, but he comes up with a sense of the love of God. So the apostle goes down and this characterises his letter. In the ways of God the apostle has to go through this. Reduction has to be effected, and we are all drawn together in our spirits by the discipline of God.
Take Jacob: discipline was the feature of his life, but at the end he speaks of "The Angel that redeemed
{208}
me from all evil". He sees things aright and worships, and he blessed the sons of Joseph. The sun goes down, but we know that it will rise again. So in the end of Genesis, Jacob and Joseph both die, but they have resurrection in view; and Jacob calls upon all his sons and says to them: "I will tell you what will befall you at the end of days"; he knew the end. He knows the God of resurrection, and that God is faithful. In the discipline, God brings into evidence His faithfulness.
{209}
THE ASSEMBLY AT CORINTH IN ITS INITIAL FEATURES (1)
@1 Corinthians 1: 26 - 31; @1 Corinthians 2: 1 - 16
It will be observed by most of us that this epistle opens as an address to the assembly of God at Corinth, hence all the teaching has reference to that position, and in reading this letter it is helpful to connect with it the initial work at Corinth, the apostle's early circumstances and work there. It says in @Acts 18: 2, he found "a certain Jew by name Aquila, of Pontus by race, just come from Italy, and Priscilla his wife". I thought it well to call attention to that as it sheds light on the epistle. The Lord had the formation of the assembly in view, and the architect was known at the outset as a tent-maker, and lodged with Aquila and Priscilla, who were not Corinthians at all but Jews by race belonging to Pontus, who had been ordered to leave Rome.
So the three are in no way such as would be held in favour at Corinth. Their rank would be nothing beyond that of trades people and their trade of no special consequence to a town built up on architecture. It is as if God would begin in this unpretentious way where His assembly should be set up. It was the word that was exercising the apostle, and it was a question of teaching the word of God.
The thoughts of God should take form in the assembly. The simplest person in Corinth would have access to those three people. The question might arise, 'How is God to work out His thoughts?'. In Exodus, which corresponds with this, His greatness is called attention to, the elders go up to the mountain to see the greatness of God before He requests the people to build Him a tabernacle. But He virtually says after that, 'I am to come into very small circumstances
{210}
in order that you may know Me and My thoughts'. To become poor deliberately requires very considerable greatness. Accessibility was the great feature of Luke. Even in Matthew the royal Child was available to those that were wise, but Luke particularly emphasises that. This Man receiveth sinners-that was the testimony (chapter 15: 2). Wherever any sought Him He was accessible. The action of the woman in @Luke 7 would have been resented by an ordinary man; it would compromise his dignity. So here the fact that the assembly of God is in view emphasises what comes before us as marking the assembly. Coming into that assembly one would discover that God was there. He was setting up the assembly and what was necessary for that was the word of God, as the thoughts of God should be there. In the tabernacle the Lord Jesus expressed the thoughts of God. The tabernacle was anointed and Aaron with it without the necessity of death. The assembly is set up in these thoughts: "I speak as to intelligent persons", @1 Corinthians 10: 15. Chapter 1 shows the kind of material. Chapter 2 brings out the hidden wisdom and the things the Corinthians had got involved the Lord of glory. What Paul taught has to be entered into by the Spirit. The tabernacle was made in parts. So now we have got what answers to that, and the word of God links it all together and it is called the assembly of God. Colossians goes further; it treats of the mystery in which are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Those epistles fit in in regard of what is spiritual, but the first thing is the word of God. So the tabernacle in the wilderness contained the divine thoughts but in order to understand them it required the spirit of wisdom and revelation. "For what man knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is in him? even so the things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God".
{211}
But the first great thing is to apprehend the littleness of the material according to man, then to apprehend the word of God, then Colossians and Ephesians give the privileges involved. The assembly is the vessel of divine glory of the ages. It is God acting in Romans and Corinthians; these epistles have things in this world in view. Romans is adjustment for the individual, and Corinthians is that same individual set up with others in intelligence in the things of God. It is a collective view; God is seen in Romans in righteousness and love; in Corinthians in order. Romans provides the boards; Corinthians puts them in relation to each other. We are not well versed in the word of God. His thoughts are seen in figure in the material universe; you see the order God delights in. He is the God of order in all the assemblies. So the word of God as known in our souls regulates us. From @Exodus 25 to 33 it is "Thou shalt make", then from chapter 36 onward it is, "And he made". This is what the apostle laboured for during those eighteen months; that much people must be secured. They are set up in dignity spiritually. "But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who has been made to us wisdom from God, and righteousness, and holiness, and redemption; that according as it is written, He that boasts, let him boast in the Lord". The dignity they had was from God. We are set up of God in dignity for His building; nothing else is taken account of. This is the groundwork of all that follows; those things ennoble us for God's system. "In Christ Jesus" is our status. Poverty does not qualify you for the tabernacle any more than riches. We are ennobled by being put into Christ. It is objective, what is in Christ Jesus, think of the range of things. Manhood is in Christ. Think of what that is, typically the cedars of Lebanon, the full thought of God in man, and not only so, but man anointed, "In Christ Jesus". That is the anointed man, the greatness of that is what the
{212}
Holy Spirit would present, that is the hidden wisdom that is referred to. The world has its wisdom; we would be regarded as quite unsophisticated if we had to do with religious and scientific societies, but has God no wisdom? Wisdom was by Him when He laid the foundations of the earth; so He says, You are to be wise. You begin with the thought that all divine wisdom is in Christ. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom. Abstractly every christian is wise. Wisdom is justified of all her children. God is saying virtually in verse 30, You must have these things, but you cannot get them yourself, so I will supply them, I will make Christ them to you. God has done this Himself.
In connection with chapter 2, the apostle says, "We speak wisdom among the perfect", as much as to say, Even if we do not speak it to you, you must not think it does not exist. "We have the mind of Christ", the apostle says, that is, the means of thinking as wisdom does. The mind here is the thinking faculty. Proverbs helps greatly in regard to wisdom, written as it is to sons, and by a son, showing that wisdom requires the family relationship for the full bearing of it: it is there it has fullest play. Wisdom was there when the foundations of the earth were laid, and rejoiced before God. Wisdom works out in the family. Solomon was his father's son, tender and only beloved in the sight of his mother; then he speaks to sons. The primary thought of God is the family and it is not simply that love requires it, but wisdom is love's handmaid and love has free play in the family. The relationship itself induces love so that in regard of revelation it says, "No one has seen God at any time; the only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, *he* hath declared him", @John 1: 18.
The assembly of God at Corinth refers to all that God is in the way of public manifestation. His wisdom and order are to be taken account of. The
{213}
assembly is adorned by these things, hence the great necessity of spirituality and of understanding the epistles to the Colossians and to the Ephesians. The assembly is greater inwardly than outwardly. While Paul was there you could see expressed in him the divine thought. Inwardly the tabernacle contained things that were infinitely great but outwardly what was it?-badgers skins, rams skins and so on: all that met the eye referred to death. So here you get what corresponds: "I determined not to know any thing among you ...". The apostle sustained that truth in his preaching; this is the bearing of what he would give out. It is knowing the truth of Colossians and Ephesians that enables you to take this up. A believer is set up here in what God has got, but what he is set up in is already sustained by spiritual power.
"We speak wisdom among the perfect". What an incentive. Romans is the adjusting epistle and one who is adjusted is enabled to take his place in relation to the assembly of God.
Then the thought of the temple comes in. As saints recognise the temple of God how things are opened up to them! It is really in the light of Ephesians that you understand the whole of Scripture. The light of the heavenly enables you to see everything in its true relation. 'Heavenly light makes all things bright'. The Lord greatly honours all who come together in the light of the whole church, the Holy Spirit acts in relation to that. Romans brings in what is of God; then you find He has prepared things for us, things which eye has not seen nor ear heard. Think of preparation expressly for those that love Him. Nothing touches us more than that divine Persons should be preparing for us. God has revealed them unto us by His Spirit; "For the Spirit searches all things, even the depths of God". It is a remarkable expression, the depths of God.
{214}
THE ASSEMBLY AT CORINTH IN ITS INITIAL FEATURES (2)
@1 Corinthians 3: 1 - 23
Ques. Can you describe a spiritual man for us? What would characterise him?
J.T. An unspiritual man, or a babe in Christ, is one who sees men as trees walking; men have a great place with him. So there were those at Corinth who said, I am of Paul, and so on. A spiritual man sees all things clearly. In @Mark 8 the Lord first touched the man, who then saw men as trees walking, but after the second touch he saw all things clearly. So the apostle says, "The spiritual discerns all things",
@1 Corinthians 2: 15. One is reminded of the wheels in @Ezekiel 1: there were eyes in every part, hence we learn that it is necessary that one who takes a lead in the house of God where the government of God is seen should be spiritual; he should see things as they are and be uninfluenced by the natural.
Ques. Would the babes to whom John writes be spiritual?
J.T. Well, as governed by the anointing they would be. More is said to the babes than to the other two classes; they were so exposed to antichristian influence. The apostle says, "Now these things, brethren, I have transferred, in their application, to myself and Apollos, for your sakes, that ye may learn in us the lesson of not letting your thoughts go above what is written, that ye may not be puffed up one for such a one against another", @1 Corinthians 4: 6. He was concerned that the Corinthians might learn not to set local leaders one against another. Men are not trees.
@Mark 8 is the end of a section in which the Lord acquired His own place in the mind of the disciples. He says (verse 27), "Who do men say that I am?".
{215}
The disciples reply, "John the baptist; and others, Elias; but others, One of the prophets". They would surely put Him amongst the 'big men', just as you see His name in the museums alongside that of Zoreaster and Plato, but the Lord says, "Who do men say that I am?". And Peter answers, "Thou art the Christ". In Mark it is the anointing that is prominent. The antichrist is set over against the Christ. The anointing enables you to apprehend the Christ, and the man at Bethsaida would be led on in that way. So long as men are seen as trees, the Lord is not much taller in your eyes, but when you see Him in His right place you recognise that men have no place beside Him. 'Big men' is a Philistine idea. It is a mistake to put up local leaders one against another. Paul was little (his name means little) and that is how he appears in these epistles. The results of a spiritual man's life, scarcely understood by his own generation, are felt later. The import of Abel's testimony was not understood in his own day, but he now speaks. The voice of the men of faith goes on.
One's thoughts in regard to this section were connected with the temple; the Corinthians had to learn what they were. The apostle brings out at the end of the chapter that all the levites were the property of the saints, "Whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things coming, all are yours; and ye are Christ's, and Christ is God's". It is the opposite to the clerical thought which is that the flock is the property of the clergyman. The ministers subserve the assembly, so the levite is on a lower level than those to whom he ministers. The main point here is what the Corinthians are; thus they would understand the relative value of servants. The moment you see men as trees walking, you lay the basis for the clerical principle.
Priesthood is greater than what is levitical. The levite is personally a firstborn one. In our service we are
{216}
given to the priests; we can stoop because of our greatness. Seeing his calling the apostle was great enough to be the least of all. Ye are God's husbandry, ye are God's building, Apollos and myself are just labourers, he says. It is what the saints are to God that is the great thing. It is beautiful how he connects himself with Apollos; there is no rivalry there. In most, if not all cases, where servants have been uplifted, the saints have helped in that; hence the danger of the babe state. A babe says, What a preaching that is! and is carried away by the sermon and the preacher. As you get older you see there are others in God's plantation.
Ques. What is the thought of the temple? What is the practical application?
J.T. You would not need to go out of the company to get the mind of God. The temple had been at Jerusalem; now saints would see it was amongst them, that they themselves were it. So they come together in the recognition of this. In Exodus God was to speak to the people off the mercy-seat. Moses went in and heard a voice. All he received would be on that principle, as I understand it. It comes out locally where saints turn to God about matters. It is a great thing for every local company to recognise that the light of God is in the company. God will not fail to convey His mind to us as coming together in this light. The Lord went into the temple; according to @John 2, the word used describes the general building, but when He says, "Destroy this temple ...", He uses another word, the shrine. He had in mind the thought of light. No one who sought light from God would fail to get it. Light would radiate from the Lord's words. The Holy Spirit has come down, and now the body is called the Christ, the anointed vessel in which the light is diffused. The temple is a place of enquiry: "And to inquire of him in his temple"; the temple underlies the body. In the millennial
{217}
day things will not be arbitrary, but intelligible. People will know by enquiry, they will see the rightness of things.
Ques. Is the temple in view of administration?
J.T. Yes, in a sense, the mind of God is there and the church of God is to express that; it is the rule of influence. Attention is called to what the Spirit says, and yet He does not speak specifically, as things are to come out from time to time. In @1 Corinthians 3 a builder may be saved even though he puts in bad material, but the corrupter of the temple is not saved. The foundation is the order of man, Jesus Christ and Him crucified. What a Man He was! Paul would put that in the souls of the Corinthians by testimony and teaching; those who followed were to see to it that they put nothing else in. It is so easy to put in extraneous matter.
Ques. What is the thought of a corrupter of the temple?
J.T. One who brings in someone else's light, something that seems to be light but is false. Babes are exposed to that. Satan assumes to be the temple himself. One has known men who professed to have light from God from the moment, whereas they are corrupters. We have to do, not only with men's intellects, but with evil spirits. This is that spirit of antichrist. They deny Jesus Christ come in flesh that order of man. They are not ordinary men. We are told to try the spirits. "Every spirit which confesses Jesus Christ come in flesh is of God; and every spirit which does not confess Jesus Christ come in flesh is not of God", @1 John 4: 2, 3. There is the testimony of the apostles and of Jesus Christ come in flesh. You will always find that these false teachers are building up on the wrong man. One would be alive to the danger of so-called evangelism. Souls are undoubtedly enlightened but the features that go with the work are of man and entering into the building
{218}
they prepare for its corruption. Souls do not get a right conception. Satan is at the meetings and the preacher is sowing seed that will bear a crop later on. All ministry is subject to test. If any one is transgressing the Scriptures he ought to be pulled up; however powerful what he says, he must be amenable to the judgment of his brethren. The idea of the temple is that the light of God is here. The body is more an external thought; the temple is inside. The light of the body shines in the world, whether men want it or not; but the temple is light to the saints, "Do ye not know that ye are the temple of God ..?". That is the way the Spirit is spoken of in regard of the temple, but the anointing is public; it is the dignity of that vessel in which the light is set. The end of the chapter contemplates saints in a wonderful position; everything is ours. It saves one from the modern thought of a shepherd and a flock, the clerical thought; the flock is too great for that.
{219}
ADMINISTRATION IN @MATTHEW 2
@Matthew 2: 1 - 23
This chapter suggests the condition of things into which the Administrator is introduced, and which He has to deal with. It is the state of things in Israel, officially or nationally, and is in great contrast to the godly remnant which we see in the first two chapters of Luke.
There should have been light in Jerusalem, but there was complete breakdown in regard to God's thought for Israel, so that we see the sovereign operation of God outside of Israel, in bringing in light from heaven. The star appearing to the wise men suggests this. From the official element in Jerusalem they could get scriptural information, and they were able to use and apply this in the heavenly light they had received. Israel had the oracles of God in Scripture but the Scriptures are only understood in the heavenly light which has come in through the church. Going to Jerusalem exposes the darkness there, but it was also an intimation to the nation that God was moving.
Wisdom is a great necessity in administration hence the wise men. In Luke the shepherds suggest God's care for man, as God would still have men as His flock. The star coming in here in connection with the King suggests the Star and the Sceptre in Balaam's prophecy (@Numbers 24: 17). The star, too, announces in a dignified way the arrival of the King.
Administration in the first chapter would appear to be in connection with the rights ("Son of David" ), and promises ("Son of Abraham" ) of God. In the second chapter the introduction of heavenly light suggests the administration of His glory. The administration is to be from heaven. There is light from heaven to bear on everything here in connection with the exercises of administration.
{220}
In Matthew things are viewed in responsibility. We see that God is going to assert and maintain His rights through the King. There is in the King the solution of every difficulty that is raised in connection with the condition of things found here (@Ecclesiastes 8: 4).
Two important features of the administration are suggested by the twofold way in which Christ is presented. First as "the little child"; then as in verse 15, "Out of Egypt have I called my Son", (compare @Isaiah 9: 6).
The expression "the little child" occurs very frequently and suggests the spirit that should mark the administration of the kingdom. It is the only kind of spirit that is suitable to the kingdom as seen in @Matthew 18: 1 - 4. Solomon speaks of himself as a little child on taking up the kingdom (@1 Kings 3: 7). The great failure in man's administration in the world today is that the people cannot be controlled and led. But in the coming day of the kingdom "a little child shall lead them".
The thought of sonship is developed in Matthew in connection with the administration of the kingdom. There can be no right administration apart from the sense and liberty of sonship. Saints are sometimes almost afraid to touch matters connected with divine administration because they are not in the liberty of sonship. "David's sons were chief rulers", @2 Samuel 8:18. Who would have more care for the interests of the kingdom than the king's sons?
The three cities mentioned seem to answer to the three divisions of the generations in chapter 1. The first division would bring you to Christ, under His authority, which answers to Jerusalem the city of the great King. In Bethlehem, which was "little", we have suggested the absence of anything in the way of outward show, which corresponds to the breakdown of the public aspect of things marked by the Babylonish
{221}
captivity. The brethren come to light here in a very special way (chapters 1 to 11).
W e find the brethren, it may be said, compassionately in connection with the kingdom in Matthew. Peter's line discovers to us our need of the brethren in this way. In Colossians on the other hand, we find the brethren constitutionally on the other side of Jordan.
In Nazareth, "He shall be called a Nazaraean", you reach Christ personally as the One who is not accepted publicly and you accept that place with Him. So you are in line with the whole spirit of prophetic ministry in regard to Christ as rejected.
It is when we feel most the state of captivity that we get most light as to Christ. Compare Daniel in Babylon, Paul in prison, and John in Patmos.
Chapter 1 may be regarded as presenting the kind of man and chapter 2, the King. There is a suggestion of the two pillars of the temple, Beauty and Strength.
Matthew does not refer to the Babe; Luke does because he is presenting the Lord Jesus as Man. In Matthew it is the King. The thought of Emmanuel in Matthew, God with us, is God with His people in support, whereas John presents God come in a Man.
The gifts of the wise men are suggestive of the divine glory of Christ (the gold), His perfection and fragrance to God as Man (the frankincense) and His sufferings (the myrrh). The first may also suggest what God is towards man, the second what man was in Christ to God, and the myrrh His sufferings as Man with men.
It is instructive also to note the circumstances in which the Lord Jesus is "found" in the gospels. In Matthew, with His mother in the house, a circle of affection is suggested; in Mark Peter and the others found Him in prayer (@Mark 1: 37), indicating levitical exercise; in Luke in the temple (@Luke 2: 46) there is what is priestly; in John He is found in connection
{222}
with the home (@John 1: 39 - 45). @Psalm 132: 6 also bears on this.
The weeping of Rachel is full of suggestion. It was Rachel who said, "Give me children, or else I die", @Genesis 30: 1. This is a good exercise. She would not be comforted. Everything was secure in Christ, but there should be exercise and travail to see a generation like Christ. We see, however, that the children are brought in by Christ in @Matthew 11: 25. *He* brings them in. They are brought in by the King and in connection with the travail of the saints.
The Lord going down into Egypt may be regarded in different ways. It suggests the Lord identifying Himself with Israel in their whole course from Egypt to "the land of Israel". It may suggest also the Lord putting Himself in a place in which we all are, starting from a point where all may be reached. The reference to Egypt in @Isaiah 19: 24, 25, suggests God's providential goodness to Egypt for providing shelter for Christ.
We must know Bethlehem before Nazareth. The house of bread suggests support in view of the place of reproach.
The house in verse 1 I suggests the church as the house and the position of the star as over the house suggests the present position in a beautiful way. Heavenly light directs attention to Christ cherished in the affections of the saints in the house.
The house suggests the public position of the saints; the star the kingdom of the heavens.
In reaching Christ you come under divine instruction (chapter 2: 12); and you go back by a different way from what you came.
{223}
THE LORD'S SUPPER
@Matthew 26: 13, 26 - 30; @1 Corinthians 11: 17 - 26
J.T. It occurred to me that the light that shone from heaven around Saul enters into everything that he treats of, and above all, the Lord's supper. There is nothing perhaps that has occasioned more controversy among the people of God than the Lord's supper and yet it is encircled with the greatest light, as if the divine intent was that there should be no doubt or shade of doubt as to its meaning and bearing. So that, in introducing it in this epistle, the apostle regards the saints as intelligent persons and as such they were to judge what he said. As we remarked, Matthew and Mark do not speak of the Lord's supper as a memorial; they speak of the woman who anointed the Lord in Simon the leper's house as to be remembered: what she did was to be spoken of as a memorial of her wherever the gospel should be preached. Luke alone speaks of the memorial of Christ, and he presents the subject evidently as supporting Paul's presentation of it. An understanding of the memorial of what the woman did would lead to the conditions suitable for a memorial of the Lord's supper. Perhaps we have not thought much about this memorial of the woman.
G.W. Not in connection with the Supper, I am sure. Perhaps you would say a little as to how what the woman did prepares us for the memorial of the Lord's supper.
J.T. I was thinking the Lord's supper has become enshrouded with the greatest darkness among the people of God generally. As we all know, it has become degraded into idolatry in some; the grossest darkness enshrouds the institution in others; and then with others, there are uncertainty and materialism. So the obvious reason is that what this woman represents
{224}
has not been observed. The Lord enjoined here that what she did should be spoken of as a memorial of her wherever the gospel should be preached. If what she represents were announced in the ministry of the gospel, the converts would be prepared for the memorial of the Lord's supper; because in Matthew she represents one who regards the Lord Jesus as the only One fit to govern and rule, and in Mark she would look for the levitical service as seen in Christ. I think if christians generally understood these two features the memorial of the Lord's supper would be seen in its proper setting. The government of the church of God is in the hands of men who are in many instances perhaps not christians at all, so what can you expect but darkness and uncertainty? Then the ministry too is carried on by men who are not christians, and how can they comply with what the woman would look for? So that the government of the church and the ministry are in the hands generally of men who are not really christians, and hence the darkness. So that evidently the Lord's injunction in regard of her has been overlooked, disregarded.
G.W. The moral import of it evidently has been very much overlooked. It has been more looked at as an act of devotedness.
J.T. It was an act of devotedness, but it was devotedness marked by intelligence. She knew what she was doing; she anointed His head.
Ques. Are you connecting that with what Paul said, "I speak as to intelligent persons", @1 Corinthians 10: 15?
J.T. Yes.
W.F.J. She was commended then and distinguished for it.
Y.Y-L. May we go back a point: would the gospel produce this kind of person?
J.T. I think it would, rightly presented: but it is spoken of as an addition. "Wheresoever this gospel
{225}
shall be preached in the whole world, there shall also this, that this woman hath done, be told for a memorial of her". That is, if you preach the gospel and carry this out, you would speak about this woman, and you would have to make plain what she had in her mind.
Y.Y-L. I wondered if you were going back to the origin of the thing, that the kind of gospel that is preached, if it is the gospel of God concerning His Son, would produce this kind of convert, and have in view that we might be intelligent in our minds in regard to the Supper.
J.T. Yes, that is what I thought. The convert would be told by the evangelist something of the import of the gospel of Matthew.
Rem. The evangelist would lead the convert to an intelligent appreciation of what is presented.
J.T. Yes. He would be saved from a human organisation. He would look for the kind of government that Matthew presents; and in Mark, he would look for the kind of ministry that Mark presents and would not recognise the clerical system as it is.
Ques. Would Matthew present the thought that only Christ is to be distinguished?
J.T. Yes, as regards government. So that the hierarchical system would be undermined at once: it is not the idea in Matthew; nor is the clerical idea the idea in Mark.
G.W. Therefore the importance of the man who preaches being himself intelligent on this fine or he will only misdirect those to whom he preaches.
J.T. Yes. Many a preacher sends his converts to the systems; he does not think of the woman and what she did.
Ques. Why does she anoint Him for His burying?
J.T. That governed the position at that time: He was going to die to establish these things. They could only become effective thus. She saw that He was going to die; it was a very great thing that she did
{226}
discern this. A preacher is a former of assemblies really, according to Ecclesiastes, and if I have the assembly in view in my preaching I will make a good deal of this woman, for she prepares the way for it. So the assembly Paul speaks of is an assembly formed of such persons. When you come together in assembly, the first thing before you is the Lord's supper. If we are in the light of what this woman did, we shall be fit for it.
Ques. Do you think that the woman was in the full enjoyment of what she did in intelligence?
J.T. Evidently she was intelligent as to what she did; she anointed His head. Luke speaks about an anointing of the feet and John speaks of an anointing of the feet, whereas in these two gospels it is the head, referring to the mind of God set out in Him officially in the two relations of which we have been speaking, because it is no less than the mind of God.
Rem. Although she anointed Him for His burying, she knew He was coming in glory, as you get in the previous chapter; she was in the light of that.
J.T. No doubt.
Y.Y-L. After the convert is delivered from the systems of men, a good deal has to be taken down before the structure can go up. Is that the work of the preacher or the teacher?
J.T. I suppose the teacher would come in, but I think the gospel should lay the basis in the soul for everything that is to follow. If you present Christ aright, and present this woman, what she did, I think the foundation is laid for the structure of the assembly. That is where the popular gospel comes short; it does not lay the basis for the church. Hence the Lord says, "I have not found thy works complete before my God" (@Revelation 3: 2), meaning that protestantism has never laid the basis for the church in the preaching.
G.W. Would you say the preacher's work really is to introduce souls consciously to the Person concerning
{227}
whom the teacher unfolds all the moral excellencies and bearings, so as to affect him? The preacher is not satisfied until the soul is really introduced to the Person.
J.T. The Person, not only in regard of what He is Godward, but what He is officially. I think Matthew and Mark enlarge on those two features: what He is in government and what He is in ministry, or what He was, for we have to learn the mind of God from Christ and the four gospels give us it in its completeness, but particularly these two, because they make way for Luke.
W.F.J. Neither of those two speak of remembrance, do they? It is only Luke who speaks of it.
J.T. No.
G.W. You mean that until we have apprehended in some measure what is presented in Matthew and Mark, we are not free to take up what Luke presents?
J.T. Yes. Matthew and Mark help us to emerge from the complicated state of things at Jerusalem. The passover and the Lord's supper merge, according to the records of these two evangelists, and you see the necessity for that. It seems a bit difficult perhaps for many to dissect, but we have to make room for the patience of God, and that is where His government comes in. The government of God required that Jerusalem should be owned even after the Spirit came down, so that the assembly is a separate entity here, as it says, the Jew, the gentile and the church of God (@1 Corinthians 10: 32). The announcement of that was deferred, because the patience of God required that He should continue with Israel, that there should be the fullest opportunity given for them to accept the glad tidings, and so Matthew and Mark, I think, have to be understood before we can see how the assembly is to be regarded as a separate entity here according to 1 Corinthians, and I think the understanding of this woman's act helps.
{228}
W.F.J. In regard to the gospels, is not the Luke mission carried on in the Acts?
J.T. They all have their bearing; you would not leave out any. Luke is the standpoint of the pure grace of God, but you have to take account of the government of God as well, otherwise you would not perhaps make allowance for the patience of God on the one hand, and for His retributive judgment on the other. Our dispensation is not strictly a dispensation of judgment, but judgment did enter into it in the government of God: it came on the Jew even in our own dispensation, so there is overlapping, and in order to reconcile these things you have to understand Matthew and Mark.
G.W. Wrath did not come upon the people fully until they rejected the testimony of His having been glorified; it was essential that should be presented to them. That was the final testimony to them.
Y.Y-L. You mean, the refusal of the Spirit, the testimony to Him as a glorified Person by the Spirit.
G.W. Peter said, "And he shall send Jesus Christ, ... until the times of restitution of all things", @Acts 3: 20, 21. They refused Him in His glorified condition.
J.T. They said, We will not have this Man to reign over us.
Y.Y-L. How are you going to bring in the government of God in regard of the gospel of the grace of God?
J.T. What this woman did would help you. You see that in the government of God certain parts of humanity are in view. You see that two-thirds of the human race is left practically in the dark. You can only account for that by the government of God; you cannot explain it. Europe has been wonderfully favoured. Well now, the government of God relates to those two things. If Europe has been favoured,
{229}
the government of God is sure to follow the rejection of the truth.
Y.Y-L. In what way do you present the government of God as to individuals in the light you were speaking of? What a man sows he reaps.
J.T. Quite. The Jew is not addressed as a Jew now; you deal with him as a man. God is not recognising him as a Jew now; that is His government; whereas in Saul's time he was dealt with as a Jew.
Ques. How do you deal with the gentile?
J.T. As a man.
Ques. Does the government of God come in in @Matthew 28 where it says, "Go into Galilee"?
J.T. Yes, there it is again, meaning that Jerusalem is disregarded.
Ques. Would you say it would be out of keeping to have a special mission to the Jews?
J.T. Yes, that is out of keeping with the moment.
Ques. You link that with the Mediator?
J.T. Yes, that is the position now, "There is one God; and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus", @1 Timothy 2: 5. So that prayers are for all men and the Jews are included necessarily.
Ques. Would Paul be presenting something of the government of God when he said to the Jews, "Behold, ye despisers, and wonder, and perish: for I work a work in your days, a work which ye shall in no wise believe, though a man declare it unto you", @Acts 13:41?
J.T. Yes, the government of God was overtaking them.
Y.Y-L. You had this on your mind in connection with the coloured races?
J.T. You cannot ignore that: they are facts. They do not shine in the assembly much, even when they are converted.
Y.Y-L. But a thoughtful and intelligent christian-
{230}
a coloured man-would accept the situation and be blessed accordingly.
J.T. Yes, exactly so. The Syro-Phoenician woman accepted the position: she had no claim on the Son of David. So the Samaritan woman accepted that salvation was of the Jews. And later the Samaritans had to accept that they did not get the Holy Spirit until Peter and John came down from Jerusalem. I wanted specially to show that what this woman did, as rightly understood, it would save us and deliver us from the darkening influences that surround the Lord's supper, so that we should have it as it is in the light of Paul's ministry, for he emphasises the light: the Spirit of God says, "A light from heaven". That is the light in which we ought to understand the Lord's supper. Paul speaks of it as "a great light", and again as "a light from heaven, above the brightness of the sun", and that should govern the Lord's supper. The thing is as clear as noonday, but the darkening influences that have come in hold most of the Lord's people.
Y.Y-L. So we suffer in consequence in regard of it. What do you think was in the mind of the Lord in the confirmation of this from the glory to Paul?
J.T. I think that the thing should be seen in its proper setting in relation to the assembly. It is a light from heaven to govern the assembly. The position at Jerusalem tended to complicate the Lord's supper and indeed, everything. There was a complicated state of things at Jerusalem because of the longsuffering of God: He was loath to give them up, but the light from heaven meant that all that uncertainty should disappear, and I think that is what you get in Paul's ministry. It is a complete disentanglement of the truth and all that stood connected with it from Jewish settings, and so today from religious settings, for that is where the darkening influences are. So we have in Luke an upper room.
{231}
Instead of what this woman did, we have in Luke that the Lord sent Peter and John to prepare. I think that would correspond administratively with the light the woman's act conveys. Peter would shut out all human innovations, for he had authority, having the keys of the kingdom, and John would insist on family conditions. Peter and John were sent by the Lord in Luke.
G. W. How do you connect that with the woman as to John?
J.T. I only mean in a general way; that Peter would insist on the government as the Lord Jesus set it out-he represented the Lord; John would insist on family conditions.
Y.Y-L. Though he does not give us the Supper.
J.T. No, but he was sent with Peter to prepare for it, and he does prepare for it now. @John 13 is most essential to the Supper, as we have often remarked. John speaks of the things without naming them. As we were remarking this morning, "Thy teeth are like a flock of shorn sheep, which go up from the washing", @Song of Songs 4: 2. That is the principle of @John 13.
Y.Y-L. In that way the service of Christ leads Peter much to the same goal as the Supper. You have the thing that goes with it-the atmosphere of it.
W.F.J. @John 13, 14, 15 and 16 were all said at the Supper table.
J.T. Quite.
G.W. What you are saying now is that we should be exercised that each one of us might be delivered from these principles that are going to cloud the Supper in our souls: principles which are abroad in the world and which our own hearts naturally turn to when we get down in our moral condition. Has not that been really the reason things have come back to the hierarchical and clerical system? A worldly principle
{232}
has been taken up to make up the lack of what there should have been spiritually.
J.T. Neither Peter nor John mention the Lord's supper formally, but they really prepare us. Peter's epistles are governmental and they make for the support of Paul's doctrine. Peter writes his letter from Babylon apparently: a very suggestive thing, for what is Babylonish is coming in, and he writes therefore with authority. I do not know who carried the post, but evidently it was carried straight across Palestine to Asia Minor. He is speaking from Babylon to the Jews of the dispersion in Cappadocia, Asia, Bithynia, and so on, the provinces of Asia Minor. These are the provinces in which Paul's labours began and in which God blessed him, in which the assemblies were formed. Paul habitually went to the Jewish synagogues first but the time was passing for that, and the believing Jews of the dispersion were to learn that it was no longer a question of the Jew first; they were to learn not to look to Jerusalem any more. They themselves were living stones and had to come to Christ, not to Jerusalem. "Yourselves ... are being built up a spiritual house", so they should not have to go to Jerusalem any more.
W.F.J. They got the support of the Spirit; those who remained in Jerusalem did not.
J.T. Just so. You can see how Peter's epistle as it was received and understood would make way for Paul's ministry.
W.F.J. It is very interesting that Peter and John should both take up things in connection with Paul's ministry.
J.T. Yes, it shows how God maintained practical unity, and how Peter and John prepare for the Lord's supper as Paul gives it to us.
E.M. What does the apostle Paul refer to in speaking of what "I also delivered to you"? Had he told them about these things beforehand
{233}
J.T. He evidently delivered it to them during his ministry amongst them, and he reminds them of that now.
E.M. And that was all confirmed by the light from heaven and the special revelation that was given. That is an important fact for Christendom today, the revelation from heaven.
J.T. Yes, it ought to be seen that the Lord's supper stands in relation to the light given from heaven, and Peter and John now prepare us for the Lord's supper as Paul has delivered it to us. That is to say, it is no longer connected with a house. They broke bread in the house, it says in @Acts 2: now it is in the assembly; it is separated from the believer's house and connected with the assembly.
Ques. Is it connected with the thought of Christ being the head of every man?
J.T. It comes in in that same connection.
Rem. I was thinking that the light of the Supper is found in a circle where the headship of Christ is recovered to the saints.
J.T. There is no doubt that the first part of @1 Corinthians 11 bears on the second part.
Y.Y-L. Would you agree that the Lord, in confirming this from the glory, had in mind that it might be set up by the apostle in the Spirit's power, that we might see there is nothing clerical about the Supper, but it is established livingly in the Spirit's power; hence it will be ever in freshness?
J.T. Quite. It is kept before us continually that the Lord's supper is connected with the assembly and the assembly only. In Matthew and Mark it is the evening, whereas Luke says, "when the hour was come", all having in view what should ultimately take place in the gentile church. That is, we do not have the Lord's supper in the evening: if we did not have Luke, it seems to me that spiritual sentiment would
{234}
lead us to have it in the evening, but Luke says, "the hour", and that leaves it open.
Y.Y-L. When is that?
J.T. It seems to be left open. As intelligent persons, in the government of God, we have a free day now. The first day of the week is allowed free, and we are free to use it, and it seems to me that Luke anticipates that.
Ques. Would you say a word further on the thought of the Lord instituting the Supper and then of Paul receiving it, and the heavenly light connected with it?
J.T. I think we ought to take account of the one through whom it has come to us, that is why I ventured to refer to his conversion: the light is so dwelt upon, and it affected not only Paul but those who were with him. Those with him did not hear what was said, but they saw the light that shone round about him. I think emphasis should be laid on that in connection with everything he treats of, especially the Lord's supper, for he received it from the Lord; he received it in that light, so you do not get it in connection with a man's household.
Rem. If we imbibe the spirit of this woman we will bow to what the apostle says he received of the Lord.
J.T. Yes, quite.
Ques. Is there any feature in Matthew's and Mark's presentations that applies to us at the present time or do they both refer to the transitional period?
J.T. There are features: one especially, it was "as they were eating"; Luke does not say anything about that, it is "This do", what the Lord did, but Matthew and Mark emphasise the eating. I think that feature has a great bearing on us because 1 Corinthians treats of the passover or the feast of unleavened bread before you have the Lord's supper, and we are enjoined to keep that feast and to keep that feast means you have to eat-that is what comes in chapter
{235}
10. Eating is the thought of communion or fellowship, and the Corinthians were eating in relation to idolatry. What they were eating in Matthew and Mark was the unleavened bread; if we are not eating that, we may be sure the Lord's supper is a dead letter to us.
G.W. It is God's solemn judgment on the whole principle that actuates this scene and actuates our own souls in lawlessness.
W.P. It says in Matthew too, "Take, eat; this is my body".
J.T. That bears out what we were saying: they were eating the unleavened bread, for how can you come to eat what represents the Lord's body in a spiritual way unless you are eating the unleavened bread? In the systems they know nothing of this how could the Pope eat unleavened bread?
Ques. What is eating the unleavened bread?
J.T. It is reduction.
Ques. Is it feeding on Christ as the One who would not allow any leaven?
J.T. Quite. But that system is symbolised by what the Lord said, "Leaven, which a woman took, and hid in three measures of meal, till the whole was leavened", @Matthew 13:33. The systems around us are the very opposite to unleavened bread.
Y.Y-L. It is called a feast, and the exclusion of evil can hardly be a feast, can it?
J.T. Well, there are the two things: there is the passover, "Christ our passover is sacrificed for us", that is there always; but apart from that, you must supply the unleavened bread. God supplies the passover, but to have part in that, we must bring the unleavened bread ourselves. That was symbolised in Matthew and Mark: *while they were eating*, He takes what symbolises Himself and His love and gives it to them.
{236}
Ques. Is @1 Peter 2: 1, "Wherefore laying aside all malice ...", the enforcement of this?
J.T. Yes, that goes with it exactly. Think how precious it is to eat the Supper, but who will value it save one who eats the unleavened bread?
Rem. Yes. I suppose every true Christian has unleavened bread in his house in some sense. Lot had it, but the thing is to eat it in relation to Christ.
Ques. Does not the unleavened bread represent Christ as a Man here of an entirely different order to anything before? The feeding on that would prepare one to partake of the Supper in a worshipful spirit, that such a One as that has gone down into death.
J.T. So it is a continuous thing. Sincerity and truth would be within the reach of the youngest.
Ques. How do we supply the unleavened bread?
J.T. It is a question of the state of our souls-one is sincere in what one is doing too.
Ques. In 1 Corinthians the apostle seems to connect the thought of the memorial with what we do, whereas the eating is connected with the announcement, is it not?
J.T. That is how it stands. In chapter 10 it is what we bless and what we break; in chapter 11, the memorial: he brings in what the Lord did. In chapter 10 it is the cup which we bless and the bread which we break; that is to bring out what these things are. Chapter 11 is to bring out the memorial, what the Lord did.
Ques. Would you say that Paul adds anything to Luke's presentation of the Supper or are they parallel?
J.T. I think Luke rather supports what we have here; but this word, "As often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink the cup, ye announce the death of the Lord, until he come", is additional. In verse 24 J.N.D. leaves out "Take, eat", but in connection with the cup it does say, "This do, as often as ye shall drink it, in remembrance of me".
{237}
Rem. The disciples would not have understood the Supper, but the woman seems to be intelligent. The disciples say, 'Why this waste?'.
J.T. The disciples were not so far on as she; if they had been, she would not have been singled out in this way. The Lord loves to single out special devotedness.
Ques. Would keeping the feast make us intelligent?
Y.Y-L. Intelligence really works by affection.
J.T. Just so, but you feel, if we are not eating, when we come together to the Lord's supper it becomes a dead letter to us. It was "as they were eating" in Matthew and Mark.
Ques. Do you link that up with @1 Corinthians 5?
J.T. Yes.
Rem. A woman first announces the Lord's death then a woman announces His resurrection.
J.T. Yes indeed.
{238}
SALVATION OF FAMILIES
@Acts 16: 30 - 34; @Zechariah 12: 10 - 14
In preaching the gospel at this time I wish to show from these scriptures that it has *families* in view. It is, of course, to the individual in each family, to each individual in the world, indeed, but God did not intend men to live otherwise than in families, and so it shall be in the world to come of which we believers speak. So also that eternal state of things which God has before Him is in entire keeping with His own nature. He will surround Himself eternally with families. As the apostle Paul says, "For this reason I bow my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom every family in the heavens and on earth is named", @Ephesians 3: 14, 15. They are all named of the Father; named doubtless according to the measure of their knowledge of God in Christ, but nevertheless all named of the Father, so that He will be surrounded by families eternally blest in Christ. And so from the outset it became apparent that man was to live family-wise. It is true that the family from the very beginning became degraded and marred. You all remember how Eve named her first son and her second son, and how, in taking the initiative in the family, disaster ensued, so that her firstborn became a murderer, and as a murderer, went out from the presence of the Lord. As time went on the marriage institution became degraded in the posterity of Cain, and with it necessarily the family became degraded and deranged, so that corruption and lawlessness prevailed.
But then, in the line of Seth, who is a type of Christ, we have restoration. God begins in @Genesis 5 over again; the history of Adam is given through Seth. "In the day that God created man, ... male
{239}
and female created he them; and called their name Adam". That is to say, the one name covers husband and wife, which involves unity; one idea in the ordering of the family. Thus we have the divine thought restored. And so it is said that Adam "begot a son in his likeness ... and called his name Seth". It was now Adam and not Eve. And so we go all the way down in chapter 5 until we arrive at Enoch, of whom after his first son was born, it says, "Enoch walked with God", as if the necessity of walking with God came into his mind in the light of his family. Then we find in Lamech, Noah's father, a recognition of God in his household in that he gave his son the name, 'Noah', which means that God would comfort him regarding the curse on the ground. Then in Noah we have the complete thought: he "prepared an ark for the saving of his house" (@Hebrews 11: 7), and that *house* did not contain more than one wife for each of the husbands. Thus the original institution of God was preserved, and with that the family.
In calling out Abraham God said to him, "In thee shall all families of the earth be blessed". God had *families* in His mind, and in calling out Abraham He said He knew him that "he will command his children and his household after him", @Genesis 18: 19. So that Abraham being a great father, his name signifying that, became the depositary of the mind of God.
Thus you see, beloved friends, how God had man before Him family-wise, and how, as they strayed from Him, as alas! the race has, the family has become degraded, particularly in the East. But God has never given man up. He is never taken back by surprise; He is never driven back. He holds to His thoughts, and He will arrive at the full fruition on this earth. Even in men, as they are in flesh and blood, God will bring the race back to His original thought. Man shall be blest, as the gospel said to Abraham, family-wise. All the families shall be
{240}
blessed, and then God, as I said, will have in the eternal state of things, in a spiritual world, His eternal thought, and that is families.
I wanted to show how that in introducing the gospel into the Western World, which includes ourselves, the household idea appears. In @Acts 16, Timothy is taken up by the apostle Paul and is chosen to accompany him; his mother is said to be a "believing woman", a fine tribute to any mother! No mother can effect anything for God in her family save as she is a believing woman, and the mother of Timothy was called a believing woman. Faith *dwelt* in her, and it dwelt in her mother; and the faith that dwelt in her mother and in her dwelt in Timotheus (@2 Timothy 1: 5). So that we have a young man accompanying the great apostle to Europe, the product of a believing household. He had thus by his side a living witness to the great value of a believing woman as a mother.
Then we find Lydia, also in @Acts 16, "whose heart the Lord opened to attend to the things spoken by Paul". (May God open some Lydia's heart here tonight to attend to the things which the Holy Spirit would present to you!) She attended to the things spoken by Paul. As the Lord opened her heart to receive the gospel she opened her house. You see thus another household comes into view.
Then, finally, in that same chapter we have the Philippian jailor. The jailor has a house, and as he is awakened he called for lights, a sure evidence of the work of God in his soul. Unless a man calls for light, I have doubts about him, whatever his profession. The first desire in a man's soul in whom God is working is that he should have light. There can be no headway made without light. Nothing can be done in the dark, beloved friends. God commanded that light should shine out of darkness and the light shone, and God called it Day. Things must be in the light of day. And so the jailor called for lights; no part is to be
{241}
kept dark, things are to be searched out as far as he is concerned. "He that practises the truth comes to the light, that his works may be manifested that they have been wrought in God", @John 3: 21.
It was a wonderful moment for the jailor, but it was a wonderful moment for God, for God was getting his man in Europe. Timotheus was not a European; he was really a Jew. Lydia was not a European; she was an Asiatic, for she came from Thyatira. The Spirit of God had not suffered Paul to remain in Asia, so that it was not Asiatics He was now seeking, but Europeans, and the jailor was in His mind. "A certain Macedonian man" had beckoned to Paul. It was a man, not a woman. God intended to have in Europe men like Jesus. The earthquake comes and the jailor is awakened. He is moved; he is in earnest. As a representative of that dark part of the world he wants light. That part of the world was calling for help, and now we have it in a concrete case in the jailor. He calls for fights, as I said. Look, friend, are you prepared to face the light tonight? There is no hope for your soul unless you are prepared to face the light. "God is light, and in him is no darkness at all", @1 John 1:5. You have to do with God.
The jailor was awakened, and instinctively he felt that he needed lights, and he called for them. The lights were there in Paul and Silas. The voice of Christ through Paul from the inner prison says, "Do thyself no harm, for we are all here". It was the voice of compassion. And now he says, "Sirs". He speaks respectfully to the servants of Christ, those whom a few moments before he had thrust shamelessly and cruelly into the inner prison. In whom was the change, in them or in him? He asked, "What must I do that I may be saved?", and the answer is, "Believe on the Lord Jesus and thou shalt be saved, thou and thy house". There is a beautiful touch to my mind in the expression 'Lord Jesus'. He has
{242}
supreme power, but He has the heart of a man. He has the sympathies of a man; and the jailor has to believe on Him to be saved, and his house. You cannot have a house without a head. Thou shalt be saved, the head of the house first. The wife and the children would see salvation in the head. The child rent know salvation as they see it in the father. They see it in one who loves them and they learn it easier there. I am not denying that each child has to do with Christ. It has; but I am speaking of the salvation of a household, and it is in the mind of God that the parents should be examples to the children. And so the jailor was to be secured first. He *believed*. He made no delay in believing. He felt the need of salvation, and he took the way indicated by Paul's word, not only for himself, but also for his house. He was baptised, and all his straightway. He brought Paul and Silas into his *house*. They were the representatives of Christ, and he had them there. Their stripes betoken that they are devoted to Christ. Would the children of that house forget this scene? I think not. Salvation in the head of the house was evidenced in a very practical way; it was truly in that house. I can see the blessed apostle in spite of the excruciating pains which must have resulted from his stripes and chains, actuated by the love of Christ as he baptises that man and his house. It was a saved household. The gospel was preached to the head, and the head believed, and was baptised, "and rejoiced", we are told, "with all his house, having believed in God". There was thus a household secured for the Lord Jesus in Europe by the gospel.
Now I want to go to Zechariah to show you in more detail how the work of God shows itself. I have been dwelling on the head of the house. Now I want to come more particularly to the house itself. And what you find is that *God begins*; and now it is not only the head but there is the family: the house of
{243}
David, the house of Nathan, the house of Levi, the house of Shimei. They are all exercised. But how exercised? God has poured out upon them "the spirit of grace and of supplications". The work begins with God.
Now it may be that God is beginning on someone here tonight for the first time. The Spirit of grace and supplications is poured out, and you have begun to think of what has happened to Jesus. It may be just dawning upon you that you have responsibility in regard to Jesus. They mourn for Him. First it is they mourn for Jehovah. I want to show you the identification of Jesus with God. In this passage it says, "They shall look on me whom they pierced, and they shall mourn for him". God is in view in the first; then it says, "they shall mourn for him"that is Jesus. This prophet identifies Jehovah with Jesus, "the man that is my fellow" (chapter 13: 7).
"They shall look on me". The truth comes home to us that we have been treating *God* shamefully. How have you been treating God all these years? As refusing the gospel, you have been treating Him with utter disrespect. You have been rejecting His offers of mercy, and now the thought of God comes into your soul and you *feel* it.
Then you are reminded that you can only know Him in Jesus. It is the only-begotten Son that comes into your mind. They "mourn for him, as one mourneth for an only son". The "only son" is Jesus; He is "the only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father" and "*He* hath declared him", @John 1: 18. The revelation of that God, the thought of whom has come into your soul, is in Jesus. And you have treated Him shamefully! What has man done to Jesus? What have the princes of this world done to Him? They have crucified Him. Have you had anything to do with that? Ah! yes, you have had to do with that; you have been taking sides with His
{244}
murderers! I know the primary responsibility is with the Jews, and wrath has come on them; but Christ's accusation was written in Hebrew and in Greek and in Latin. The race of man is brought into it, and no one can escape, especially none of those to whom the gospel has been preached. He has been announced in your ears. You have turned a deaf ear to Him. You have persecuted Him, it may be. But now "the spirit of grace and of supplications" poured out into your soul leads you to mourn for Him. Have you done it? The family thought enters at once into the exercise. It is the "only son", you see. You are thinking of Him family-wise, and that is how the gospel presents Him. He is God's only-begotten Son. God has given Him for us in order to save us, in order that we should have everlasting life. Does that not touch your heart? As the spirit of grace and supplications enters the heart you thus regard God and Christ.
But now I want to show you that it is *every family apart*. As I said, God is dealing with men familywise, and the wives mourn apart. In speaking a word about the wives I do not want to take any advantage. Far from it; the gospel must be announced on the principle of grace. But wives exercise a tremendous influence in the family for good or for evil. I have spoken of Timotheus mother. I have spoken of Lydia. What about the wives here tonight? What are you doing in the family? Has the salvation of the family been before you? You have a responsibility in regard to the family. Look at Eve; see her way in the family! Look at the wife of Lot! See her in the family! She stands out, beloved friends, "a pillar of salt" for every woman, for every mother in the world. What did she do? She "looked back from behind" her husband. That is what is said of her. Did she want her children saved? No, her heart was in Sodom. Lot's sons-in-law had no confidence in Lot.
{245}
Need I say the mother had a great deal to do with that? She had. If she looked back from behind Lot as they left Sodom, you may be sure she did many things behind him in Sodom. The husbands of her daughters regarded Lot as a man that mocked when he spoke to them about leaving Sodom. I am not excusing Lot, but the Holy Spirit says he had a "righteous soul", @2 Peter 2: 7, 8. Thank God for that! He was a true believer, but a poor father. Peter says nothing about Lot's wife, but the Lord Himself calls attention to her as a warning; "Remember the wife of Lot", @Luke 17: 32. All wives should take this to heart. In Zechariah the wives mourn separately. "The family of the house of David apart, and their wives apart; the family of the house of Nathan apart, and their wives apart; the family of the house of Levi apart, and their wives apart; the family of Shimei apart, and their wives apart". The wives are apart, not only from the husbands, but from the family. If she is to be a power in the family she has to learn to have to do with God separately. Beloved friends, that lies at the foundation of family salvation. Salvation is to be seen first in the head, the husband, and then in the wife. Many wives live just in the faith of their husbands. It is well indeed that they should follow their husbands to a point, but God requires for salvation that the wives should learn to do with Him apart.
Having said so much about self-judgment, "the spirit of grace and of supplications", which brings about this mourning for Christ, I want just for a moment to speak a word about cleansing, for it is in the presence of self-judgment that you have the fountain opened here. It is open in Jerusalem where the mourning was (chapter 13: 1). The word 'fountain' alludes to moral purification; that is to say, water. But I am not confining myself to that, because the means of judicial cleansing, the blood, flowed from the
{246}
side of Jesus as also the means of moral cleansing, the water. They go together. And so in John's gospel what you find is, the blood comes first. In the epistle the water is first.
I confine myself for the moment to the blood. It is for sins. It refers to God, beloved friends. As the families judge themselves, the wives apart, there is a fountain of cleansing, there is the means of cleansing. "The blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin", @1 John 1: 7. That has its value, and I invite you, in the Lord's name tonight, to take advantage of it. What does John also say? "This is he that came by water and blood, Jesus the Christ; not by water only, but by water and blood. And it is the Spirit that bears witness", @1 John 5: 6. The Spirit is bearing witness *tonight*. He is calling attention to Jesus, who has come into this world in connection with the means of cleansing; it is what man needs most, judicial cleansing. That is to say, that which enables God to forgive and cleanse us from all unrighteousness. Then there is that by which we cleanse ourselves; that is to say, water. The water refers, as I said, to moral cleansing. The blood is judicial, and the judicial is first in the gospel of John, for it is a question of my relations with God by faith. And so the word is, "If we confess our sins, he is faithful and righteous to forgive us our sins, and cleanse us from all unrighteousness".
Now, are you ready for this tonight? "It is the Spirit that bears witness". The Spirit here tonight is bearing witness to you to the value of the blood and the water that flowed from the side of the dead Christ. John says that *he* was a witness that as the soldier pierced the side of Jesus forthwith flowed blood and water. The Holy Spirit is a *permanent living* witness to it.
In the following verses God cuts off the idols; He acts to help us as cleansed, and the family thought
{247}
according to God is so understood that if any son arises who prophesies lies the father and the mother smite him. You see thus how thoroughly they are secured for God. They no longer shield their son. They love God more than their son. They are true Levites (see @Exodus 32: 26 - 29). Where the cleansing value of the blood of Christ is accepted, we arrive at true levitical instincts, and so it says that "the prophets shall be ashamed every one of his vision, when he prophesieth; neither shall they wear a hairy garment to deceive", @Zechariah 13:4. Wearing a hairy garment does not make you holy. Holiness can only be by the Holy Spirit working in us in relation to the death of Christ. You may wear hairy garments; you may enter a monastery. These things do not make you holy. Holiness is by the Spirit of God, as I said, working in the believer in relation to the death of Christ.
Now the Lord Jesus appears in spirit and says, "I am no prophet, I am a tiller of the ground; for man acquired me as bondman from my youth". That is the spirit of the Levite. The true spirit of service now is that you make no official pretentions. You are not claiming distinction on religious grounds. He said, "I am no prophet, I am a tiller of the ground".
He was man's Servant. Think of the lowliness of Christ! Has He not been our Servant? Yes, beloved friends, He is serving you tonight, and He is seeking no religious distinction. Neither should anyone who serves Him wear a hairy garment to deceive or any other garment to give him religious distinction.
Then it says, "What are those wounds ... ?". The lovers of Jesus will always enquire after the wounds. Have you? He says, "Those with which I was wounded in the house of my friends". It goes on to say, "Smite the shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered". Now we come to the wounds with which God wounded Him. "He was wounded for our
{248}
transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities", @Isaiah 53: 5. The wounds that man gave Him in themselves would not work atonement. He must have divine wounds. And so Jesus was smitten of God and afflicted. "The chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed".
I leave the word with you. I had in view the salvation of God for the family, bearing fully in mind, as I have indicated, that each member of the family has to judge himself apart, and, as a believer in Christ, to be cleansed by His precious blood.
{249}
THE FIRST DAY OF THE WEEK
@Acts 20: 7 - 12; @John 20: 1, 19
J.T. In connection with these two scriptures, I thought we might see in John's gospel the full bearing of the first day of the week as denoting that which is first, that which is morally before all else in the ways of God. The synoptic gospels connect the resurrection with what preceded it in the Old Testament, the truth regarding the assembly in these gospels being linked with what preceded it, like Rebecca's being brought into Sarah's tent. But John goes back to what is before the Old Testament; hence he refers in his gospel to that which was in the beginning: "In the beginning was the Word", and Christ being thus introduced, John the baptist says, "He was before me", that is, the Lord takes precedence of all else, and the assembly is linked up with Him, like Eve with Adam. We get the Lord's hands and side in John's gospel, the outcome of love; it is not something that has come in like Israel, but what preceded. So we get throughout John's gospel what sets aside and ignores. Whilst the passover is respected and recognised in John's gospel, it is a feast of the Jews, and other feasts are disregarded. The Lord refuses to go up to the feast of tabernacles. Things are brought in in John's gospel which are wholly independent of what the current religionists were going on with; they were going on with this feast, but the Lord has part in things which are wholly independent. Six days before the passover He has a supper made for Him (chapter 12) and in chapter 13, "before the feast of the passover", there is a supper, which is not called the passover but is "before" it, as if the Lord is going on with something entirely apart from current religion. What we are going on with is entirely apart from what
{250}
the religionists are going on with, whatever they may call their things. What we have is by itself, nor do we seek to be conformed in any way to them, their holy days, or whatever they may call them. We have our own things which belong not to this world but to that which is *before* the world.
J.H.L. What is the difference between the first day and the eighth day?
J.T. The eighth day links on with the previous seven.
J.H.L. I thought the eighth day suggested that which is eternal.
J.T. The numeral would indicate that it follows on seven, a period before, whereas there is nothing before the first day. The first day was in the mind of God before any other dispensation came in; the way it is introduced in John is in keeping with that.
-.N. "That *he* might have the first place in all things", @Colossians 1: 18.
J.T. Yes, what He is.
Ques. Why did they have preaching before the breaking of bread?
J.T. It is dispensational with regard to the church.
The professing church has ignored what was in the mind of God in connection with the breaking of bread.
The breaking of bread stands connected with Paul's ministry.
W.C.G. Was the preaching in order that they might understand the breaking of bread?
J.T. We are not told what he said: it is a suggestion. Paul had to say what he said before they broke bread. Eutychus would set forth the fall in connection with those who did not pay attention to Paul's preaching. The breaking of bread has been divorced from Paul's ministry in christendom and it has lost its character, but those who have come into the truth of it respect it in its right setting. "For I received
{251}
from the Lord", says the apostle Paul; it is associated with Paul's ministry.
Ques. Is the breaking of bread the product of Paul's gospel?
J.T. It is associated with it specially. He detaches it from the houses in Corinthians; he tells them the houses are to eat their meals in. God foresaw perfectly what would happen, that Paul would not be listened to. Paul had much to say, and there is much to say. The breaking of bread is not to be left in a cloud, but it should be in the full light of Paul's ministry so that no one should have any doubt. It is what was in the mind of God from the outset.
A.K. Does the salvation of the gentiles today lie in the maintenance and appreciation of Paul's ministry linked with the Supper?
J.T. Yes, that is what has happened. Light came in in connection with Christ as Head in heaven, and following on that the breaking of bread. Brethren began to see that the body of Christ was here. "We ... are one loaf, one body". Eutychus did not listen to that.
Ques. What would the "many lights" signify?
J.T. It was in an *upper* chamber. The upper room has its own spiritual significance. It is that into which those came who saw the Lord ascend. We can welcome all the lights. They do not detract from any greater light; they add to it.
Rem. It is not only recorded that Eutychus fell into a deep sleep but that "he sunk down with sleep".
J.T. It signifies the state of the church at a given period. "While the bridegroom tarried, they all slumbered and slept". The midnight cry caused an awakening. "A certain youth, by name Eutychus, sitting at the window-opening, overpowered by deep sleep ...". He was overpowered, showing he had not the strength to hold against it. You will remember on certain occasions the disciples could not keep awake.
{252}
It refers to weakness spiritually. It is not presented as sin, but inability to listen, to keep awake. "Wake up, thou that sleepest, and arise up from among the dead", @Ephesians 5:14.
Ques. What would keep us awake? We do not want to go to sleep.
J.T. The first thing that would keep us awake is to accept responsibility. If you accept responsibility and are hearty in the thing, God will help you. There can be nothing here for God without the sense of responsibility attached to us here on earth. We are left here as responsible. We do not want to be stupefied, to lose our senses: "Be not drunk with wine". In Matthew and Mark we are told that following the breaking of bread they sing a hymn and go to the mount of Olives. The mount of Olives would maintain the thing in power. We want the thing maintained in the full level of the mind of God and that can only be by the Spirit; it is by the Spirit that we are not overcome with sleep.
Ques. Would sinking down suggest lack of vitality?
J.T. The way it reads here is that "a certain youth, by name Eutychus, sitting at the window-opening, overpowered by deep sleep, while Paul discoursed very much at length, having been overpowered ...". "Overpowered" comes in twice. It is a question of power. The truth of the matter is that the young man being at the window-opening would be looking out, so that he would have an eye on the world: that is the secret of it. Worldly influences stupefy and overpower. The drop was severe, from the third storey down to the bottom, showing the completeness of the fall. The Lord says to Ephesus "Remember therefore whence thou art fallen", the depth of the fall. Ephesus was at the top and fell down. The Lord's supper is intended to keep the eye of the christian on Christ, not looking out. It is said of Moses on one occasion that "he looked this way
{253}
and that way". That is what politicians do. The worldling looks towards the world, and the politician looks on all sides to make sure that he will get support.
Rem. Daniel's window was a great contrast.
J.T. Yes, he looked towards Jerusalem; he was not overpowered with sleep. Demas loved this present world; he "has forsaken me", Paul says. It is the same sort of thing.
A.K. Would the embrace of the apostle answer to the revival of which you spoke earlier in the meeting?
J.T. I thought so. It is the way love has come in. Paul descending enfolded him in his arms. Paul did not fall; he descended. There is a great difference between falling and descending. Love descends. The more love you have, the more ready you are to descend to help others. The Lord descended. Love goes down. You go down to bring another up. Paul resuscitated him.
Ques. Would John's ministry keep us awake?
J.T. It makes you live, anyway. The state of the people of God in general is just that of Eutychus, and it is your business now in the light of Paul's ministry to be exercised, to descend, to fall upon them and enfold them in your arms. It is a question of serving in love. Sonship is the thought of God for us. That is what Paul brings out. We "are all God's sons by faith in Christ Jesus". We have the spirit of sonship and it should show itself by our serving one another in love. "Be not troubled, for his life is in him", Paul said. "And they brought away the boy alive". In the presence of all the light, Eutychus was overpowered with sleep. When the Lord was in Gethsemane and on the mount of transfiguration the disciples were overpowered. It shows what we are unless supported by the Spirit of God.
J.H.L. You were referring to that passage in Ephesians: "Wake up, thou that sleepest".
J.T. Yes, it is a quotation from @Isaiah 60: "Arise,
{254}
shine! for thy light is come, and the glory of Jehovah is risen upon thee ... and the nations shall walk by thy light". It is a quotation which fits in with this epistle, all things having their true character exposed. In Ephesians it is, "And the Christ shall shine upon thee". That is the idea in @Isaiah 60. "Thy light" is Israel's light, and it refers to the nations, too. That is what we get in the epistle to the Ephesians.
J.H.L. Christendom is asleep, but are we not in danger of it?
J.T. Yes, and the danger is of going to sleep in the full blaze of light; that is what the mount of transfiguration teaches us, and you see it in a moral way in Christ in Gethsemane: a great light shone there, and the disciples went to sleep in the presence of that!
Ques. As to accepting responsibility ...
J.T. It is a great thing to accept responsibility. The Lord will help you if you do.
J.H.L. What do you mean as to accepting responsibility?
J.T. I am here where Christ is not. The Lord said to the man in @Luke 8, "Return to thine house and relate how great things God has done for thee". That was given him to do. The man wanted to be with the Lord, but the one who wants to be with the Lord is qualified to represent Him where He is not. So that man does go home and he speaks about the Lord Jesus. Then in the same chapter we get the woman who had the issue; she is healed, virtue goes out to her, and she falls down when the Lord urges it and tells all the truth; that is, she is transparent. She represents the church as reflecting Christ, but a transparent body, not opaque. The church is not to be an opaque body, but bright and luminous, open; anything that went in would come out! Any virtue that comes out of Christ is reflected in the transparent body. Then we get in the same chapter the little girl,
{255}
Jairus's daughter. She suggests the spiritual element, fresh and youthful. When the Lord comes to the house He goes in with Peter, James and John, and the father and mother of the child. These three cases in @Luke 8 represent what the church is here in responsibility to the Lord though wishing to be with Him. It is left here to be the reflection of Himself. "That ye might set forth the excellencies of him who has called you out of darkness to his wonderful light", @1 Peter 2: 9. There is the freshness of life in the little girl, the youthful element.
It is important to see how the breaking of bread stands as related to Paul's doctrine. It is not put down here (in Acts) as an example of how things should be done, that is, we do not look for a long discourse from a brother before the breaking of bread. Paul represents God, and it is a question of what he will do. It is better to have a discourse than to break bread in the dark; that is what is being done in christendom. It is better to listen to Paul before the breaking of bread. The young man shows the state of things, that which comes to pass in the history of the church, and proves the wisdom of Paul's long discourse.
Rem. I suppose one might go to a district where this is not known and it might be well to have the discourse in order that they might rightly understand.
J.T. You have hit the nail on the head: we want to know what we are doing.
W.C.G. How many could give such a discourse?
J.T. Take the ministry in the Collected Writings of J.N.D. ; what a volume of ministry God gave as the thing was brought to light to dispel the dark cobwebs of the middle ages! Cartloads of superstition had to be removed! The ministry does that; it exposes the human innovations and brings things into their original simplicity, so that you can now break bread in the light as God is in the light.
{256}
J.H.L. They make the Lord's supper individual in Christendom, whereas it is collective.
J.T. It is very important to remember we are not doing things because there are certain customs around us that are like it; it has nothing to do with those customs. It is the first day of the week. We begin with the thing.
Rem. We ought to be very glad not to be classed with the religious bodies.
J.T. Yes, we are not known there.
A.K. In connection with Eutychus, after Paul had enfolded him, it says, "And having gone up ...". In that sense the apostle would seek to "present every man perfect in Christ", @Colossians 1: 28.
J.T. Very good. It stands related to the breaking of bread: "Having gone up, and having broken the bread, and eaten, and having long spoken until daybreak, so he went away". That is what he did. He went up again, that is where the breaking of bread is; he went up, and then there is a change from discourse to conversation. In verse 7 we are told Paul discoursed.
A.K. Would the discourse be an individual thing on the apostle's part?
J.T. Yes, and then it is conversation, after the breaking of bread. The breaking of bread is now resumed in the full light of Paul's ministry and in the full light of the resuscitation of the person who went to sleep. We get the principle of conversation between brethren. Instead of a discourse they are speaking together, mutually; "having long spoken" or conversed (see footnote in New Trans.); that is to say, there would be room for others to speak as well as myself.
It helps greatly to see that John brings the Lord in as at the beginning, not connected with anything historically; He is before all. Whatever there has been historically He has done it: "All things received
{257}
being through him, and without him not one thing received being which has received being". That is very sweeping; it brings Him in pre-eminently. He takes a place before all things, and the church is necessarily linked up with that, with what is at the beginning; so that he presses in this gospel that the saints might see His glory, the glory, He says, "which thou hast given me, for thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world", @John 17:24. We can understand what the Lord meant by "that world, and the resurrection" (@Luke 20: 35), Hebron being before the world. "The hidden wisdom, which God ordained before the world", Paul says.
Ques. Why is it in the evening in verse 19?
J.T. Well, it was the first day of the week. That would mean that all the blessed service of Christ during the whole day would enter into it. Luke, who is concerned about the public order of things, says the "hour" not the 'evening'. But here, I apprehend, all the ministry of Christ during the whole day entered into this last event.
A.K. So that even in our day, in the language of the scripture we are meditating upon, we do break bread in the evening in that sense.
J.T. We do it in the light of all that Christ is to us. He comes to us like the "hind of the morning",
@Psalm 22. It included all the blessed service of Christ upon that day; it would be a wonderful day. The hind of the morning would allude to the agility of Christ in the service of love. The feminine speaker in the Song of Songs says, "I charge you, daughters of Jerusalem, by the gazelles, or by the hinds of the field, that ye stir not up, nor awake my love, till he please". That is, you do not need to do it. Love is like the gazelle; when it acts it acts wisely. You do not need to stir it up; it comes.
A.K. "I will not leave you orphans".
J.T. Exactly. You do not force it; it is remarkable
{258}
that she says "by the gazelles, or by the hinds of the field". It suggests the declaration of the name unto His brethren first: "I will declare thy name to my brethren". That would be involved in the ministry of the first day. How active He was in visiting His brethren and making His Father known to them! -.N. The *same* day is emphasised.
J.T. It is well to notice that. It is not emphasised like that in the other gospels. "The same day at evening, being the first day of the week". "The first day of the week" comes in twice. The first verse of this chapter gives us a beautiful picture and Mary Magdalene is in the forefront because she represents the subjective result of what is going on: "The first day of the week Mary of Magdala ...". She stands out in this beautiful picture. She represents the church as the complement of Christ; Christ was in her heart.
-.N. It has been said that Mary Magdalene is the only one who saw the Lord Jesus twice on the resurrection day.
J.T. That is very interesting. It shows how she fits in here in connection with the first day of the week. Mary Magdalene goes early in the morning to the tomb. We can see how she would understand the message that the Lord gave her; the church fits into it as the complement of Christ. John has the assembly in view as seen in Adam and Eve before sin came in, what was in the mind of God before anything else, Christ and the assembly! We need to enter into what is proper to the church.
Ques. Should we go up like Paul?
J.T. That is the principle, moral elevation; it has nothing to do with current religion. Mary was not asleep. She, too, came like the gazelle, and she could say to the daughters of Jerusalem, 'Do not stir up my Beloved until He please'. God will never be behind; hence, "When the fulness of the time was
{259}
come, God sent forth his Son". That is what love had in mind, sonship; He had waited for it.
Rem. Service came for Mary Magdalene: "Go to my brethren".
J.T. Yes, she brought a wonderful contribution that time. She goes "bringing word to the disciples that she had seen the Lord, and that he had said these things to her". She did not go as a gifted person; she did not go as a teacher; she went in a comely way. The church does not teach, but she has light.
A.K. Phoebe was a servant of the church.
J.T. Yes, and she knew her place.
Ques. What have you to say about the last utterance to the disciples, "Peace be to you"?
J.T. That was to be the state which would characterise the company. "And having said this, he shewed to them his hands and his side. The disciples rejoiced therefore, having seen the Lord. Jesus said therefore again to them, Peace be to you". That is, He confirms them in peace as rejoicing. They have peace first as having the light through Mary's message, and then as they are rejoicing in His presence He confirms them in peace. We should be overflowing with thanksgiving and praise, and there is peace.
-.N. Before we close, would you say a word as to the difference between the first day and the Lord's day as in the book of Revelation?
J.T. The Lord's day brings in authority and corresponds with the Lord's supper. Subjection is the first great feature. Without subjection you cannot have anything; hence, the apostle says, "I received", not of Christ but "from the Lord, that which I also delivered to you". The Lord's supper involves subjection to the Lord; that is very important. The first day of the week releases you from all that is here and takes you into the spiritual realm; that is what the first day of the week implies.
Ques. As to His side ...
{260}
J.T. It alludes to Eve being built from the rib taken from Adam. John shows us the church in that way. It is life out of death, life in a collective sense in the saints, so that we are known. We get the personal distinction of the church in John. When God brought the woman to Adam, he said, "This time it is bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh: this shall be called Woman, because this was taken out of a man". She was there before him. John gives us the dignity of the persons who form the church. We get "great fishes" in John (chapter 21: 11).
{261}
MOUNTAINS
@Matthew 5: 1, 2; @Matthew 14: 23, 24; @Matthew 15: 29 - 32; @Matthew 17: 1 - 5; @Matthew 24: 3, 4; @Matthew 28: 16 - 20
It will be obvious that I have mountains in mind, wishing by the Lord's help to make clear their significance in this gospel. Many of you will remember the reference in the Old Testament to the mountains round about Jerusalem. It appears in the Songs of Degrees, that section of the Psalms which speaks of the people of God ascending. Many, alas, are marked by descent, moral descent. It is right, of course, to descend after the manner of Christ. He took that path in love, but only to ascend (@Ephesians 4: 9). Many descend and remain at the low point reached. One of the most sorrowful pictures of descent is indeed in this very gospel, where the demons are allowed of the Lord to enter into the swine, which descended into the lake. It is typical of moral depravity, swine being a type of what is peculiarly unclean among men, unclean tastes and desires. These things drag us down, and when unclean demons acquire a place the pace is immensely accelerated. And that is what is going on. When God begins to work with His people for recovery we have moral ascension; there is a desire for better things and the refusal of the things in which, like the prodigal, we had part. So in the Psalms we have the people of God and they are going up, and on the ascent Jerusalem is in view (@Psalm 125). The writer refers to it with emphasis. "Jerusalem!" he says, "mountains are round about her". That is the impression on the mind of the spiritual. The heart is moved as the city comes into view. Then the psalmist adds, as the defences are seen, "Jehovah is round about his people, from henceforth and for evermore".
{262}
Now that gives you what I had in mind, and I hope that the saints will understand the feeling as to Jerusalem. When the Lord, on His last visit, viewed the city He was moved differently. The time of the return of the remnant was not yet, but His own death, the death of the Messiah, was imminent. It was not possible, He said, that a prophet should perish outside of it. Wickedness was so concentrated there. Righteousness must suffer there; dreadful situation! He wept over the city; that was His feeling as He said, "how often would I have gathered thy children as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye would not!", @Matthew 23: 37. Will was at work there, but the time would come when Jerusalem would awake and put on her beautiful garments, when the voice to her would be, "Arise, shine!" (@Isaiah 60: 1); that is yet future. Matthew has that in mind, but not immediately in regard to the literal Jerusalem, but in regard to the spiritual, that is, to the assembly, and my *thought* is to show you that these mountains are round about the assembly. The passages that I have read convey what is implied in the verses from the Psalms.
The light of rule and government now resides in and issues forth from the spiritual Jerusalem which Matthew has in mind. So we have in this gospel such allusions to Jerusalem as "the city of the great King" (@Matthew 5: 35) *which* is a quotation from the Psalms. There is, without question, such a thing as that today, beloved friends, where the rule of Christ and the authority of Christ reside and from which they issue forth. Another beautiful reference is that in @Matthew 27: 52, 53, "Many bodies of the saints fallen asleep arose and ... entered into the holy city". These passages are peculiar to Matthew; they are spiritual references for those who understand the assembly. There is the city of the great King and there is the holy city. These two things go together. Woe be to
{263}
him who disregards the great King. "Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? are we stronger than he?", @1 Corinthians 10: 22. "God is greatly to be feared in the assembly of the saints", @Psalm 89: 7. He is armed with power to enforce His rights.
Then there is the holiness of the city, in which there are spiritual experiences. It says that there were those that rose from the dead and went into the holy city and appeared unto many. I do not say that there is such a thing as that today. There is no connection whatever with those that have fallen asleep *through* Jesus; they are 'asleep' as far as relation with persons and events in this world is concerned. The appearance of some, as risen, in the holy city was a testimony. The city is taken account of as holy, abstractly so, we may say.
Having said so much about the city, I wish to dwell upon these mountains so that everyone will understand a little about them and rest with more security in the city. As we understand the mountains that are round about it, we shall be more restful in it. David says, "Pray for the peace of Jerusalem", @Psalm 122: 6. It is an enclosure, surrounded by these mountains, and the inference is that we dwell there in peace and prosperity.
The first mountain is in chapter 5, and what comes out in regard of it is that the Lord ascended it Himself. The passage preceding this, in the end of chapter 4, gives an epitome of the whole of the wonderful ministry of Christ. Stress is thus laid on the fact that there was such a ministry and that it was so extensive and so effective that crowds upon crowds were moved. But the Lord is not to be thronged, and so He ascends the mountain, and His disciples come to Him. I want to appeal to everybody here. It is very exhilarating indeed to see the crowds, but crowds are deceiving. Many hear the testimony but they have to be tested. The Lord sits down on the mount, meaning that whatever is in the crowd will be tested. He never
{264}
ministers to nature. He tests you by the position He takes up. He sat down. He takes up the attitude of a permanent position-may I call it a fixed position? -- for the moment. He is unmoved by the crowd, unrushed, and not carried off His feet by them, and His disciples came unto Him. What a beautiful picture is this ascending! It is for me as a disciple to learn to ascend and see the Lord in a sitting posture. What a need of teaching there is, beloved friends! You have to do with the Person. He opened His mouth and taught them. What comes out on this first mount is the wonderful perspective that opens up as the Lord continues teaching. I am no longer befogged and many things that I may have questioned now become clear.
First He makes plain to me the kind of people who are blessed. It is a matter of great interest to me. Am I to be amongst them? There are nine different kinds of persons, or, maybe, nine different traits attached to the same person, and they all involve blessing. Can we afford, beloved brethren, to overlook these blessings? We should rather wish to be fully in the good of them. You should, yourself, consider these various blessings; they are very familiar: "Blessed are the poor in spirit"; "Blessed are they that mourn"; "Blessed are the meek". The first thing is the great perspective of blessing that is opened up, and then the kind of people that are blessed, beginning with the poor in spirit. Then you have the Lord's teaching in relation to the law in a variety of ways, and how we are to be in regard to one another: how to pray, how to give alms. You are no longer uncertain as to the kind of people that are to be blessed, and you can tell if you are among them or otherwise. The Lord directly says to those before Him, "Ye are the salt of the earth ... the light of the world". What a position to occupy! That is the first mount of those that surround this wonderful city.
{265}
The next mount is in chapter 14. The Lord, it says, dismisses the multitude. The disciples went into the ship and He went up apart to the mount. You can see that if I take in the wonderful perspective of chapters 5, 6 and 7, which is seen from the first mount, I shall be very dependent. I shall not be self-confident as I hear the Lord going over the ground. I shall become more and more humble. How can I be on this mountain suitably to it? How can I stand on it? Only by dependence. The Lord has gone up; the disciples are not with Him on this mount. It is typical of the present position of Christ as our representative in heaven. He was alone there. There are no intercessory saints in heaven; no prayers there. No one dare occupy any ground like that save Jesus; He is alone in prayer. Marvellous fact for us! we have an Advocate, a great High Priest, Jesus the Son of God. He is occupied in prayer alone. He has no associates. In the greatness of His Person He is great enough to represent us there. The ship is tossed by the waves below; the wind was contrary. Is not that our position?
The next mountain is in the end of chapter 15. The Lord goes up again and now the crowds come. It is the evangelical mountain; everybody can come. And as they are coming the Lord would say, "Lift up your eyes". We must have our eyes opened to see what the Lord is doing. There are those actually ascending the mountain to get to Jesus. In Luke He goes down, but this gospel contemplates the work of God in souls so that the multitude comes with those suffering from every possible kind of disease, and casts them at His feet. They are urgent and they are respectful. They do not say,'It is your business to heal them'. Wherever the work of God is proceeding there is respect for the vessel of God. Why not be respectful? This is the evangelical mount, a very fine mountain among those around Jerusalem. Now the Lord says to His disciples,
{266}
'I want to bring you into this. I have compassion on the multitude; they have been with Me a long time'. I think that the Lord would open our eyes to see what is being done, the kind of thing that is going on, the work of God. And so He feeds the multitude; this feeding has reference to what is on earth; that in chapter 14 refers to heaven. Here the Lord simply gives thanks for the food; He would bring us into what He is doing. Do we see what is going on? Have we a part in it?
The next mountain is in chapter 17. This is one very well known to us but perhaps not hitherto viewed as one of those around the city. There is great spiritual instruction in every one of these mountains, and as we understand them we shall be more restful but more active and energetic. This mountain brings out a certain selective principle that belongs to Christ. When it comes to divine selection I have no choice, but it should make me very concerned. Am I to be left out of this selection? Some will be left out; just three are selected. It is a selective season. This is the mountain in which the principle of divine selection comes to light. Am I to be among those selected? There are some today who have great privileges and they know it, but the Lord is according these privileges to us. I do not deny that the growth of the saints enters into it, but what I would insist upon is that you must accord the principle of divine selection to the Lord. He takes Peter, James and John and goes up. He went up apart in chapter 14 but now He takes them apart. It is an exclusive company, actually separated from others who were doubtless worthy people, but the Lord makes His own selection and He takes them up and takes them up apart. In order to understand this scene it is well to read what Peter says about it in his own words in @2 Peter 1: 18. I am sure that when Peter read this passage in Matthew, or in the other gospels, he would have been very much
{267}
ashamed. But let us dwell on his own account "When we were with him in the holy mount". He thus refers to being consciously in the Lord's company and to what happened there: he speaks of hearing the voice which came from heaven, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased". He is revelling in it. It was a word of prophecy to him. He had not followed cunningly-devised fables in making known the power of the Lord Jesus. He was an eyewitness of the majesty of Jesus. How we need to be impressed with the majesty of Jesus as the Son of man coming in His kingdom! His face was shining as the sun in governmental dignity and power.
What I wanted to point out particularly is that He is to be heard. The apostle says, "Knowing of whom thou hast learned them", @2 Timothy 3: 14. We must understand the person from whom we have learned. Christianity has been initiated by the most wonderful, most glorious Person. That is the point. His majesty is before the mind and then He is to be heard. There is no one else worth listening to. Moses and Elias were great men, but it is this Person who authorised Moses to speak, this very Person.
There is another thing that came to my mind of late; all mediatorial ministry from the very creation down to the present time is through Jesus. All that came out in the Old Testament was through Jesus. Who spoke to Moses in the burning bush? Jesus. Moses was commissioned by the Lord Jesus. He was not a Man then but He was a Person and He was the very Person who said to Elijah, "What doest thou here, Elijah?", @1 Kings 19: 9. Now on this mount there is a voice, "This is my beloved Son ... hear him". Is He not worth hearing? There may be somebody here who is shutting his ears to that voice, the voice of the Son of God. It is wonderful to hear Him. Were He to signify in heaven now that He wished to speak a word all would be hushed there. So what
{268}
about here? The Lord wishes to speak a word and I bow in my soul to listen. Hear Him.
The next mount is in chapter 24. It is a very well known mount, the mount of Olives. It was literally at Jerusalem, but I am not speaking of literal mountains. They are very interesting, but the spiritual, not the literal, is in mind. What is the mount of Olives? The Lord sat on it after He had left the city. When they spoke to Him of the stones of the temple He said, 'They are all coming down'. If I am held by any conspicuous building in this world, or by any great society such as a religious society with a reputation for its learning and antiquity, what does this passage mean to me? It means that the Lord has left it all. Am I going to settle in that which He has left? Am I going to remain in what the Son of God has left? No; I am going to leave it too. It is going to come down about my ears presently; I had better leave it at once.
He sat upon the mount of Olives and His disciples came and made enquiry. He answered, "Take heed that no man deceive you". I only dwell on the Lord's position as sitting on the mount of Olives. That is where He is sitting today.
The final mount is in the last chapter. All I shall do is just to refer to it in the briefest manner. It is the appointed mount. It is as if the Lord said, 'Now meet Me there'. It is a trysting place; you understand that you have to meet the Lord at this mount. It is specially for those that are serving. You love to meet Him there. And the eleven come; it is a broken number, alas! It touches us because we are in a day of breakdown ourselves. They resorted to that trysting place and the Lord met them there. He had made His promise, as it were, and He did not disappoint them. He will never disappoint me if I go to that mountain in every bit of service, but never go to that mount with a doubt in your heart; some doubted
{269}
when they saw the Lord, but they all came and the Lord met them. This is a wonderful word, to my mind, for all those that serve. It was His doing. They worshipped Him, and He then said to them, "All power has been given me in heaven and upon earth. Go therefore and make disciples of all the nations, baptising them to the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit".
What does all this mean? In this last mount it is not a question of His glory; it is a question of His power: "All power has been given me ... Go therefore and make disciples". I recognise His deity. This is the mount that implies that if I am to be here for God I must have some influence. Every one of us has some influence of some kind, but of what kind? Is it the kind that makes disciples to Him? that which brings souls under His tutorship, under His training? And so you see, having gone over these mountains, I have myself arrived at the idea. I take a trip round these mountains, chapters 5, 14, 15, 17, 24, and 28; that would be six mountains. It is a most exhilarating thing to take a trip round these mountains; there is a lesson in each one of them, and when I have learned these lessons, I come to the last mountain. I have influence. What kind of influence? I am not on the line of leading a party; I am thinking of Jerusalem. I do not want to divide up Jerusalem. When David left Jerusalem, he told them to carry the ark back. He will be no party man. The principle is that you leave the ark where it belongs; there is only one assembly.
As I traverse these mountains I become a Jerusalem man. I think of Jerusalem as a whole, not of a fraction of it. I have in mind the heavenly city, the new Jerusalem, and I pray for the peace of Jerusalem. I know these mountains are round about her and my great exercise is to get the people of God into them, and get them instructed so that they understand the
{270}
security of the position; they will dwell in peace. You will understand that what I have had in mind all this time is the assembly. It comes into evidence particularly in this gospel. This is the gospel that tells us that the Lord builds His assembly. He says, "On this rock I will build my assembly, and hades gates shall not prevail against it", @Matthew 16: 18. All these mountains are round about that assembly and I must understand them if I am to be in the good of it.
{271}
THE SPIRIT OF A SHEPHERD
@Romans 10: 18, 19, 21; @Amos 3: 1 - 8, 12
I desire, dear friends, to speak in the spirit of the shepherd. The Scriptures abound with allusions to the shepherd. The idea was abominable to the Egyptians, showing it is not in the world. It is only seen in Christ, and those who are Christ's. And so, in serving now, one would exhibit the spirit of the shepherd, who, it is said here by Amos, would rescue from the lion's mouth whatever he can. The true shepherd will not let the lion have anything, so that he rescues whatever he can, as it is said here, "Two legs, or a piece of an ear". Maybe there are those here over whom the lion has almost secured complete control. Your presence here encourages us for your legs have brought you. That much is an evidence; you have come. And we are hopeful that a part of your ear is still available; were it not so, we might graciously assume you would be elsewhere tonight, listening to some production of this world. Many of us here have been praying about this meeting, and now we are here with a burden on our hearts. You are the occasion of it, you, whom the lion has. We desire you may be recovered wholly from him. The Good Shepherd of the sheep laid down His life to the end that the lion should have none of you, but that *He* should have you, all of you. The Lord is aiming at getting the whole person. He will have us entirely, but He will take what He can get now. And so, as I said, one may graciously assume that, as you have come, your legs have carried you. His legs, His feet carried Him a long way; indeed it is said here in @Romans 10, "How beautiful the feet of them that announce glad tidings of peace, of them that announce glad tidings of good things!". These are, pre-eminently,
{272}
the feet of Jesus, for He walked *all* the way, so to speak. One who was gained by His grace anointed those feet with myrrh (@Luke 7: 38); she, who was a sinner greater than you, than any of us, a sinner in the city, found grace in Jesus. He had carried it a long way to her, and she anointed His feet with myrrh, she washed His feet with her tears and then anointed them. So that if your legs have brought you here now, we may graciously assume that the Lord has those now, and a part of your ear. You have never given the whole of your ears to Christ; you have paid more attention to the voices of this world hitherto. He speaks loudly, we read, so that all may hear, and now the voice goes out to the ends of the earth. But it may be you have never placed yourself within the reach of it. You may have been 'listening-in', as they call it, listening-in to some voice from the pit maybe! You may have given your ears heartily to these voices from the loud-speakers, which would get your ear even if you did not listen-in, for the enemy uses every effort to get it so that you may be secured wholly for this world. There is the man that speaks froward things, who speaks blasphemous things against Christ, and then there is the woman that flatters with her mouth (@Proverbs 2: 12, 16). These all bid for the ears of the young, so that they do not hear the tones of the voice of Christ. But you are here tonight, as I said, and one would graciously assume that your ear is open now.
So I read in @Romans 10 to remind you that you *have already heard*. Evangelisation today is to those who have heard; there are those who attempt to go to the heathen world, where Christ has not been named, but with little result. That was Paul's aim, showing that the position has changed now. His labours were "not where Christ has been named" (@Romans 15: 20), a very difficult matter involving suffering we are not acquainted with now. "Not where Christ has been named",
{273}
those were Paul's labours over a very wide area, as he says, "From Jerusalem, and in a circuit round to Illyricum" he has "fully preached the glad tidings of the Christ". Our work is to *those who have heard*. "Have they not heard?". Israel *had* heard. So today, there is no one who has not heard in a literal sense, and on account of this God holds you peculiarly responsible. This is what I wish to press upon you: "All the day long I have stretched out my hands unto a people disobeying and opposing", *both* His hands, showing how much God was in it in His overtures of grace to His earthly people. Now that applies at the present time, dear friends. God is still holding forth His hands in christendom, in spite of the hardness, the indifference, the blasphemy against Christ, and the sink of iniquity that exists in Christendom, things equal to any that ever existed in heathendom. God is nevertheless maintaining His own dispensation of grace. He is standing forth tonight in thousands of places, stretching forth His hands to a disobeying and opposing people, shall I say? Well, it is for you to answer! Brought up in a godly household, brought up even to attend spiritual meetings, where Jesus has been named with affection, not in a formal religious way, these advantages you have had, and still your heart is as a stone. You have not yet bowed; you come in the class of "a people disobeying and opposing". "All the day long"; and so it is, "I have stretched out my hands" *tonight*, so full of grace! As Christ began to preach, according to @Luke 4: 22, He was full of grace. In His very reading of the Scriptures, and the manner in which He sat down, there was the expression on God's behalf of grace. He was anointed by God, He was everything Himself that He was to announce in the power of the anointing, and so He is still: the Christ crucified, the Christ glorified, the Christ seated at the right hand of God, whatever way He is presented. One of the most
{274}
remarkable things is that grace is reigning, that is, it is dominant, there are no limitations to it; it is grace in the most absolute way, so that the neediest, the blackest sinner may be the subject Of grace. Indeed, in the gospels the Lord singles out the worst people, so that afterwards no sinner should hesitate. God is holding out His hands, in spite Of a people disobeying and opposing. Peter says, "Christ indeed has once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God; being put to death in flesh, but made alive in the Spirit, in which also going he preached to the spirits which are in prison, heretofore disobedient, when the longsuffering Of God waited in the days Of Noah while the ark was preparing",
@1 Peter 3: 18 - 20. It was a time of disobedience, as the present, a time in which few were saved. God was making overtures in a righteous man, an ark-builder, striving with men. And so it is, dear young people, we are here to emphasise in your ears the dominance of grace; it is that power on the throne that overcomes the greatest guilt, the worst possibly conceivable; "that repentance and remission Of sins should be preached in his name to all the nations beginning at Jerusalem" (@Luke 24: 47), the worst possible place on earth then. That is how it stands, and it has been going On all these years. You have heard, but your heart remains unmoved, you are still outside the realm of grace, you have elected to remain there. Presently the hour Of it will have gone for ever! "Ye shall begin to stand without and to knock at the door, saying, Lord, open to us; and he answering shall say to you, I know you not whence ye are: then shall ye begin to say, We have eaten in thy presence and drunk, and thou hast taught in our streets; and he shall say, I tell you, I do not know you whence ye are; depart from me, all ye workers Of iniquity", @Luke 13: 25 - 27. He does not say that now, He knows all about you, and He is here, in me, to convict you, that you may
{275}
be saved. Preaching is to bring home the truth in the power Of the Spirit, to bring about repentance, for there is no hope apart from it.
So in Amos He says, "Hear this word that Jehovah hath spoken against you, children of Israel". Now you see how God is dealing with a people that had had immense privileges, and now they are going to be dealt with according to their advantages. I speak warningly. God will deal with you presently according to your advantages. Yours will be a far more serious matter than that of the dark heathen in Africa. Then He begins to ask questions through Amos, who is a sort Of representative prophet. It is a divine way to ask questions: "Shall two walk together except they be agreed?". Now what about this? You sit down at your father's table in the morning, you go to business with him maybe, and you are on good terms with your mother, your brothers and sisters. But what about this, are you really agreed? You see, down below, in spite of apparent family affection, there is a radical disagreement. You are On a different road from theirs. How can you walk with them? Presently the cleavage will become wider, you are on the broad way and they are On the narrow way. At the table they talk about Jesus, they love Him; it is irksome to you. You would rather read the newspaper, Or a novel. You bear with it, maybe, but underneath there is a disagreement. You are taking the broad way that leads to destruction. It means for you separation for ever, like that rich man Of whom we read, "And in hades lifting up his eyes, being in torments, he sees Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom" (@Luke 16: 23), with no possibility of ever reaching him, for there is a great chasm fixed, it is impassable! How serious it is!
Then there are other questions here, as you will observe. "Will a lion roar in the forest when he hath no prey?". What about this, what about the noise of
{276}
the lion? Your parents hear. The lion may not have you altogether, but it is said, "Your adversary the devil as a roaring lion walks about seeking whom he may devour", @1 Peter 5: 8. Wake up, young man, you may not know it, but this is the position. And then again, "Can a bird fall in a snare upon the earth when no gin is laid for him?". You see all this alludes to the catching of souls by the world system. You have no wings, you have not even your sins forgiven, and the snare is set for you. He does not catch anything that has wings; you see, the Christian has wings. "Shall a trumpet be blown in the city, and the people not be afraid?". That is another matter. The trumpet of God has been blown, thank God, and some are afraid; so the Lord says, "Fear not those who kill the body and after this have no more that they can do. But I will shew you whom ye shall fear: Fear him who after he has killed has authority to cast into hell; yea, I say to you, Fear him", @Luke 12: 4, 5. The trumpet is blowing tonight, will you not hear, will you not be afraid? Not that God would bring terror into your heart, yet He would terrorise you that He might save you! "For there is revealed wrath of God from heaven upon all impiety, and unrighteousness of men holding the truth in unrighteousness", @Romans 1: 18. Indeed, in Christians the mark of piety is that they fear God, but you go about with your head lifted up as though there were no God.
These questions are very searching, but I would especially press this, as to whether you are ready to meet God. What about it? Terror shall surely set hold of you. Instead of that gracious countenance of which I have spoken, the heavens and the earth shall flee away from His countenance. How can you meet God, in Christ, thus? As Luther said, 'The judge of all mankind appears'. "The dead, great and small", we are told, stand before Him (@Revelation 20: 12). You
{277}
are not allowed to escape. May God work in your conscience; *now* the trumpet sounds!
And so there are other things here, but I want to come to the shepherd. You will observe in @Amos 3: 12 it says, "Like as the shepherd rescueth out of the jaw of the lion two legs, or a piece of an ear; so shall the children of Israel be rescued that sit in Samaria in the corner of a couch, and upon the damask of a bed". I have been speaking of the shepherd spirit. I want now to call attention to the energies of the shepherd; although the setting of this prophecy is in magnificence, it is in relation to a people who are reprobate and in Samaria, living in affluence. The allusion to the couch and the bed is a question of luxury. The bed of Damascus is the idea of a rich luxurious resting place. That is, enjoying the mercies of God, enjoying luxury, and leaving God out, leaving the Creator out. It may be you are striving for this very thing, young man or young woman. You have had before you a position in this world, a well-furnished house in time, and so on. It is the present world, the world of luxury; the standard of living is very different from what it used to be in the memory of many of us; many are going into debt, to live in luxury, living on the future. They are going to sleep, and leaving God out. Satan will rock them to sleep in their luxury. God has not changed one whit: man may become luxurious, a rich man aspires to great things, but God has not changed. He has fixed the time of His grace, and He keeps on at it.
The Lord is here in great solicitation to get your soul and rescue you from the lion's mouth, for that is where you are. David, you will remember, the great type of Christ, took the lamb from the lion and the bear (@1 Samuel 17: 34 - 36). The shepherd will have *you entirely*, not only your legs or your ear. It was a dual attack. We know the Lord has us entirely, we belong to Him; for us He has slain the lion and the
{278}
bear, but not for those who have not faith. Satan still goes about and he has got you. David took the whole lamb, and slew the lion and the bear; that is Christ in fulfilment. But we are trying to get you now, in a humble way. Will you not give Him your ear tonight? Listen to His voice, accept the offers of mercy and forgiveness: "Through this man remission of sins is preached to you, and from all things from which ye could not be justified in the law of Moses, in him every one that believes is justified", @Acts 13:38, 39.
All these things, and more are offered to you. Will you not have Him? Will you not give your ears to Christ? He will then have your whole person, now, and for eternity!
{279}
A WOMAN OF WORTH
@Judges 1: 12 - 15; @Judges 3: 9, 10
The Old Testament makes little of the idea of celebration in connection with marriage; it is not a question of how it is done but of necessity.
What comes out in the scriptures I have read is that the wife is considered of value. Her father considered her of such value as to be an incentive to the man to make a sacrifice. A similar incitement is seen in Jacob, of whom it is said that he "served for a wife, and for a wife he kept sheep". It is a side of the subject that brings in Christ in a touching manner, for He regarded the church as worth having, as worthy of sacrifice. It was no small matter in His mind, nothing common, but an object worthy of Himself. "He gave himself", a side that is touching, oft-repeated but most touching. He regarded the assembly as worthy of that. Caleb regards Achsah as worthy of the sacrifice of someone. This service to be rendered, the capture of Kirjath-sepher, was a matter of great importance to Caleb; that city represented an element of the world he knew to be very damaging, a book town (Kirjathsepher means 'City of books' ). It must be removed, being an element his spirituality discerned would interfere with the working out of his desires among the people of God, and which must be overthrown.
It is most important for a brother in his position as head of a house to refuse to allow in his house books containing the evil which is developing in the world. There can be no spiritual life in any household where such books are allowed. One could give a list of them. Kirjath-sepher must be overthrown and it was. Othniel secured his object. Achsah is placed in a position which enhances her; not to be a slave, not merely a worker, but an object worthy of sacrifice.
{280}
Chapter 3 shows how he persevered, marked by military energy, the sequel to his capture of Kirjathsepher. The secret is his not allowing books to hinder. This calls for brothers who are heads of houses to stand against the evil of books. "He judged Israel; and he went out to war". It shows how valuable such a brother would be, one who as head of a house would not allow this evil, a thing that cuts at the root of spiritual growth. He goes out to war and the king of Mesopotamia is given into his hands. Mesopotamia means 'two rivers'. It speaks of the resourcefulness of the world; the king had immense influence in the way of fruitfulness in his power-he attacks. The man who has taken Kirjathsepher can meet this attack; it has to be met in the power of the Spirit of God.
God sympathises with such unions as this. They are the result of legitimate desires. The establishing of a household is a matter of great importance with Him; a union formed in the Lord and, as such, a pattern of Christ and the assembly. These features are in the mind of God. The military features seen in Othniel are not taken on in natural energy, but in the power of the Spirit of God. A brother cannot judge Israel unless he can judge his own house.
The wife here was obviously a worthy object, a woman of great worth, and Othniel sacrifices for her. The thing is, can she continue? A woman usually instinctively begins well, but can she continue? Achsah's instincts were right. First she moves Othniel to ask of her father a field. Then, we are told, she sprang off her ass, a comely thing, respectfulness before her father, but it also shows she is marked by spiritual energy which is always attractive. She had been given a south land, given an advantage. These young people have been given an advantage, the prayers that have been uttered for them have touched my heart and, I hope, have touched theirs, but that will not hold them.
{281}
The springs of water, for which Achsah asked, are necessary, freshness, particularly for the wife. Then Othniel goes on; first judging his own house, then the house of God; then in conflict for the saints. "The Spirit of Jehovah was upon him, and he judged Israel; and he went out to war".
{282}
DIVINE URGENCY
@Luke 14: 21 - 23; @Acts 10: 44; @Haggai 1: 2 - 4; @Haggai 2: 5
I have in mind, dear brethren, the divine urgency which has a great place in Scripture, sometimes bearing against what is evil, as we read in Timothy: "The Spirit speaketh expressly", and sometimes in relation to the development and maintenance of the truth. The Holy Spirit became urgent, indeed we are reminded of that very fact that there should always be an ear open to what the Spirit says, and we should not be forgetful of what is said or has been said. What He says is necessary to the understanding of what He has said, in keeping with the principle in Revelation indicated in the reference to Christ as, "He who is, and who was, and who is to come". He who *is* is first: what He was and what He will be, become intelligible as we understand what He is.
So the Spirit is speaking: the enemy would always be bent on clouding, or shutting out, or deafening our ears to what the Spirit says. We must never assume He is silent; He is always saying something, and our safety lies in hearing what He says. So He speaks "expressly" as it is the more urgent. Therefore, whatever the evil, and the enemy is specially against the service of God, you may be sure the Spirit will say something immediately. But I have in mind to speak of divine urgency in regard of the church, that is, what is positive. The Lord has His feelings and affections and desires, dear brethren, and they are never interfered with; He is patient in reaching His ends, but He is urgent, and He would have us to understand what He says.
So I read that well-known chapter in Luke because of the urgency of the second mission of the servant. It is just one servant in this chapter, whilst in @Matthew 22
{283}
there are servants, more than one. The service is in that way more concentrated, evidently in such worthy hands, but there is great urgency that the house may be filled. Now that refers to the gospel, but what I have in mind refers to the *mystery* of the gospel. In asking for the prayers of the saints, the apostle Paul stresses that they should pray for him particularly, indeed entirely, that he might open his mouth with boldness to speak of "the mystery of the gospel", something wrapped up in the gospel involving a secret, involving what God's heart cherishes; that is to say, the assembly was unfolded as it was to take form, as its service Godward should develop. That is what is so urgent in the apostle's request, in his prayer on the part of the brethren. The words that he uses indicate plainly enough that it was a difficult matter to unfold the mystery of the gospel. It was not that he could not put it into words or write it down, but that it should find an intelligent acceptance in the saints. The hearing was poor in that regard, and it required special power to make known the mystery of the gospel, what God would have for Himself.
So you find as it is relative to the incoming of the gentiles it is marked with urgency; no delay should be allowed, and what comes out in @Luke 15 is that the father of the prodigal *runs* immediately. One person is in view there, whereas in chapter 14 the servant was to go out into the streets and lanes of the cities, the ways and the fences; and there is nothing said as to the qualities or qualifications in the persons that are to be brought in. But in @Luke 15 qualifications are discerned, the movements of the prodigal were seen; they were the movements not of a prodigal but of a repentant sinner; the movements of a prodigal are not evident but to call forth sorrow, but there are the returning movements of a repenting sinner! Even at a distance they call forth admiration, and that
{284}
admiration becomes intensified as the footsteps of the repentant sinner came nearer and nearer to God, until he is actually inside. That is what I wish to dwell on, dear brethren, the pleasure in one, not in the number from the streets and lanes of the city, the ways and fences of the world, but in the quality of one: first, a repentant sinner, then a confessing sinner (these things make the person's movements most interesting to God), and then the caress, where divine love begins to find its satisfaction: "His father ... covered him with kisses". I cannot say it was literal, but it shows how complacent the father was in the whole person, for it is no less than that. The mystery involves the whole person being secured, in spirit, soul and body, so that the body of the person is covered. It is not now the atoning work of Christ; surely he is covered in regard of that; he knows the blessedness of covering in relation to forgiveness, but he knows too the unspeakable blessedness of what it is to be covered with kisses.
Then there are all the movements until the returned one is inside; it is within that love is complacent, not only is there the kissing but the atmosphere is pervaded with love, love in activity, love in a scene that expresses what heaven is; the very best is there. There is the music and dancing to show what is inside, where the Father can express Himself as to what is heavenly. You can understand, therefore, dear brethren, the urgency that there is in regard of what is hidden, in order that the house may be filled. So that the incoming ones synchronise with divine counsel, coming from all quarters, from the streets and lanes of the city, from the ways and fences, and inside they discover divine interest, and the nearer they draw to God the more sensitive they are of divine interest. Inside too they find their names are in the book of life, and not only in the book of life but in the counsels of God, foreknown to Him. Their names are known to the
{285}
Father in the sweet counsels of eternity, the counsels of love. So that there are those suited to the place, and clothed in all the dignity of the place, set free in freedom, indwelt by the spirit of adoption, and capable of sharing in the very best; for this wonderful chapter describes divine lavishment! Love is telling itself out, what it can do for its own satisfaction! So the house comes into view, and the music and the dancing. Well now, I want to show you how this fits in with @Acts 10, indeed @Acts 10 is the historical fulfilment of this parable. I had in mind to show that the quality indicated in the returning prodigal appears in the house of that Roman officer in the city of Caesarea. It is a well-known chapter of many, forty-eight, verses, full of interest. We have from the very outset of the chapter the beautiful avenue leading up to the great event; much of the chapter is preliminary but verse 44 is the great event. The great apostle Peter is active; if he is treading the avenue, he will tread it with suitable steps, suitable affection, suitable intelligence, he will be prepared.
First of all we get the centurion himself, Cornelius, and how remarkable is divine wisdom that it should select one, a military officer! A military man is brought forth to show forth this supreme act of God, but such is the divine thought; God's thoughts, beloved, are not ours, as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are His thoughts higher than ours. But He knows His man, for from eternity are all His works as all those with whom He works. God's work is all of one great piece, beloved, with one great end in view, the satisfaction of His own heart. He knows His man, and makes no mistake; so He takes up a military officer, the centurion of Caesarea, and prepares him so that the work should proceed, that it should proceed with the divine stamp on it.
So the chapter runs on from one event to another; an angel comes down to the Roman officer as he
{286}
prayed, for it says he was known to pray and give alms; a soldier servant is employed; then there is the great apostle on the house-top; a sheet is let down from heaven thrice; then there are the messengers at the door. Peter was illumined by the sheet and by the voice, and he journeys to Caesarea in company with six brethren and the messengers-what a company! What delight to heaven was every move and every step in that shining way, until Caesarea and the house of the officer, the centurion, are reached. Then Peter and the centurion enter together, conversing on equal terms; Peter has ceased to be the Jew in any sense; he is now one man with another, both of them subjects of God's work, brethren in that sense. Then inside, what a company is gathered! We may be assured that the dignity and the ceremony connected with an officer are not in evidence. It is a divine scene, a scene indicating divine operations, far transcending anything that ever happened in Caesar's palace! Then Peter opened his mouth and preached; no-one could do better! God had pleasure in his speaking and He is not deprived of that pleasure. Let the speaking go on; let nothing interfere with the pleasure of God, that nothing else should take place. No! the preaching goes on, but something besides happened. What happened? "While Peter was yet speaking ... the Holy Spirit fell upon all those who were hearing the word". It was nothing less than the word of God. It was no doubt a remarkable address for the occasion; it was the word of God, and they were listening to the word and God knew the effect of the word on them; their ears were opened, they were hearing and the Holy Spirit fell on them. He did not wait; the matter was *urgent*; not that Cornelius and his company could not have waited, but it was urgent from the divine side. On another occasion there was not the same urgency; that was when Peter and John had to come down
{287}
from Jerusalem to Samaria so that Philip's converts might receive the Spirit. Urgency was not *their* need, therefore, but the *divine* need; just as the caress received by the prodigal was not a question of the prodigal's need but of the Father's heart, the Father's need. It was urgent, so here it was urgent, not to meet the need of the hearers, but to meet the divine necessity that the Holy Spirit might fall upon them.
So the Holy Spirit fell on them; it is the same word as is used to describe the action of the father with the prodigal. It expresses profound interest and affection; that now they were coming into the mind of God for time and all eternity, for the completion of the assembly. Not that the assembly had not existed at the coming of the Spirit at Pentecost, but it is the assembly in another setting. Pentecost is not the assembly exclusively as it appears later. In @Revelation 20 and 21 we have the exterior, a greater glory surely, but as to the interior the city is the glory. That is not an external idea but an internal form. It is through Paul's ministry that the love of God is fully known. That is where John and Paul meet. It came out of the death of Christ, the ministry of the new covenant. It is through Him that he had come to understand that the love of God is brought in here, and it becomes a known thing in our hearts, that is the ministry of the new covenant. That is what is internal and that is the secret of the city having the glory of God. As the assembly has been developed in Paul's ministry, the Lord's supper being a simple thought in it, these affections are being developed and divine urgency is required; nothing can interfere with or impede these developments. So the gentiles coming thus into view on that occasion brought out this urgency on the part of God; so that the Holy Spirit, we are told, fell on all those who heard the word. It was a divine action. It was not merely a mediatorial thing-the Holy Spirit is God. It was
{288}
*God's* action: it was not less than that. It is a marvellous thought, dear brethren, God Himself acted in this way, this energetic way so that He might have His heart fully satisfied, and that with the assembly. That is the beginning, the basis, of all that follows in the wonderful ministry of Paul.
Well now, I want to show how the Old Testament confirms this. Haggai bears on our own time and illustrates the great value of the Old Testament. This little book serves in a very striking way to illustrate the value of the Old Testament to us. So we have here the idea that is so prevalent today: that saying, "The time is not come, the time that Jehovah's house should be built". Think of that! The time *had* come in the days of Moses, how many years back I am not prepared to say-hundreds and hundreds of years before. The time *had* come. Had God altered His mind? No, beloved, He had *not* altered His mind. In those days of small things in regard of His house, He was as in earnest as when He spoke to Moses on the mount after Israel had come out of Egypt. So He is as urgent in regard of the assembly today as He was at Pentecost. Be the day small, as Zechariah tells us, "a day of small things", be it so, that does not interfere with divine urgency as to the assembly.
"The time is not come" they say. How bold! How deceptive too! How darkening! The time is long and the house of Jehovah is not built. The Lord resents our tardiness and the darkening influence of our words. We may think our words are of little account, but they are either darkening or enlightening. We have to watch our words and the motive behind them. How much criticism is there of what God is doing? You may be criticising those who serve; the work and who is doing it. He resents it; He says, "Consider your ways". You do not speak thus of your ceiled houses, but God's house lays desolate,
{289}
and you say, "The time is not come"! "Consider your ways".
Well now, it is not criticising but I touch on one thing that we may *say*. It is what they say; they were not doing anything, but they were justifying their indifference to the house of God in their words and the Lord resents it.
But it is very delightful to see how the scene changed. In the course of five or six weeks this message by Jehovah's messenger brought about a great change, and the people began to work and to work with a will. When God rouses us, dear brethren, the time *has* come. The time is continuing and God is calling for energy. It is urgent from His side. So He urges them to go up to the mount in this chapter; that means exercise; that means strenuousness; that means putting aside carelessness and criticism of the people of God. They went to work and the verses beautifully present it that *we* might be in the work, that there might be an *incentive* to be in it. The house is going to be filled with the glory of God, *filled* with it! What glory? Not the glory of this world but Jehovah's glory! It reminds us of what He had covenanted with us from the outset: the disposition of His heart towards us; that remains. That is what He says in these verses: the disposition of His heart, the kisses of the prodigal, that energetic action of the Spirit at Caesarea all involve the love of God; that remains, there is no change. "He who is, and who was, and who is to come".
'My covenant', He says, 'remains with you'. One of the striking features of the ministry for many years back, forty years or so especially, is that the Holy Spirit has insisted on the disposition of God towards us in Christ: "The love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord". It is in Him and He brings it into our hearts, for He is the great Administrator of it. "The Lord is the Spirit, but where the Spirit of the
{290}
Lord is, there is liberty". How precious is the thought that remains with us? "Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty" and then "*We* all, looking on the glory of the Lord, with unveiled face, are transformed ...". We are reminded in these verses of what remains, and remains with you. "The word ... and my Spirit, remain among you". Think of the patience of God in leaving the Holy Spirit among us! "Among you", He says. That blessed Comforter the Lord sent down "abides with you and shall be in you". He remains among us and is the guarantee for the glory. It will fill the house of God. It is not now filling the people but filling the house with glory, marvellous word!
Some of us may say, "How is it that the former days were better than these?". We do not speak intelligently, if we say that. It is not that we make little of the former times, for Pentecost means much in volume and filling power too. But then let us not say, "The former days were better than these", because it means we are not enjoying the Lord Jesus now; we are not *enjoying* Him who is. If the former days were better than these there is something the matter. "He who is" is here; God is here by the Spirit, and indeed, that is one of the great features of the gentile position. "*Ye* also are built together for a habitation of God in the Spirit". The habitation of God! God Himself is the glory, what can be greater than that? Is it not urgent? It is! It is *most* urgent. That is the great testimony, the presence of God here in the Spirit.
So He goes on; He challenges those who saw the house and He says, "The latter glory of this house shall be greater than the former". There are not two houses. In that day the house began with Moses; indeed I might say with Jacob, but properly with Moses; it is the same house. The latter glory of it will be greater. Now the conditions of the house
{291}
should correspond with divine urgency! What about our ceiled houses? Can they hold the great divine thought, a love to be filled with glory? The glory of the latter is to exceed the glory of the former.
Well, that is all I had to say; I am sure the dear brethren will recognise that it is *something*; although known before to some extent, perhaps not in the same way, as indicative of divine urgency for conditions for the satisfaction of God's heart.
{292}
THE SPIRIT OF A BONDMAN
@Philippians 2: 1 - 11
The epistle starts with Paul referring to himself and Timotheus as *bondmen* of Jesus Christ. This is significant in view of what is before us in the verses read, indicating the kind of spirit necessary in approaching a subject so profound and holy. "The supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ" (chapter 1: 19) combined with lowliness of mind referred to in chapter 2: 3, are both essential if we are to apprehend the truth the Lord is developing at the present time as to His Person. The merely natural mind and intelligence must be excluded and a state of soul found with us giving liberty to the Holy Spirit to impress us with His thoughts and to form us intelligently as to them. This state of soul was found amongst the saints at Philippi, giving the apostle perfect freedom to address them, not as apostle but as *bondman*.
The mind in Christ Jesus is as He became Man. The designation 'Christ Jesus' does not apply to Him as in absolute Deity. Esteeming it not an object of rapine to be on an equality with God has to do with the mind of Christ Jesus in manhood. He was consciously "on an equality with God". The mind of humiliation does not properly belong to God *as God*. @Psalm 113 no doubt anticipates the incarnation. There is a tendency with us to put back into the Deity human thinking. The mind in Christ Jesus does not refer to human thoughts as in deity. It is the mind that is proper to Man, and is undoubtedly mentioned here in comparison with that of Adam, one Man in contrast to another.
"Subsisting in the form of God": we have to leave that as beyond us. The expression of His substance (@Hebrews 1) is not what we have here. The
{293}
expression of the thing is not the thing itself. Substance denotes what God is *essentially*. Christ as Man was the expression of this. It is not a superficial thing. What God is was there in its root principle. @Philippians 2 is the form of God, conveying not merely what is eternal, but what is substantial. "Subsisting in the form of God" conveys that it is not an appearance taken on. It had no beginning; it was *not* taken. The form of bondman was taken. "Subsisting in the form of God" has a past setting in @Philippians 2, and so the passage does not warrant our saying it applies now. The Lord may take up the form of God-who can say?-though not permanently, as we should never see Him then. We cannot limit divine Persons. The form of God is a condition which was never taken-it was always there. The statement as to it here shuts out speculation. It is not said that the Lord left the form of God, but a change in this respect is clearly intimated. Inscrutability enters into the passage, and we are unsafe if we do not bow to this, maintaining it in our minds. This chapter does not permit us to say that Christ *subsists* in the form of Man, and yet it shows in the strongest way that He took human condition in the fullest sense, sin apart. As to the glory referred to in @John 17: 5, we do not know what it was, we can hardly say it was the form of God.
"But emptied himself". We cannot say He emptied Himself of any thing. This refers to the taking of the bondman's form; two sides, as it were of the same thing. The scripture makes the emptying Himself synchronise with taking a bondman's form; to make it an act of mind in deity is too definite as making the Lord do something in the sense of humbling Himself as in deity, before taking the bondman's form, which does not seem to conform to the way Scripture states the truth. We cannot use the word 'emptying' without modification in our minds. As already said, we
{294}
have to leave "subsisting in the form of God" as beyond us. His personality does not alter. Equality is bound up with His personality. @John 5 stands as manifesting in the Lord a marvellous blending of equality in subjection. The emptying Himself is a divine pattern for us, but seen in Manhood. There could be no pattern for us in Deity (the inscrutable).
"A bondman's form" is not only physical but involves attitude of mind. Primarily human form was not bond-service. In @John 13 when the Lord sits at table it is not in bondman's form, but when He rises from supper and girds Himself to serve it is. But then, the service concluded, He resumes His place as sitting, and He is then no longer in that attitude of mind. We cannot say that bondman's form may not be taken by the Lord now. @Exodus 21 would show that it may. Bondman service involves the extent to which love will go and we cannot limit the Lord in the exercise of His prerogative to serve in this way even when in glorified condition (see @Luke 12: 37). He is bondman to His Master but Husband to His wife and Father to His children (@Exodus 21: 5, 6).
"Taking his place in the likeness of men" would be that He was outwardly like an ordinary man, as one of the race. It would no doubt specially be seen in His private life. "Is not this the son of the carpenter? Is not his mother called Mary? and his brethren James, and Joseph, and Simon, and Judas?", @Matthew 13:55. He was distinguished amongst men at His baptism when He was anointed, the Spirit descending upon Him in bodily form as a dove.
"And having been found in figure as a man". God says at His baptism: "In whom I have found my delight", @Matthew 3: 17.
"Humbled himself". This is connected here with the figure of a man, not with bondman's form, which is surely significant. The glory of His humiliation was seen from the outset, but it is not the Babe nor
{295}
the Youth of twelve years, but the Man-found here in figure as a Man who "humbled himself, becoming obedient even unto death"; it would go with the anointing of Christ at His baptism.
"Taking"-the word implies that it was His prerogative to take.
Creation is not infinite, but God is infinite, and He having come into the creation, we are in an environment in which we shall be fixed eternally. We are in infinity, not lost in it; we are there intelligently, being "filled even to all the fulness of God".
@1 Timothy 6: 15, 16. The Lord Jesus Christ, it would appear, is included in that. The inscrutable enters into the passage.
@Ephesians 4: 10. He has ascended up above all heavens. Though Man, it involves His deity, as filling all things.
@John 5: 19. "The Son can do nothing of himself" is not a reference to His power, which is ever undiminished, but to His choice. Having taken up the position of subjection and relative inferiority to the Father, He is in keeping with it. Reference to the triumvirate at one time ruling over the ancient Roman empire is illustratively helpful. One of the three might be a general and he would go down to the battlefield and serve and give his orders as such. In serving thus he did not cease to be an emperor or on equality with the other two, nor did his prerogative as such cease, although in abeyance. This is suggestive of what is found in John where the beautiful blending of equality in subjection is seen in the Son. He asserts there that they must honour the Son as they honour the Father.
@1 Corinthians 15: 28. The place the Son is in is not imposed upon Him. It says, "Then the Son also himself shall be placed". It does not say who does it. He will represent the great principle of subjection, but
{296}
we cannot say He will always (during every moment, so to speak) be that.
As already mentioned, the apostle in writing to the Philippians speaks of himself and Timotheus as bondmen. It is blessed to be such and maintained as such, as we are not likely to vie with one another as bond men. The verses read (@Philippians 2: 5 - 11) are intended to impress us in this way. They are like a jewel of gold set in its right place-not in a swine's snout (@Proverbs 11: 22)-coming as they do in an epistle addressed to a company of saints such as was found at Philippi. Lydia would be amongst them. She was one who attended to the things spoken by Paul. She would be a most attentive listener to him. The letter would be read perhaps in her house. They might say, 'Well, evidently the Lord left the form of God', but Lydia would say, 'No, Paul does not say that', and if one said, 'The Lord would give up the form of a bondman', she would use the same negative words. She attended to what he spoke. We likewise want to habituate ourselves to attend to what Scripture says. We get more disclosures as we continue to listen. The Lord will go on speaking as we go on listening (see @Luke 19: 11).
{297}
FREEDOM FROM CLASS DISTINCTION
@Acts 13: 1; @1 Corinthians 11: 17 - 22; @1 Corinthians 12: 13
J.T. I hope we may see from these verses how God undertook to establish unity in spite of class distinction. The human race is divided into nations and subdivided into tribes and classes, social and religious. God accepted all this and undertook to establish unity notwithstanding, and the divine record in the Acts and in the epistles shows how these classes were drawn from through the gospel. Their existence, the existence of class, was fully owned to be militating against the unity, and yet the unity was established, so that note is taken in the Acts by the Spirit of classes of humanity out of which material is drawn for the assembly. At Pentecost a large number were affected without any mention of their distinctions, but from chapter 3 onwards we have allusions to different personages right through the book, and these are also noticed in the epistles, and it is shown that, whilst the external relations may not have been much affected, the spirits of those who received the gospel were released from the influence of class, so that, in these verses read, we have all been made to drink of one Spirit. We are thus so graced, bond or free. The distinctions are owned, but the means whereby we escape the distinctions are noted, that is, the Spirit. I am led to this because of the observance of the influence of class amongst the brethren. I do not mean what is sometimes regarded as classes, that is, those who belong to the upper grades of society, but more particularly the lower grades of society. The influence of class is greater in the lower grades than in the upper grades. That is the difficulty, to overcome the conditions into which one is born and brought up publicly, so that the unity may be reached, the unity
{298}
that God intended, and I suggested the verse in Acts, that well-known verse, because it gives us such a variety of classes outwardly in the persons mentioned, five different persons mentioned, each drawn from a class of his own, but they are together now in spirit. They are in the assembly at Antioch, but they are obviously together in spirit.
A.N. Would you get it illustrated in @Revelation 5: 9, the divine victory; "And hast redeemed to God, by thy blood, out of every tribe, and tongue, and people, and nation"?
J.T. That is a good illustration of it. God, taking full account of the diversity, drew from every tribe and tongue and people and nation; not only so, but the subdivision of every tribe and tongue and people and nation, the different grades of society, the different callings or vocations of man are noted.
J.M. Do you mean that although we may remain in our own calling naturally, we move out of it in spirit?
J.T. That is what I mean exactly. God never intended the communist idea as it is understood, but He did intend a community of common interest in a spiritual way, so that the saints are together spiritually on the same level. The rich is to glory in his humiliation, but the poor in his elevation. That means elevation spiritually, that he emerges from the peculiarity of his class and is unaffected by it in the assembly. You see how persons begin to be noticed after @Acts 3. We have a lame man and a beggar. How was he to emerge from his class?
R.P. Is this unity brought about by all drinking of one Spirit?
J.T. That is the secret. We have all been made to drink of one Spirit; that is the power of it.
R.P. Is that an allusion to the cup?
J.T. It is. You can see how classes begin to be noticed. Take the man at the gate of the temple.
{299}
There were many beggars; the idea of asking alms was a common enough thing, and it has its own effect on a man who does that. It affects him, it gives him character. If God converts him, how is he to emerge from that? Unless he does so he is useless in the assembly. Then we have a man like Barnabas, who had means, was a Levite and belonged to a class. His class would militate against the truth of the unity as much as the beggar's. Then we have the Ethiopian who belonged to a class. His class would greatly interfere with the unity. There was not only his racial, but his national distinction, and his office, too. All those would militate against the unity. Then we find Saul of Tarsus, who belonged to a class. Then we have Cornelius who belonged to a class, a military class. He was not a common soldier, he was an officer, the kind of calling that is peculiarly against the unity of the Spirit, and so we get the deputy in Cyprus and Lydia and the jailer and Timotheus and so on, the Holy Spirit noting the difference of class. We get the women of the upper classes mentioned. So in this verse we have Barnabas and Saul, already alluded to, and we have a nobleman, and Niger, a black man, and we have the Cyrenian, who was also distinctive. He is called the Cyrenian, meaning that the idea characterised him, that is, he belonged to a nation and he was characterised by the term, the Cyrenian. There they are. God knows all about them. How are they to emerge from their classes and take on the common ground of the Spirit?
S.W. Would that be seen in the lame man whom Peter took by the right hand?
J.T. That is right; he lifted him up.
A.N. Luke, in addressing his gospel, speaks of the "most excellent Theophilus", but in Acts where it is a question of assembly material, and assembly formation, the 'excellent' is dropped. He is coming on to a common level, would you think?
{300}
J.T. That illustrates what I was saying. He is now equal to it. As our brother remarked, Peter gave his right hand to the lame man, but he did not give him the least clue that he would make him more socially. He says, "Silver and gold I have not". He held out no encouragement to him that he would be advanced socially or financially; there was to be no advantage on that line.
G.C. Are you suggesting that in @Acts 13 we get what is according to the mind of God in the assembly in its normal setting?
J.T. That is right. I think these five men are mentioned as a concrete example of what we were saying, that they emerged from their classes. They were no longer resting in their classes, whether high or low.
J.McL. Do you think that distinctions would cease as we come into the truth of the body?
J.T. Yes. With Theophilus the 'excellent' would be dropped. That is attached to him in the flesh. He would discard it himself. Evidently Luke would not discard it if he did not know that Theophilus had emerged to that extent.
D.McI. I suppose, first, we have to see that it is God's thought that we should emerge. Philip had no hesitation in approaching the Ethiopian.
J.T. The Spirit of God directed him to do it. I do not suppose he would have ventured to join the chariot otherwise. As he joined the chariot I apprehend there would be such grace in his movements, such spiritual power in his movements, that would commend him to the eunuch. The eunuch would not resent his joining. The point was "join thyself".
J.C. Do you think that what would preserve us from such distinctions in the assembly would be the maintenance of the truth as to what Peter saw in the vessel brought down from heaven? "Of a truth I perceive that God is no respecter of persons, but in
{301}
every nation he that fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him", @Acts 10: 34, 35.
J.T. I think that is good. We can observe that what was immediately in mind was the line of distinction, very galling to the flesh, and in a man like Peter, who was a fisherman by calling, the thoughts and feelings attached to his calling might be there; his religious feelings were there certainly. 'Well', he might say, 'I do not expect much from him, from a Roman officer'. I mean to say, that is what I would be apt to say, or any of us who had to look up very high to a man like that. We might feel that that man is not likely to yield to God, but God would say, 'I can work in that man so that he emerges from his class, so that he sees that there is something better than his class'.
J.W. Would classes have the effect of persecuting the saints? Think of the Lord saying to Saul, "Why persecutest thou me?". Would that be the finish of class for Saul?
J.T. Quite so; during those three days who knows what he went through in his heart and mind? During those three days God was working in his soul. He had much to unlearn. Take one like the man who had been laid at the gate of the temple. What had he to be delivered from? You say, 'Nothing', but he had. He had a constitution developed by that occupation, by that state, and it might be just as hard for him to get out of that as for Saul to get out of his class. That is perhaps what we do not see.
R.M. Was the end reached when the lame man came into the temple walking and leaping and praising God?
J.T. I think so. The right thought was conveyed to him, "Silver and gold I have not". That was what was in his mind. He was thinking of silver and gold, glad to take anything, but the more the better! He looked as though he expected those things, but that
{302}
state of mind had to be changed. He could never be in the assembly with any such a mind as that, expecting alms.
F.F.R. His thoughts must have moved on a very low level, but the scripture says, "And leaping up he stood and walked". Does this suggest that he moved out of this condition to a higher level morally?
J.T. He escaped. He emerged from the state of his class, otherwise he could not be alongside Peter and John. They had emerged too.
W.B. He could emerge from his class without getting into a higher social class.
J.T. There was no proposal of any elevation socially. You cannot have social elevation without money. People may talk about it but it cannot be sustained without money, and we may as well face that, and it was money that was in his mind. If that man got a million, well, he would emerge into another class socially, maybe, but that was not the idea. The idea was that he might emerge from the class he was brought up in and be in the assembly.
W.B. The apostle said in @1 Corinthians 7:22, "For the bondman that is called in the Lord is the Lord's freedman; in like manner also the freeman being called is Christ's bondman. Ye have been bought with a price". Is that the idea?
J.T. That is the idea. You may remain a bondman outwardly, but you change in spirit; you are the Lord's freedman; and you may be a freeman outwardly, but you are the Lord's bondman.
A.N. So it would be seen in the epistle to Philemon, that the social relations between Philemon and Onesimus outwardly remain. Onesimus might remain a slave, but when the apostle speaks of him he says, "a beloved brother".
J.T. That is an excellent illustration. How different it would be! Onesimus might have to clean his master's boots, as before, and do everything that a
{303}
slave had to do, but how different would be his spirit! He would sit down with Philemon in the assembly as a brother. He was greater inwardly than outwardly.
G.B.D. One would appreciate the grace that takes him from the dunghill and sets him among princes.
J.T. That is what will affect one-sets them among princes according to God, princes as illustrated in Jacob, princes who had the Spirit. It is the universal working of this principle that I think is not seen. It may be seen in a partial way with persons who have social distinctions, but it should operate in them. But then it is also needed in the lower grades of society as much as in the upper.
J.M-n. This would include everything from the cedar to the hyssop.
J.T. So that in @1 Corinthians 12 the drinking is all from our side, the side of the classes, whether Jew or gentile, or bond or free, we have all been made to drink of one Spirit, and in the new man there is neither one nor the other in Christ Jesus. In Galatians there is neither Jew nor gentile, bond nor free, male nor female, they are not in it. As soon as you get inside they are not there. It is not that these distinctions should not be there, but they are not there. @1 Corinthians 11 is to show how to get out of them by drinking into one Spirit.
R.F. @Romans 12: 2 says, "Be transformed by the renewing of your mind". Would this relate to it?
J.T. Yes, it does. That leads up to the same thought in the body, one body in Christ.
J.C. Is your thought that when we come together to remember the Lord at the Supper we leave our various positions in this life, and are together as in the Lord?
J.T. That is the idea. That is where you come. It is the light in which we meet; that is the mind of God for the assembly, but then the next thing is whether as come together in that light I am free in my spirit.
{304}
That is where the difficulty lies, whether I am free in my spirit of the class distinctions, so that we have all been made to drink of one Spirit, whether Jew or Greek or bond or free. Now that means, I apprehend, that we are all satisfied with the same thing. Drinking means satisfaction, whether I am elevated or reduced, I am on the platform of satisfaction in a spiritual way.
J.C. Do you think that is why it says, "Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat"?
J.T. That enters into it, because the verses read earlier show that the Corinthians came together in the recognition of class. Instead of the disallowance of it as a matter of light, they came together in the recognition of it, so that it says, "For each one in eating takes his own supper before others, and one is hungry and another drinks to excess. Have ye not then houses for eating and drinking? or do ye despise the assembly of God, and put to shame them who have not?", @1 Corinthians 11: 21, 22. Those who do not have are the poor, that is, the poor class. Those who drink and eat to excess are the rich. The classes are owned to be there.
A.N. Could you help us as to drinking into one Spirit, and how we are set free from these things? Is the reference as to drinking into one Spirit an allusion to the cup?
J.T. I think that is so. The suggestion as to drinking in Scripture generally is satisfaction, I think. Well, if we are all satisfied in what we have in common, we are delivered, and delivered from class distinctions. I am satisfied with the one thing. It says, "The trees of Jehovah are satisfied, the cedars of Lebanon, which he hath planted", @Psalm 104: 16. It is satisfaction that delivers them.
J.M-y. It is one Spirit.
J.T. That is right. We have all been made to drink of one Spirit. Think of what is in it, think of what is there, what enters into the cup, for the Spirit
{305}
of God analyses it. In Mark they drink out of it and then the Lord tells them what the cup meant; then they sang a hymn and went out to the mount of Olives. That is to say, He enlarges on what the cup means, what enters into it, the new covenant in His blood. It is the communion of the blood of Christ.
J.M-y. There would be no distinctions in one Spirit; they are swept away.
J.T. Exactly. The question is whether it is so in your soul, whether you are satisfied with the thing. It is a covenant. Am I satisfied with the conditions? They are positive conditions.
Rem. We are in new relationships now where there are no distinctions.
J.T. I am satisfied to have it so. I am not hankering after the old conditions. Satisfaction is deliverance. That is, I think, why so much is made of the covenant to us in Scripture. It involves satisfaction. It is the love of God; it is the divine proposal; it is the best that love can do, and am I satisfied? If I am satisfied I am not hankering after the old conditions. I am delivered.
J.W. The truth of the death of Christ would deliver us from that.
J.T. The truth of the death of Christ involves the removal of man after the flesh. That is the doctrine side and you are thankful to accept that, but as drinking into the cup it is the love of God. You are thankful to be relieved from all that to which class distinction belongs, whether the lowest class or the highest, whether the bond-slave or the king. You are thankful to be free of all that because it interferes with the unity and with the enjoyment.
A.N. The death of Christ would really be the point as to separation, but the Spirit brings you into what is positive.
J.T. It does, and you are satisfied. The man looking for the alms was satisfied. If Peter and John
{306}
had given him a few pence, he would have been thankful, but he would have been looking for the next one that came. He would not have been satisfied.
R.M. There was more than satisfaction. There was excess in "walking, and leaping, and praising God".
J.T. Quite so. He was satisfied. That man would never ask for alms again.
R.W. None but Christ can satisfy. Why are there so many who are not satisfied?
J.T. I think there is not much drinking.
R.W. Is there not a difference between salvation and satisfaction?
J.T. There is, but they go together.
R.W. The Lord brought in the idea of drinking in @John 4.
J.T. It was a question of deliverance. Just like the man at the gate of the temple. He would beg and beg and never be satisfied, no matter how much you gave him. That was his nature. He was developed by it. So with the woman. She would thirst and thirst again, but the Lord proposes satisfaction, and that is the Spirit, but the highest expression is when we drink together. The Lord says, 'Now I will tell you what it means. It is the love of God'. Indeed, one of His great services to us is to effect that in our souls, to give us to understand that what we have drunk is the love of God, and that implies satisfaction.
G.C. Would this help in forming the features of the new man?
J.T. In @Colossians 3, as regards the new man, it says, "wherein there is not Greek and Jew, circumcision and uncircumcision, barbarian, Scythian, bondman, freeman". It is not that there should not be, but there is not. They are not there. That is the other side, so to speak. From the standpoint of the outward position, deliverance lies in the drinking.
{307}
J.T-n. The Corinthians were not drinking together. What is there in that?
J.T. That is why I thought we might see that class distinctions were owned as there, but the apostle had already remarked that they were saying they were of this one and that one. There were party conditions, but here the distinction is in the persons who had means and those who had not. So that they were not drinking together; they were not partaking of what satisfies together.
R.M. Do you think the suggestion in @1 Corinthians 12: 13 is that we can drink as deeply as we wish? "And have all been given to drink of one Spirit".
J.T. Yes, it is a privilege. God makes no distinction in what satisfies. I think we would be helped if we considered the question more at our leisure, when we have opportunity, and see what is said about drinking. God Himself accepted the idea of strong drink in the sacrifices.
J.C. In the @Song of Songs 5: 1 we read, "Drink abundantly, beloved ones!".
J.T. Quite so, and there is a vast amount of instruction that would lead to satisfaction in the saints, and in that satisfaction we emerge from class distinctions so that we are free. I am not living in my class, but I am living in the class that belongs to the saints. I may remain outwardly where I was, but my spirit is free.
Rem. Is there not more danger of the higher class dominating things rather than the poor?
J.T. That is what is seen here. Wealth in this world's things does not give a man place in the assembly. One may take advantage of this to seek it, but wherever you see that, the question arises, is that man satisfied with what is spiritual, or what is he after? Is it not that he is using what he has as a man in the world to acquire dominance amongst the saints? He is not satisfied with the spiritual.
{308}
R.W. What is the difference between drinking water and drinking wine?
J.T. Water is satisfaction, but the wine is stimulation. It makes glad. Water is the satisfaction of thirst; it is refreshing, but wine is stimulation. It makes glad the heart of God and the heart of man, but then we must not import the idea of wine into the Lord's supper. It is not said to be there.
G.B.D. Distinctions of necessity must be dropped before we can participate in the Lord's supper rightly. The apostle said to the Corinthians, "It is not to eat the Lord's supper", @1 Corinthians 11: 20.
J.T. Exactly. He is condemning the whole thought of class amongst the saints. He is condemning it, and as it has been remarked before, the light in which we sit down together is that we have emerged from class, but then am I able to maintain that in the assembly, as being satisfied? The drinking satisfies, so that I do not wish it otherwise. Now the Corinthians came together in the recognition of class, so that the rich would be sitting by themselves, and the poor sitting by themselves. We can hardly conceive of that today, but that was what could be seen at Corinth at this time, and the Spirit of God seizes the opportunity to unfold the truth. If we are to eat to excess, and the rich man is given to it, well it is in his own house that ought to be done, not in the assembly. The assembly is not the place for that.
L.D. Do you think that if I were not free from class distinction I would be in bondage?
J.T. There would not be deliverance. How could the Holy Spirit take you up? The Holy Spirit has a dual action in the assembly; first as in relation to the covenant. He stresses the idea of the covenant in the hearts of saints in relation to the Lord's supper; hence you see, according to @1 Corinthians 12, no one can say "Lord Jesus" except by the Spirit. It is by the Spirit I say "Lord Jesus", that is, I am saying it
{309}
in fulness of spiritual power, and that helps others. I give a lead when I say that in spiritual power. Then there is the Spirit as saying, "Abba, Father". He cries, "Abba, Father", that is, He cries through some brother, "Abba, Father". Well, that gives a lead, too, but if I come with the idea of class I am not available to the Spirit. The assembly is the sphere of a dual action of the Spirit, the one in relation to the Lord Jesus, and the other in relation to the Father, and if I am not free of class, I cannot be available to the Spirit. It is the drinking into one Spirit that sets me free.
J.M-y. Is it not important to notice that we are baptised into one body by one Spirit?
J.T. That is the Lord's action. "For also in the power of one Spirit we have all been baptised into one body", @1 Corinthians 12: 13.
J.M-y. We have to recognise that, have we not?
J.T. Then the drinking is your own action.
A.N. What you speak of is a very far-reaching principle, and, while looked at in relation to the social distinctions, would be equally true with regard to national distinctions. It is rather remarkable in Ephesians when the Jew and gentile are brought so close together. "That he might form the two in himself into one new man", @Ephesians 2: 15.
J.T. That is right; "So then ye are no longer strangers and foreigners, but ye are fellow-citizens of the saints, and of the household of God".
W.B. Would you open up a little what you referred to as to the cup in the Supper not being connected with the thought of wine?
J.T. It is not the wine; the ingredient is never specified as to the Lord's supper. It is as to the passover supper, and of course it is obvious that it is wine, but that is not the point. What our brother has been remarking as to @Psalm 104, "Wine which gladdeneth the heart of man", is an earthly thought, it
{310}
relates to what is on the earth. It is not properly assembly ground.
W.B. The thought of drinking of the cup is not exactly stimulation.
J.T. No, it is more satisfaction, it is what God is Himself. It is not so much what is seen in Christ; it is not altogether a question of Christ personally, but what God is in Christ. The bread is what Christ is. The bread is in relation to the Lord giving Himself for us, and the cup is what God is towards us in Christ, so that it is not on the ground of wine. Wine is an earthly thought, it belongs to the millennium. The Lord says He would not drink it again until He drank it anew with them.
R.W. My thought about the wine was that it satisfies. Wine satisfies the heart of God and man. ("Cheers" - not 'satisfies'. See @Judges 9: 13).
J.T. It does so in regard to the earth, but wine does not belong to heaven. It is an earthly thought, it is what Christ is in relation to the earth. The cup is not a question of what Christ is personally, but what God is in Christ. It is the covenant.
R.M. It is "the new covenant in my blood".
J.T. Quite so; it is in His blood.
D.McI. Had the apostle Paul reached it when he said that nothing can separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord?
J.T. That is right. He had reached it, and what satisfaction there is in that. It is what God is in Christ for satisfaction for us. In the second epistle to the Corinthians we have in chapter 3 great stress laid on the Lord as the Spirit of it. It says, "not of letter, but of spirit", and a long parenthesis is in the chapter to unfold the superiority of the new covenant, that it is the administration of the Spirit, that it exceeds the old covenant. The parenthesis commences at verse 7 and goes on to verse 16. The Lord is that Spirit, which implies the remarkable merging of the
{311}
Lord with the Spirit, and all to the end that we might have the covenant effectuated in us, that it might be a reality to us, so that where the Spirit of the Lord is there is liberty. There is satisfaction in drinking what is presented to us, and then it proceeds to say, "We all, looking on the glory of the Lord, with unveiled face, are transformed according to the same image from glory to glory". What a deliverance there is in that I emerge from all I may be in the flesh into the realm of liberty and glory. That is the thread of it, and we do not want to go back to that influence. We want to go on from glory to glory. There is no limit to it.
A.N. I suppose the simple thought of drinking is appropriation, that is, we might be quite clear as to the doctrine of the love of God, but if there is lack of appropriation on our side, there is no satisfaction.
J.T. It is in the appropriation I am satisfied. "Drink, yea, drink abundantly, beloved ones !", as our brother has quoted. We have all been made to drink of one Spirit. What a realm we are brought into !
G.B.D. That would lead to worship.
J.T. It does. You emerge, and there is no limit to the glory; it is from glory to glory. That is the realm we are brought into.
W.B. "According to the same image". Is the effect of drinking connected with that?
J.T. It has a similarising effect upon us. You can see how all that I may be here in this world is wiped out-from glory to glory.
D.M. Is there not a beautiful allusion in @Psalm 16 "Jehovah is the portion of mine inheritance and of my cup"?
J.T. Quite so, "my cup", and so in @Psalm 23 the psalmist says, "My cup runneth over".
T.F. Full satisfaction.
J.T. It is shaken together, pressed down and running over.
W.McL. Do you get the same thought brought out
{312}
where the psalmist says, "They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house; and thou wilt make them drink of the river of thy pleasures", @Psalm 36: 8?
J.T. It is all the idea of satisfaction, and it is in the idea of satisfaction that there is deliverance. Abundantly satisfied.
F.F.R. I suppose it is only in these conditions of satisfaction that there could be worship rightly.
J.T. You see that is how it stands. It is in deliverance we worship.
T.F. Christ would not be everything otherwise.
J.T. Christ is everything and in all. Now you see at Antioch what ground had been gained. The Spirit of God loves to bring forward a concrete illustration of the truth, and on entering on the conversion of the nations, the evangelisation of the nations, we have this platform reached. There is the obliteration of class, but we have a higher note. There are five men here, and they are ministering to the Lord. They are absorbed with the Lord. They are delivered and the Holy Spirit can speak to them, as He does, on that platform: "Separate me now Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them".
W.B. Is the fasting that is mentioned in @Acts 13: 2 the disallowance of every feeling that would be on the distinction line?
J.T. That is good. The disallowance of all that would interfere with the satisfaction. So that any person from any nation, whether it were Africa or Asia or Europe or the Isles of the Sea, any person who believed the gospel, the Spirit of God could suggest to him to go to Antioch and see the divine idea. The divine idea is there; you can see what prevails there. God sets out in His evangelising service with His own idea actually reached in a particular place.
J.L. As the elect of God they put on certain features.
{313}
J.T. I think that ought to mark us in our localities.
If the testimony is to go out, what is behind it? Is there any concrete expression of what is proposed in the gospel? That is the idea at Antioch.
W.B. "Has shone in our hearts for the shining forth", @2 Corinthians 4: 6.
J.T. You can see how suitably this comes in after chapter 12 of 1 Corinthians.
W.B. Does the apostle confine that to himself or is it a general statement?
J.T. It is fully expressed in him, but the idea should be with every one of us. God has shone in for the shining out. Rivers of water flow out (@John 7: 38).
J.M. So that the overcoming of class distinctions not only has reference to worship, but also to testimony.
J.T. To everything. The denominations all around recognise class. You get the hierarchy of every creed, of every grade of class, right up, you may say, to the nobility, the archbishop. There is distinction. It is contrary to the divine thought. But then the person who comes in in poverty and enters into the free pew has got a formation and that man has got to be delivered from that. I believe that is what is not seen. The lower grade is perhaps the stronger in formation, and we have to be delivered from it.
{314}
RESULTS OF THE WORK OF GOD
@John 19: 38 - 42; @John 20: 11 - 23
J.T. What comes into view in these verses is the result of the work of God in different persons: one of them a rich man who was holding a social status in the world; another of them the teacher of Israel, holding a status also in the world; another a person with a disreputable history; two others, men of low estate, fishermen: all drawn to Christ-whether thought to be dead or alive, the work of God seen thus but as requiring adjustment. That was what I had in mind that we might consider. Nicodemus belonged to a class, and so did Joseph, and so did the Magdalene, and so also Peter and John; each had his class viewed here as under the government of God, but the effect of the work of God in us, is to take us out of our several classes and set us together.
P.L. "The rich and poor meet together: the Lord is the maker of them all", @Proverbs 22: 2.
J.T. Quite so. The word 'class' is sometimes used to describe only persons elevated in society, but the word really implies all grades of society in this world. God works indiscriminately; He is the Maker of them all, and He works as He wills, selecting whom He will. The Lord says, "The wind bloweth where it listeth" (@John 3: 8); we have to accept that and note the effect of it. But adjustment is needed; the general result is that each is taken out of his class in spirit and mind and brought into the heavenly circle, the circle of the brethren: "Go to my brethren ...". In principle, that would, of course, include all these persons, but they all needed adjustment-every one of them.
F.I. Here at this point they had actually come out of their class, had they not?
{315}
J.T. You feel what it must have cost Joseph, to begin with, to identify himself in the presence of Pilate with the rejected Nazarene, for doubtless he was known to Pilate as a distinguished man. For a rich man to associate himself with a poorer person was a comparatively small thing, but when he identifies himself with a rejected Christ before persons of his own rank, or it may be even those superior in rank to himself, which would make it more difficult still, there is something moving in his soul. He is like Moses, who recognised the slaves of Egypt, the Israelites, as his brethren.
Rem. John shows us there were no half measures with Joseph, in that he says he "demanded" the body of Jesus.
J.T. Yes, I think he took advantage of his status to do that; no doubt Pilate would recognise he had a right to do that. But could he have done it aside from the help of God? It must have cost him much in the way of sacrifice of feelings to do it.
A.H. Do you think it suggests the determination to take up the reproach?
J.T. I think so. These classes answer to the Lord's remark, "I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto me", meaning that, however much there is in the circumstances to check ardour-that is like a gibbet, the being lifted up-yet He says, they will come; in spite of the reproach they will come; it is the work of God that is in view in John, what it is, how it braves the fiercest opposition; it is the nature of the thing, what characterises it.
A.H. Is some of the adjustment seen in chapters 3 and 4, in the way the Lord deals with Nicodemus and then with the woman?
J.T. That shows the nature of the work; this is the result. We do not see the proper result in Nicodemus; he slips out of view, we find him in chapter 7 but he is still in his class, "being one of them"; he speaks a word for Christ, but that is all.
{316}
F.I. As a result of the lifting up they came out of their class.
J.T. That is the idea, they are braving the opposition. What natural thoughts in them would dread, the scorn of Pilate or the persons about him, was braved by Joseph; it says he was "a disciple of Jesus, but secretly through fear of the Jews", but he "demanded of Pilate that he might take the body of Jesus".
Ques. Does it emphasise what you said, that Arimathaea was a city of the Jews; he had come out of that?
J.T. Well, just so; it was characteristically so, you mean. He is coming out of his hiding; he was in his hiding hitherto, but now he is coming out.
P.L. So that it says, "Now is the judgment of this world; now shall the prince of this world be cast out: and I, if I be lifted up out of the earth, will draw all to me". Is the testimony to that judgment, both on the world and its prince, manifested in these persons?
J.T. Well, I think they are moving out of it, do not you?
P.L. So as they do, they judge it and witness to its judgment.
J.T. Yes. If Joseph went back to Arimathaea, as he did doubtless, he would go back a different man; he had taken up new ground in the testimony publicly, and it would give him character.
Ques. Does @Psalm 68, making the solitary into families, fit in with those we are reading of here?
J.T. I think so; they are coming into view. Of course they have a good lead in the earlier part of the chapter. You will remember how, in the days of Jonathan, they slew so many men in an half-acre of land (@1 Samuel 14: 14). They gave a lead, and then the Israelites began to come up out of their hiding places; that is the result of a lead given.
{317}
Now in verse 25 we have, "By the cross of Jesus stood his mother, and the sister of his mother, Mary the wife of Clopas, and Mary of Magdala". Think of the fierceness of opposition and the reproach there was against them. John alone gives us this grouping; it is to bring out the nature of the work of God and what it can stand; these two men receive a lead in that. It is the setting of the thing. Whether they knew the women were there or not, there is a lead given by persons identifying themselves openly with the Lord in death. The greatest reproach of all is the cross they were by the cross of Jesus, and now these men leave their hiding places and come out and identify themselves with the Lord. That group in verse 25 is by the cross, but the other verses read show us persons by the *grave*, undertaking to put our Lord Jesus in the tomb, a holy service!
Dr.S. What would you say corresponds to that in our history as representing this identification with the Lord in His burial?
J.T. Well, of course, baptism is that, would you not say?
Dr. S. I was wondering if it would correspond with the acceptance of the place we have taken outwardly in baptism.
J.T. Yes. These two men, as they went on in the truth (we do not get their names mentioned after this) would say, 'We are baptised already'. We have no record of the apostles being baptised; these women who were at the cross did not need baptism; nor did the thief get baptism: they were already baptised in a more real way than by water. They would all refer back to this when they got the Spirit; this was their great beginning, the complete identification with Jesus in His death and resurrection.
Ques. Do you suggest the cross was their severance from all they had been linked with?
J.T. Just so. It is really more; there is a greater
{318}
stigma in it than in the grave; identification with Christ on the cross is the depth, I think, of degradation, "Cursed is every one hanged upon a tree". Well, "I am crucified with Christ", Paul says, and that is what these women would say as they understood it later.
F.I. Is that why the women, the subjective state of things, predominate?
J.T. I think so, to bring out the subjective state of the work of God. The fierceness of the opposition starts here; they went through standing by it, not at a distance.
F.I. Having entered into that, you would be prepared for the burial side, and if we were true to that we should all come out of our class. Class would cease.
J.T. That is the end of all classes. Sometimes we speak of the upper class, but there is no more virtue in a lower class than an upper class; either militates against the truth of the fellowship.
Ques. Does Antioch illustrate this?-persons who have come out of their class. They are first called christians at Antioch; would that be their first identification with God's anointed?
J.T. Just so. Five persons are named, drawn out of different classes: one out of Nicodemus class, Saul; and we have a Levite in Barnabas, first mentioned, and an aristocrat in the foster-brother of Herod, and we have two Africans, one was called Niger, which means black, it would be a reproach to him undoubtedly that he was black; then there is a Cyrenian, also black. That is the idea; they have come into another realm-"called christians".
A.H. How do you view the disciple whom Jesus loved? What aspect of the work does he represent? He was standing by the cross.
J.T. Yes, apparently he was. It is not just said he was standing by the cross, but still he is standing
{319}
by. He afforded the Lord an opportunity of disposing of His mother: he is a christian near enough to the Lord in this position, to be usable. The others are not said to have been usable; John was usable. It says, "Jesus therefore, seeing his mother, and the disciple standing by, whom he loved, says to his mother, Woman, behold thy son. Then he says unto the disciple, Behold, thy mother. And from that hour the disciple took her to his own home". The Lord uses John there, and could you think of anything more desirable than that he should be used of the Lord at such a moment? To have such a charge handed over, not as His mother, but as John's mother. What an advantage to John, to be usable, near by!
Rem. I have often thought what a source of help she would have been to him in writing this record.
J.T. Just so.
F.I. One free from the class that fled, though they were disciples.
J.T. Just so; it says that elsewhere. But Mary would be in his house as his mother, so that the relationship would be in family liberty.
Ques. Would you tell us a little as to the relations of these two men with each other?
J.T. Well, they are usable too, they are being used; they are men of initiative, men who take the initiative in doing things, which is an important item amongst us; whatever your hand finds to do, to do it without a commission. They had no commission; John got a commission, for the mother was handed over to him; but these men did what they did on their own initiative, and that is a very important thing amongst us, that a brother is able to do what his hand finds to do without any special commission.
Rem. So record is made of Nicodemus first movement-coming to Jesus by night.
J.T. Just so, he is a man of that kind; and Joseph has initiative too.
{320}
P.L. Are not the disciples in John peculiarly marked by that feature-as developed in chapter 12 in the movements of the Bethany family? Cannot love take the initiative with a spiritual taste?
J.T. Yes, that is good. I think you see it in chapter 9 also in the man who had been blind; he knew what to do. So when the Lord came to Bethany, as you say, six days before the passover, He did not find them unprepared, six days before: "There therefore they made him a supper". That was what you mean? They were ready to do what was required He did not ask them to do it, but it was the proper thing to do, and He greatly valued it.
Mary too had initiative. It says, "On the first day of the week Mary of Magdala comes". She does it -- and she ran: that is, I apprehend, she did what the work of God would prompt with energy; she is like the hind of the morning: she runs, and that is somewhat unusual for a woman. I suppose she lived in Jerusalem; she would have to run through the streets.
Ques. I was thinking of what is practical: do you think we might be hindered in taking the initiative by waiting for the brethren?
J.T. Well, if your hand finds anything to do, do it; the brethren will be with you. If you want to preach, do not wait for the brethren to ask you, go out to the street corners, and they will be with you.
P.L. The men who had understanding of the times knew what Israel ought to do.
J.T. Just so. How becoming it was that Mary should be so early there; it says, "in early morn" and "while it was still dark". So that she is in line. Joseph and Nicodemus had initiative and they acted nobly, they acted as princes, so far. Their contribution was not exactly spiritual, and yet it was; heaven must have been greatly pleased with this action. It stretched back to Isaiah's time, for whatever Joseph
{321}
may have known, he was really fulfilling @Isaiah 53, so it was a great service.
P.L. Were they fulfilling a type too in regard of the priests carrying the ashes into a clean place? Is there some analogy there?
J.T. You mean putting Him into the new tomb. Well, if you can bring that into it. But I think it is a question of the holiness of the action. The dignity of the Person is always in view in John, and He was "with the rich in his death". "Men appointed his grave with the wicked"; that is, the cruel soldiers who had to do it. Doubtless three graves were dug; the grave they dug would have answered that thought, the Lord being laid in the heart of the earth. How much that meant to Nicodemus! But there is a beautiful touch in the fact that it did not go their way, "Men appointed his grave with the wicked, but he was with the rich in his death". Therefore these two men were fulfilling Scripture; probably they did not know they were, but they were; showing that, in doing what our hand finds to do, we are fulfilling the mind of God, maybe going back for centuries, God knows. The good works of the people of God are all prepared for them (@Ephesians 2: 10).
Rem. Their idea was to give the very best that could be given; they showed their appreciation of the Person by the way they treated His body.
J.T. That is how they would regard it, but God was in it. They were certainly doing the will of God expressed centuries before, which gives the act a very great place. Therefore each of us ought to think of that; if God opens a good work for us, God has prepared it for us. If I neglect it, what am I doing? I may be interfering with the divine ordering.
Rem. You look at taking the initiative as doing the will of God. Then it affects others also; Mary runs, then later on Peter and John run.
J.T. Just so. They too fulfilled a prophetic suggestion,
{322}
for @Psalm 22 is, as you know, to "the hind of the morning"; the hind is a feminine thought. The agility is not attributable to the Lord, it is the subjective result; that is, it is what the Lord was seeking. So what Mary did was really fulfilling @Psalm 22 in the spirit of it. She would not have thought so, but she was. How early she was there! She was running, which would be, I would say, peculiar for a woman; it would be now. Why was she running like that? The Lord knew; heaven knew; every step was delightful to heaven; she may not have thought so, but it is how heaven reckons. It is said of another, "She hath done what she could". She was running to bring the great news as fast as she could; yet there was not exactly faith, for she thought someone had stolen the Lord away; she represents therefore the great need of adjustment with us.
Ques. The two men brought something that was right and intelligent-the linen and the spices. Would that be suggestive of intelligence?
J.T. I think so, it fits in with the position, the dignity of the Person required it; God ordered it. They must have been in some way amenable to divine influence.
Ques. How would that reflect in us with regard to the body of Christ: wrapping up the body in the linen and putting spices on it? Is there anything applicable in that today?
J.T. It is well to keep in mind the dignity of the Person. I think these two men were impelled by some power. God was governing their movements; they were amenable to divine influences while not intelligent perhaps as to what they were doing; they might not have been able to say to you, '@Isaiah 53 requires that He should be buried with the rich'.
Rem. You would grow in your soul in the appreciation of that.
{323}
J.T. Yes, you would. The thing is to be in such a state of soul as to be amenable to divine influence, even if unintelligent. The thing is there to be done; you will see the bearing of it later. We can perhaps each look back on our histories and see things that happened of which we could not see the bearing at the time, but we see it now. We were perhaps not very intelligent, but we were subject, and God used us. There is a current always flowing, and, if I am subject to it, I come into it. Throughout this section it is the work of God coming under divine influence for adjustment; the bearing of all this is seen later.
Ques. What adjustment would these two men in chapter 19 be needing?
J.T. They did not go very far: there is not a word about them afterwards. If they had gone the whole length they would have been there early in the morning; they would have known something about the resurrection, that such an One as this would rise He had said so many times. But they went to considerable lengths, and in doing so they carried out the will of God indicated hundreds of years before, which was a great matter.
Ques. Have you in mind that, apart from this adjustment, we shall be disqualified for the circle of the brethren?
J.T. I think so; we must be adjusted if we are to be in the circle of the brethren, that is what the chapter means.
Dr. S. There would not be in any way the light of resurrection with them, I suppose, in bringing these spices; they would not be really necessary.
J.T. No. We have the word 'embalm', which would be expressive of unbelief, I suppose. But it is wonderful how the work of God comes into view here, and how all fits in; even Mary, unbelieving as she was at the tomb-the chapter shows she held on to the thought of His being stolen for a long time-was
{324}
usable; she carried the tidings to others and carried them quickly; there was nothing slovenly or slothful about her.
Ques. Do you think it was affection that brought her there early?
J.T. Oh, it was nothing else, and that was the fruit of the work of God; but we may have affection and yet need adjustment.
Ques. Would you say that, if we take the initiative and get adjustment, the Lord may use us afterwards to give initiative? He gives the message to Mary; then Peter and John take the initiative after adjustment.
J.T. Yes, her mind was dark, yet the love was there all the same. It shows how mixed we may be, perhaps used to a point, and after that be darkening, for anybody listening to her talking would think the Lord had been stolen; that was a poor testimony.
A.H. How do you view her regarding the Lord as the gardener?
J.T. That showed a darkened state of mind. It is to be noted that the two brothers got adjusted first; that is, adjusted to a point. "The two ran together, and the other disciple ran forward faster than Peter, and came first to the tomb, and stooping down he sees the linen cloths lying; he did not however go in". Notice the word is "cloths" not 'clothes'; the wrappings of Christ were not one thing, there were several pieces. "Simon Peter therefore comes, following him, and entered into the tomb, and sees the linen cloths lying, and the handkerchief which was upon his head, not lying with the linen cloths, but folded up in a distinct place by itself. Then entered in therefore the other disciple also who came first to the tomb, and he saw and believed". Apparently they are both adjusted there; faith is assured; they believed. That is, they came in for adjustment quicker than Mary did.
{325}
Ques. Does the secret of preparedness lie in the Object they had?
J.T. Well, no doubt. I suppose the superior intelligence and experience of these two brothers gave them an advantage.
Rem. Mary was very much in earnest; she made two visits to the tomb.
J.T. Yes, and she stayed, it says, which is to her credit; they went home, which is not to their credit. But there is something to their credit that is not to her credit, that they got adjusted more quickly than she did as to the resurrection. The two disciples, Peter and John, got adjusted as to the resurrection quicker than the sister did, although they were not there as soon as she was.
F.I. I suppose the movement on their side was not the initiative, but they moved on what the woman said to them.
J.T. Yes, they represent moving on testimony and a readiness to believe when the testimony is adequate. The testimony was adequate; the position of the cloths was adequate testimony; what was in the tomb was the point.
F.I. Why do you stress the fact that it was "cloths"?
J.T. It is to bring out the testimony that was inside, in the tomb. These wrappings were all as they were put on by the hands of Joseph of Arimathaea; they were just as they were.
F.I. Why was the headcloth, the handkerchief, by itself?
J.T. I think to add dignity to the Person; it was to bring out headship really, the handkerchief wrapped in a place by itself. It evidently was not where it was on His head when He was lying there; some hand had removed it, and it was wrapped in a place by itself. Some hand had done that, which they took account of. That is, it is discriminating intelligence in Peter and
{326}
John, which is a great thing amongst us. Discriminating intelligence is a great thing.
F.I. I suppose we often lack in that way by confusing what is connected with Him as Lord and what is connected with Him as Head.
J.T. Quite so. Some reverential hand did that, and they were quick enough to discern it.
P.L. The activities of our own hearts or minds make us incapable of spiritual discrimination.
J.T. That is what comes out here. Those brothers intelligence was superior to that of Mary; there was testimony inside the grave, of which she apparently did not get the gain as yet.
Rem. There is increase of intelligence. It says of Mary and of each one, that they see. There is an increase in what they see.
J.T. Quite so. So intelligent investigation is what is important, and discrimination.
P.L. John makes much of that, spiritual investigation, in his writings. The Lord says, "Come and see" in chapter 1 of John's gospel, and we are told to "prove the spirits" in his epistle. Does not that principle run through John?
J.T. Quite so, you get it right through. When John quotes the Lord saying "Come and see", that is first-hand knowledge.
Rem. The woman in chapter 4 says, "Come, see a man ...".
J.T. Just so, a Man is specified, and she says why she said it.
Rem. So the assembly as adjusted would be a vessel of intelligence and affection.
J.T. That is the idea, to get us on the line of spiritual discrimination. There are those who class things together; they say, 'This is the same thing as that', and 'That is the same thing as this'. It is not so. Every time you get a thing mentioned in Scripture there is something distinctive about it.
{327}
P.L. John's account of the heavenly city is marked by spiritual discrimination.
J.T. Yes, and his position in writing the Apocalypse is changed often so that you might get the view the Spirit intends you to get. It is a good thing to follow that up in ministry. If you are ministering in a certain place, get into the right attitude, think of their needs, think of the town, get into the right attitude, and you will have something that will fit those people.
Ques. You mean, for instance, that Paul said different things to Agrippa from what he said to the Athenians?
J.T. Just so-very different.
Ques. Would that apply in local ministry too?
J.T. I think so. The great principle is, you get to see a thing rightly when you are in the circumstances to which the thing applies; you are then in a position to meet the thing.
P.L. It would keep you from having anything too fixed in regard of ministry before you arrive in the locality.
J.T. That is an important thing to keep before you. You might say, 'I will give them this in Birmingham next time I go', but it is a question of what the Lord is going to do; you ought to be there so that the Lord may do something.
P.L. "Being in the way" (@Genesis 24: 27); is that the thing?
J.T. Just so.
Dr. S. Mary is the first one who saw the Lord after His resurrection-what is the significance of that?
J.T. That would bring out the gain of the recompense of love: it is the greatest thing after all, but we must not overlook the length of time she held to her unbelief. It shows how long the best of brothers and sisters may hold to a wrong thought and how hard it is to get a wrong thought out of your mind. You cling
{328}
to it, and bring it up when it should be far away from you. She brought it up even to the Lord Himself.
Rem. She got more than the disciples did in going to their own homes.
J.T. She did, but while we give her credit for that, we must not overlook the balance. She was holding on to a dark thought all the time. You say, 'Look at that brother; the Lord is using him'. Yes, but perhaps he is holding on to a dark thought in spite of all his love to the Lord, and if I follow him I shall get into difficulties.
Rem. It says, "As yet they knew not the scripture ...", as if, had they known it, they would have had this light earlier.
J.T. Just so. It says, "But Mary stood at the tomb weeping without". Now that is a credit, I think; it is not a debit, but a credit. The disciples did not weep, nor did they stand by the tomb; they had not seen the Lord, but they went home; that is a debit to them. It says, "As therefore she wept", she was weeping, the Spirit of God says, "she stooped down into the tomb, and beholds two angels sitting in white garments, one at the head and one at the feet, where the body of Jesus had lain". Well now, I do not think that is as great as Peter and John seeing the cloths and believing because of that. She does not believe in the testimony they believed on, that testimony was nothing to her, and she had angelic testimony. She is not believing what is an adequate testimony. The Lord could not have been stolen as those cloths lay there; they would have taken Him away with the cloths or they would have ripped them off She did not believe that testimony, and I think, therefore, her faith is on a lower level. Angels had to come in to help her, as if the Lord would say, 'You are not believing in adequate testimony, I will help you to believe, I will send you other testimony'. He is forced to do it. He sends two angels. They are
{329}
restful, they are maintaining the dignity of the Person, one at the head, the other at the feet; but there is nothing said about the cloths to her; she missed that. How could she do other than believe if the angels were there!
Ques. Would that be the conviction of things not seen (@Hebrews 11: 1)?
J.T. Quite so. God has great respect for a person who can believe the testimony rendered, however little there may be.
Ques. They called her "Woman"-why was that?
J.T. Well, it is just what she was; of course it is a dignified term. "They say to her, Woman, why dost thou weep? She says to them, Because they have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him". Why should she say that? Peter and John had gone off, surely she must have known there was some reason for that; they had gone, and they were not downcast. She was clinging to her thought. One often sees that, a brother clings to his thoughts, and yet you cannot question his devotedness. Sometimes God goes to great pains to make that man believe.
P.L. The woman spoke to Him in Hebrew; the previous remarks, I suppose, were not said in Hebrew, in a spiritual setting. You find when a brother gets adjusted he takes on a new language, he does not harp on old terms.
J.T. No. Almost like the language of heaven, for it was the language the Lord used to Saul. They press on her the question of why she is weeping; then she turned backward, which means not intelligence but instinct, and she "beholds Jesus standing there, and knew not that it was Jesus". Her ignorance is still in evidence. "Jesus says to her, Woman, why dost thou weep? Whom seekest thou? She, supposing that it was the gardener, says to him, Sir, if thou hast borne him hence, tell me where thou hast
{330}
laid him, and I will take him away". She is still holding on to the dark thoughts she had, in the presence of the Lord-she did not know Him. Does not that challenge us?
G.C.S. Yes.
J.T. Then the Lord says to her, "Mary". She is now known.
Rem. All this would help us to exercise a good deal of grace and patience with those who hold on to dark thoughts.
J.T. It would, and you can count on God sending an angel, perhaps in the middle of the night in a dream or the like.
P.L. I wondered whether the patience of the Lord with her was like the Lord's patience in regard to Thomas. He was full of dark sayings later on and the brethren bore with him for a whole week. He must have repeated it pretty often, but it is to their credit that he was with them when the Lord came again. Did not the Lord leave him with them to test them?
J.T. No doubt.
Ques. It says of the woman she "turned backward", and then "she, turning round". Is it in the way we turn that adjustment comes?
J.T. I think so. The turning is the working of instinct. What have you in mind about it?
Rem. She apparently faces the Lord and has Him in her view, so that she gets wholly occupied with Him.
J.T. And I think that is one point in the chapter, that the two angels maintain the dignity of the Lord, and if you are to exercise faith, it is a full Christ that is before you: it is Himself. They might have spoken to her apart from the tomb, but they are there in the acknowledgment of His dignity, one at the head and the other at the feet. She would never forget that sight.
Ques. Would you say the pursuing of dark thoughts
{331}
brings us into a position of loneliness and on to individual lines: it was "my", and she was alone?
J.T. She uses the definite article earlier, "They have taken away the Lord ...", she says, which was right, first; but she comes down to herself, "My Lord". It is all right to say "My Lord", but she is on individual lines; it is "the Lord", that is a better term. But now she says "Teacher" after that, that is an acknowledgment that she needs teaching; she needs to go to school; she is claiming Him as her Teacher.
P.L. Is this the most testing school of all, to leave earth for heaven in spirit?
J.T. I suppose it is. She is on the high road now to the heavenly position. She says, "My Lord" and then, "Teacher", "Rabboni".
Ques. Would you put her beyond the two now?
J.T. In a way, yes. But she can never have the honour of believing on adequate testimony; she would have to admit that Peter and John were further on than she. God is put to more pains with her, which of course He will always be ready to expend on us, pains and trouble; but still God honours a man who believes adequate testimony.
Ques. Is that why Abraham said in the parable, "If they hear not Moses and the prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead", @Luke 16: 31?
J.T. Quite so.
Dr.S. It would appear from Luke's gospel that women brought the news first of all to the disciples as to the resurrection. Does verse 8 go as far as resurrection? What do you think?
J.T. Well, it is not easy to make the records fit. I think the safest way is to take a single record like this; the Holy Spirit has something to convey to your soul and He mentions what He knows will effect that end in your soul. "He saw and believed"; that, I
{332}
think, would mean believed in the sense in which John speaks of believing. They believed the Lord was risen, they believed the testimony that was there. This is written for a purpose, to show how we come into things spiritually on the principle of testimony; John makes a great deal of testimony.
A.H. And he emphasises believing.
J.T. He does, very much. "This is the work of God, that ye believe on him whom *he* has sent", @John 6: 29.
Dr.S. Do you think that in verse 9 they had come to believe in resurrection?
J.T. Yes, I think what is stressed is that they were believers, which is what John had in mind. Whatever was witnessed in that tomb they accepted; that is the way I would take it.
Ques. Would you say that, having believed, you are open for further light?
J.T. Well, there is a basis there for the divine structure. The dispensation of God is in faith.
P.L. Then, like the two-and-a-half tribes, you may believe and settle down in Moab. Is that what they did?
J.T. Well, they believed all that the testimony there indicated. They are capable of that, they are men of that kind; whereas Mary was not a person of that kind; she needed more attention.
P.L. That kind of unbelief works out in certain fruits as seen in the two-and-a-half tribes. You have to let it work, would you say? It is not rebellious unbelief that has to be dealt with off hand.
J.T. No, it is a kind of unbelief, or a kind of belief, you might say, but defective; but still it is of value here as peculiar to these two brothers, but not to Mary. It is a kind of faith God values, faith on adequate testimony, for that is how christianity is founded in this world: it is not what is seen but what is testified to.
{333}
P.L. "Blessed they who have not seen, and have believed".
J.T. Yes. We are witnesses. God gives adequate testimony, if we do not believe that we will believe nothing. You might say, 'What about Mary?', but then she represents another side to our position, the love side. What pains God takes with a person like this, slow to take things in and holding on to a dark thought till the last, but God goes on with her, and she is completely turned round. First she turned backwards, but when the Lord said, "Mary", she turned round.
Ques. Was she about to embrace Him, when the Lord said, "Touch me not"?
J.T. Yes, I think so. She was about to kiss His feet perhaps, as was said elsewhere.
Ques. What do you learn from "Touch me not"?
J.T. The touch was to be in the company, when He came in. He was to go to heaven first, so to speak; the link is to be established from heaven. It is not a Jewish link here, it is not a link formed in Galilee; it is a link formed here. It is not 'I will ascend', but "I ascend", it is the character of the thing. In principle, He did that and came back to the company; the link is formed there, we are on heavenly ground now.
P.L. Thomas is actually asked by the Lord to touch Him. Is that in the company?
J.T. Quite so; that is where we touch Him now. The Jewish remnant will link on with Him later, but He comes in from heaven here, that is the principle of this chapter.
P.L. So the breathing would be still more intimate than the touching.
J.T. It would, and it emphasises intelligence. It is the breath of life which refers to the upper intelligence. In Genesis you get vegetable life, then animal life, then human life, that is the highest thing. God
{334}
"breathed into his nostrils the breath of life". He did not breathe into any other nostrils. So we are fit for the regions above. We are capable of taking in, having His very breath, His very life, His very faculties, His very power of thinking and feeling.
Ques. Would you say Mary of Bethany being absent from here had entered into this adjustment early? I was thinking of the Lord saying that she had come beforehand (@Mark 14: 8).
J.T. Bethany is more the remnant side. Bethany is where Lazarus was, "The dead man Lazarus, whom Jesus raised from among the dead". It does not go beyond resurrection; this chapter goes into heaven.
Ques. You would not carry @John 12 beyond Colossians, whereas this, you think, is Ephesians?
J.T. That is right.
Dr. S. The disciples here would include more than the eleven?
J.T. Yes, Mary would have been there probably.
{335}
SOWING
@Genesis 27: 26, 27; @Hosea 2: 23; @Psalm 97: 11; @Leviticus 19: 19
I wish to speak of sowing, it being the great sowing time, with a view to a great crop for God.
The Lord, as is well known, speaks much of this in His parabolic ministry. A well-known chapter that speaks much of this great matter is @Matthew 13, and it is to be noted, if we are to understand the full bearing of the Lord's instructions, that His first parable is general, without reference to the ground or area of the sowing, the sowing being His. The second parable is His *field*, and so also is the parable of the mustard seed-it is in His field. That is to say, the field is His, the Sower's.
We have also in that chapter the field in which the treasure was found; that field is not said to be the property of the man who found the treasure. He acquired the field. He bought it. So that we have in these allusions to the field, dear brethren, proprietary rights, whereas the first sowing is general and the quality of the ground varies. There are in it four kinds of sowing area, one only of which yields, one only of which is called "good ground".
Now I wish to work on these lines in what I have to say, so I began with the idea of a field in Genesis. It is a believer, to make it very simple, and not a mere nominal believer, but one who is genuine, and who shows his genuineness by his appreciation of what comes to him from God. This is a matter of importance, especially to our young brothers and sisters here, or young persons generally. The application of the word "field", as seen in this chapter, is contingent on genuineness, faith.
{336}
Jacob, as you all doubtless know, was marked off before he was born, as in the mind of God for blessing, and the gifts and calling of God are without repentance. The enemy would seek to prevent the accomplishment of the divine thought in its subject, and he did not fail in this case. His effort was marked, and his instrument, alas, convenient, in the father of this subject of the divine purpose, a sorrowful suggestion that a father or mother, or other near relatives may become the instrument in the hand of the enemy to prevent, to endeavour to prevent the blessing reaching its object.
It is sorrowful to have to mention this as to Isaac, remarkable type of Christ as he was, one who, as this very chapter testifies, had faith, for the New Testament says he blessed both Jacob and Esau; he did it by faith. But he had earlier been affected by natural appetite, a very solemn reminder to us who are parents, to judge what is natural, or we may be found the instrument in the hands of Satan to divert the blessing. Not indeed that it can be diverted, but how solemn it is that we should be in his hands as aiming at the diversion of the blessing from the one for whom it is designed.
We are told that Isaac ate of Esau's venison and loved him accordingly. How sorrowful the suggestion! Esau was a man of the field, and provided for his father on natural lines. Think of a man of faith loving his son or daughter because of his or her natural proclivities, and feeding on what they provide, and allowing himself to be blinded by this natural ministration. One can understand how a young man in college or school, with ability and fine attainments after man's thought, may minister to the natural proclivities of his parent, and divert his parent from the path of faith as to him, while on the other hand, a devoted son or daughter, who values the blessing of God, may be disregarded.
{337}
So it was, beloved, in this case. It is said that Isaac loved Esau; whereas, as time ran its course, and Esau had ample opportunity to show what he was, receiving kindness from God and from his brethren, it is said of him that Jehovah hated him, a very strong word. How sorrowful that a parent should be found loving in his son or daughter that which God hates. How serious that a man of faith should thus be found diametrically opposed to God in his taste and in his attitude towards his children. On the other hand, it is said of Rebecca that she loved Jacob. At the very beginning she was in accord with God; He also loved Jacob. Isaac loved Esau, but God hated him, as the sequel shows. Rebecca on the other hand loved Jacob, and it is said that God loved him.
We are reminded, dear brethren, of the importance of being in accord with God, having tastes according to God. God's hatred of Esau and His love for Jacob was no matter of purpose, no matter of predestination; it was the outcome of what each person was, namely, that Jacob became lovable and was lovable in the eyes of God, and Esau in his history was hateful and God hated him.
Well now, you will observe the word 'field' is applied to Jacob here, for Isaac is now speaking by faith. God saw to it, in His faithfulness, that the parent did not divert the blessing, for the blessing must reach its object, whatever the enemy may do. Moreover, the blesser must be a parent; in this case it must be Isaac, for in spite of his natural appetite, he represented God, but how sorrowful that a parent, who does indeed represent God in his house, should become opposed in his tastes and attitude to what God loves. But God compelled Isaac to bless, even as, later, he compelled Balaam to bless. Not indeed that there is any real comparison between the persons, but in this case Isaac is compelled to bless. He thought he was blessing Esau, but he was blessing Jacob, Such,
{338}
beloved, is the unerringness of God's purpose; nothing can divert it; nothing can divert Him from it. And so Jacob is blessed, "Yea, and he shall be blessed", says his father (@Genesis 27:33). Thank God, he is blessed!
But I wanted to show how all this enters into the idea of a field. Not a mere field, such I have alluded to in @Matthew 13, where you have the evil seed, or tares, sown. The point of view in @Genesis 27 is the fertility of the field. There is no suggestion of soil for tares in this allusion. I am speaking now to young believers, particularly, that the character of the field might be understood. Not only that the Lord has acquired rights over you, and He has, through redemption, but that there should be the smell that is alluded to here-that is, the smell of fertility; that you are such an one as the Lord has blessed. "A field which the Lord hath blessed". It is potential here, of course, for as yet there is no crop in Jacob. But then it is set down for the young believer that he should understand that there is to be this smell, as it were, this evidence of fertility, not merely that you are a nominal christian. "See, the smell of my son is as the smell of a field which the Lord hath blessed", @Genesis 27: 27.
And notice, it is a parent kissing his son. Whatever his own feelings are, he is now in the hand of God, and he is speaking as a man of faith. His smell is now right; his senses are under control; he is able to tell what the smell of fertility is, and he tells us, but it is as he kisses his son.
How God would call upon the young to draw near! "Come near, now, and kiss me, my son". Here it is not the nations kissing the Son, as in @Psalm 2; it is rather the son kissing the vessel of the blessing, for Isaac represented God. That indeed, is what the patriarchs set out; they are representative of God.
You cannot find men of that kind today. All that is now merged in Christ. All the blessing of God now
{339}
comes out through Christ. What Abraham represented, what Isaac represented, and Jacob, as passing on the blessing, is all now in Christ. But the point I am making is, "Come near, now, and kiss me, my son". Were some young man in a theatre or cinema, or using those things that belong to and mark this world, how ashamed he would be if he were called upon to kiss. It is a challenge as to whether there is the odour of fertility, that is, the guarantee of a crop for God. That is what I had in mind, beloved, in this remarkable type.
And so, carrying on with the thought, the fertility is there, but there is the seed to be sown in the field, and the crop is to be according to the sowing. Fertility in itself will not suffice: there has to be the sowing, and I need not remind you, dear brethren, that the sowing is by Christ too. The sower is the Son of man, and He sows with a view to a crop. He knows well what He seeks. So the believer holds himself for Christ.
Now you find in the book of Hosea remarkable instructions in regard to sowing. The first son of the prophet, a symbolical son, is Jizreel, which signifies that God soweth. But in the meantime, in chapter 1, we have God's mind as to the state of Israel, and it is very different from the idea of a crop such as He sought. The meaning of Jizreel, 'God soweth', belongs to the gospel. It is an element of the gospel that whatever your present condition is, God soweth, and He will take you on. That is His mind.
And so in the verse I have read, we have, "I will sow her unto me in the land". Now it is not here a question of sowing the word of God in the person, as in @Matthew 13. It is sowing the persons. It is important to maintain these two thoughts in regard of sowing. Firstly, what I am as a field, and the sowing in me by the Lord, with a view to the crop He seeks, and secondly, His sowing me personally.
{340}
That is what you get here. "I will sow her unto me in the land". Now this is a very important matter, for if God is sowing persons, He has in view a crop of persons. If he sows you or me to Himself in the land, He has in view a crop like me, like you; and this raises the question as to whether I am an Israel as indicated in this wonderful book of Hosea.
It is a book that we should read, dear brethren, because it is so full of affection. It is so full of faithfulness on the one hand, and so full of affection on the other hand, on the part of God. In one breath you have the severest rebukes, and in the next the tenderest expressions of affection. In one breath there is the pronouncement of judgment, and in the next breath there is the announcement of the divine purpose of love. So that the believer, placing himself before God in this way, is checked constantly. God is, as it were, saying to him constantly, 'There is that in you which I hate; I am a consuming fire in regard of that', and on the other hand, 'There is that in you which I am delighted with, and I wish it not to be impaired'. That is the book of Hosea; its issue is triumphant.
But I speak here of this sowing of Israel to Himself. "I will sow her unto me", He says, "in the land". That is, He will have a crop like this. Israel is to fill the face of the world with fruit. If I am to be fruitful, as sown personally, another has to be begotten, as it were, through me. Not that it can be effected literally, but that is the divine thought. If God sets down a person in this town, He means to have another like him, and another, and another; that is the idea. You can see the greatness of it, and the importance of being like God, being representatives of God. The crop is like God; it is after His own thought.
In the second parable in @Matthew 13, the Son of man sows in His own field, meaning that there is a sphere that He regards as His own. The whole realm of christendom belongs to the Lord in one sense,
{341}
Certainly at the beginning that was how the matter stood. He sowed and there was a crop, and where His name is professed, that person is by right acknowledged to be His, and so the myriads of believers increase the field.
Hence the idea of the sowing in the second parable is to produce others like the person sown. And who is the person sown? A son of the kingdom. Now a son of the kingdom is not a child of the kingdom, meaning that the idea of the kingdom has taken hold of the person; he is a product of it; he has developed in it. God would have that extended and extended; he is a model; that is the idea, and Satan is against that.
As God sets a man or woman here in this town, formed by the kingdom, Satan is against it, and he counters it by imitation; it is worth imitating. Satan will never imitate what is not worth imitating. He imitates to nullify what he imitates. So that while men slept tares were sown; we are told that an enemy did it. Satan did it.
Well, that is the idea of the person, "I will sow her unto me in the land". God is looking on you in this town, and in many other towns; He says, as it were, 'I have sown you unto Myself; the crop is for Me. I am looking at you as I looked on My beloved Son when He was here, and I announced My pleasure in Him, and I want you multiplied; I want others like you'. They are to be like Christ, of course, but you are here under the eyes of men, and God bears testimony to you. Think of being here for Christ in such a way that God can call attention to you. He wants to have others like you. That, in truth, is how multiplication proceeds. God would have others like us as we are like Christ.
There are the sons of the kingdom, and the enemy is so irate, so opposed that he makes an imitation, called tares, an imitation of the real thing. But our
{342}
point, beloved, is to be the real thing, that is after Christ. So the dear Thessalonian christians, young ones, were said to be the "Thessalonians in God the Father", meaning that as young believers they were pleasing to the Father; they were delightful to Him; they were in His heart. They were models, we are told (@1 Thessalonians 1: 7). The testimony sounded out from them, that is the thought.
Well now, passing on to the third scripture, I wanted to show how God provides for us under these circumstances. "Light is sown", we are told, "for the righteous, and joy for the upright in heart". Now this is a remarkable scripture, and fits in with what I have been saying, by way of encouragement, by way of provision. God looks at you in this town, you are regarded as in the town, in God the Father's heart. He is pleased with you and He wants to fortify you. You may be faltering; difficulties may arise. God says, 'I have sown on your account; whatever your needs may be in the future, you are provided for; I have sown against them. When they arise the crop will be there'. How comforting the thought is! It is another way of God calling upon us to cast all our care upon Him. He cares for you, and in this wonderful way, He is actually sowing in view of your future needs.
You say, 'Where does He sow?'. Leave that to Him. There is nothing about the field here; nothing about the land. It is God telling you, as sown unto Him yourself, that He is providing for all your future needs. You cannot but say you are provided for in the present, but what causes you anxiety is the future, and this crop is what you need.
You look into next year; there may be no next year in the sense in which we speak, but suppose there will be, the crop will be there to meet it, and what a crop it will be, light! God says, as it were, 'When the need arises there will be light for you; you will know what to do'. How comforting that is! It conforms
{343}
with the Lord's word, "He that follows me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life", @John 8: 12.
The "light of life" conforms with this scripture. It is a question of sowing and the crop that is in view. In the future day, as the need arises, you will know what to do; you will not be doubtful; there will be provision; there will be light, and not only light, but joy, as the passage says, "Light is sown for the righteous, and joy for the upright in heart".
Did you ever see a crop of joy coming up out of the ground, or a crop of light? You say, 'Light comes down from heaven', but Scripture does not always say that. It speaks of light arising in the darkness (@Psalm 112: 4) and of light springing up (@Matthew 4: 16). It is a question of light, however it may come. It may be in the saints in the meeting, that God is sowing in them that there may be joy for you. Is it not His way, His wonderful resource? Light will spring up. What a wonderful time we are living in. A hundred or more years ago, there was very little in the way of light as life-very little of what the Lord speaks of as the light of life. There were the Scriptures, and there were christians who had light; christians who had the Spirit. But I mean christians walking according to divine principles, as set up here by God, as sown of God in His field, that have fight, but it is the light of life.
Hence there is the importance of keeping with the brethren. Light is amongst them. Normally where brethren are following righteousness, faith, love and peace-where the Spirit has room, there is light, and that is fight as life. It springs up. And moreover there is joy too, and that also springs up, for the fruit of the Spirit is joy and you are to participate in that. All over the world one knows of these things. A crop of light, a crop of joy, sown of God for you and for me. What we are enjoying today was sown long since.
{344}
The seed is constantly being put in in view of the future. God has a long look out, and He encourages our hearts by telling us that "Light is sown for the righteous, and joy for the upright in heart".
Well, the last scripture is in keeping with all this, namely that the believer has responsibility in regard of sowing. He has a field, whether it be himself, as seen in Jacob, whether it be his household, or whether it be his meeting, to be very simple. He may regard any of these spheres as his field, and he is enjoined here not to sow diverse seeds.
Now brethren, this is very important in all the three spheres to which I have alluded. If I sow to my flesh, personally, I shall reap corruption; if I sow to the Spirit I reap everlasting life. It may be some of you have never thought of reaping everlasting life. Your mind has been on the thought of the gift of everlasting life. That is important; it is a gift. But it is also acquired by sowing according to Scripture. If we sow to the Spirit we reap everlasting life. What a crop that is, beloved! Did you ever think of it? Did you ever picture to yourself what the crop is? If you sow to the Spirit there will be an actual crop coming up for yourself, everlasting life. It is a term little understood amongst us, as little understood perhaps as any scriptural term used amongst the people of God; certainly as a crop coming up from sowing to the Spirit.
Even if it be my household the same applies. How dangerous to sow diverse seeds. I suppose that it is in the household that we are most exposed to this error. Parents bringing up their children with a view to enhancing them in society is a diverse seed, and it is sure to bear its own crop. The field is strewn with derelicts from that sowing. Young people are ruined as their parents have in mind to make them more than they are socially, not merely to earn their living, but to enhance their position in this world. It is a
{345}
diverse seed that yields its own sorrowful crop, and it is manifest sorrowfully all around us in relation to the people of God.
Is it not well, beloved, to think of these things, to think of this injunction by God, not to sow your field with diverse seeds, but one seed alone, that is the word of God? If you want a crop like Christ in your house, it is obtained by sowing that seed. But if you want to fill your house with Esaus and Esau's wives, that were a trial to Isaac and Rebecca, causing them a life of misery, then sow with diverse seeds.
Beloved, let us be on our guard as to this error and miscalculation all around and amongst us, and sow the seed, "the living and abiding word of God", that which endures for ever, the product of which is like Christ, and never causes misery to faith, but rather joy.
If one sows to the Spirit in one's house, one shall indeed reap everlasting life, even in his family. I mean to say, the elements will be there, and there will be light and joy in the household. How beautiful is a christian household, brought up on the principles of the word of God; the children after Christ, in the testimony. The very house is a well of life and of light. Well, dear brethren, that was what I had in mind to present to you. You will admit that it is practical and important. May the Lord be pleased to help us to take to heart the idea of sowing, that there may be seed-time and harvest. That is the great principle laid down in @Genesis 8. "Seed time and harvest ... shall not cease". It is continual sowing of seed and continual reaping of harvest.
But let the seed be the word of God, and the harvest will be according to it. It will be after Christ, causing light and joy in our surroundings.
{346}
DIVINE SPEAKING IN NEARNESS
@Hebrews 1: 1, 2; @Numbers 7: 89; @Genesis 35: 13, 14; @Genesis 19: 27, 28
I have in mind to speak about divine speaking in nearness. God speaks at a distance sometimes, as at Sinai, but I wish to dwell on His immediate speaking, speaking in nearness. We have come under His good hand, a time in which this speaking is intelligible to us. The book of Revelation is divine speaking, but at a distance. The Lord says that He sent His angel to signify certain things; distance is thus implied. Important speaking indeed is contained in that wonderful book called the Apocalypse; it is the Revelation, or Apocalypse, of Jesus Christ which God gave to Him, and He sent and signified it to His bondman John, who in his turn testified to the assemblies. That book contemplates the great declension in the assembly, when, instead of speaking directly by the Spirit assembly-wise or temple-wise, the Lord was obliged to speak by an angel, somewhat on the ground of the Old Testament communications. But there has been a change. God has wrought and has become attractive to His people, and they have drawn near. The epistle to the Hebrews is intended to save the people of God from such distance as is contemplated in the Apocalypse, and it stresses the privilege that the saints have of drawing near: "Let us draw near". Some have taken that up; no doubt most of us have drawn near to God. We have boldness of access, as it is said, "by the blood of Jesus", which places the privilege within the range of every believer, "By a new and living way, which he hath consecrated for us, through the veil, that is to say, his flesh", @Hebrews 10: 19, 20. As having a high priest over the house of God, we are enjoined to "draw near with a true
{347}
heart in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water". Those are the circumstances in which we draw near, for, whilst God wishes us near, it must be on His own terms; and the nearer we get to Him the more we discover those terms are advantageous to us, as well as complying with the exigencies of His nature, His glory and His holiness. So that I wish to speak of divine speaking in nearness, that is, God speaking directly to us without the medium of distance. We are in the days of the light that assures this, and so it is quite in order for me to bring in this side of the truth of divine speaking, that it is in nearness.
I take up Hebrews first, because it opens with those wondrous words that God has spoken unto us "in ... Son". There is no thought of distance there, no thought of a medium of distance; it is God Himself speaking, but speaking "in ... Son". It is not exactly in His Son, but "in ... Son"; that is, God Himself is speaking in that relation, as a divine Person, but not as at Sinai when everything denoted distance, but "in ... Son". That is surely a most attractive title, for it carries with it the affections that are proper to the relation, and the communications take character from the affections seen in One in the unclouded relation of the Son with His Father, but He no less than God, for it is God speaking. His personality is unchangeable, so that the speaking was God's speaking, but in Son; in One who could clothe every thought expressed with the affections proper to the relation in which He stood. That relation implied, not simply that He was sent, although that is also true, but that it was God Himself; it was God, but God come near. That is the thought, for the relation was well known among men, and God chose to draw near in it, that there might be nothing to terrorise, nothing to abash, nothing to disconcert, but that all
{348}
the communications should be calculated to draw out confidence and liberty. We think of the scene at Sychar in that well-known incident when the Lord says, "If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that says to thee, Give me to drink, thou wouldest have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water", @John 4: 10. And who was it? One clothed in humility, who was nevertheless the Son, nevertheless God, for God was there in Jesus; and yet speaking in the utmost simplicity. One who in no way sought to disguise the fact that He was weary with His journey: He "sat just as he was", as we read, "at the fountain", a wearied Man. He opened the conversation, and established confidence in the heart of the woman, laying in her soul an immutable basis for instruction in the knowledge of "Who it is". She would never forget that: "If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that says to thee, Give me to drink, thou wouldest have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water". It was the Son speaking to her; it was God speaking to her in Son, with the effect of establishing confidence in her, and that a basis might be laid for that after-structure which would eventuate indeed in her becoming a worshipper, to worship the Father in spirit and in truth.
I commend to you this thought of nearness, God Himself speaking directly "in ... Son"; in One who had taken a bondman's form, "taking his place" indeed "in the likeness of men", for that is how the woman at Sychar regarded Him. She said, "How is it that thou, being a Jew, askest drink of me, which am a woman of Samaria?". He did not deny that He was a Jew; He took His place in that relation. He did not deny He was weary, that He was thirsty; that was common to men, all those things were common to thousands in Judea, and He took His place in the likeness of men, and hence recognised all these things. He was surely a Jew; He took that place; she called
{349}
Him that and He did not deny it. He says, "Ye worship ye know not what: we know what we worship". You see how lowlily He spoke to her, what a lowly place He took. It was a divine appointment that He should take that place, "taking his place in the likeness of men", and yet, beloved, He was God. It was God speaking, every word leading on from the previous one to another, building up a structure in her soul that she should become a worshipper of the true God. That is what enters into this passage in Hebrews; the wondrous lowliness of Jesus, how He came near even to the most disreputable, so as to speak, not as an intermediary, but as God. It was God Himself, as the beautiful hymn says
<blockquote>'Sinner, see thy God beside thee, <br>In a servant's form come near, <br>Sitting, walking, talking with thee! <br>Sinai's mount no longer fear'. (`112:3)</blockquote>
It disarms all fear, it establishes confidence in the most disreputable where faith is, God come near.
Now, in the passage in Numbers we have the same speaking only in other circumstances. There was no princely offering at Sychar, no dedication of the altar, whereas in @Numbers 7 we have an array of circumstances in connection with which God speaks, and which properly follow what I have been saying, that as God draws near to the sinner and sets him free, bringing him into the knowledge of Himself through redemption, setting him up in Christ as risen from the dead and glorified, he thinks of God. The Lord spoke to the woman about worship; this chapter in Numbers is the saints representatively so affected by the testimony that they draw near to recognise the altar, that being the great symbol of worship and our service Godward. It is the dedication of the altar in the day in which it was anointed. Now God on the ground of accomplished redemption has a system of
{350}
worship, but for its functioning this system depends on His people; they are essential to it. The altar is set up and anointed, and the twelve princes of Israel draw near with their offerings, perfect unity appearing in those offerings; and you will see if you run through the chapter that they are princely offerings; they are offerings of the people of God viewed as possessed typically of the Holy Spirit on the ground of redemption, in which we all have our part. They drew near; each prince had his day, each offered the same exactly both in bowls, and in spoons, and in cattle; and God is so pleased with the aggregate, as you will see, that He comes and He would speak. He is surrounded now with the wealth of His people, His own wealth indeed; as they would say like David, "Of thine own have we given thee". It was the abundant wealth of His people seen in perfect unity in their offerings.
We have thus the converse of @John 4, for the worship is sought there; now it is provided. The very symbol of it, the altar, is dedicated by the lavish offerings in unity of the princes of Israel. It is a wonderful scene, and God would speak to our hearts as taking up this attitude towards Him. He has drawn near, as we see in @John 4 and @Hebrews 1, to speak to us in nearness in our circumstances, for, mark you, at the well it was in *her* circumstances; she had come there; it was a circumstance of her daily life that she should go there to draw water, and that is how the Lord meets every one of us, in *our* circumstances. But now He would intimate to us that He has circumstances of His own, and if you draw near to Him, which He looks for, He would say to you it must be in His circumstances, and the more you enter into those, the more you appreciate them, you would not have others. So it says that "Moses went into the tent of meeting to speak with Him" (verse 89).
It is one thing to speak to God in one's closet-a most important thing, for no one will ever understand
{351}
speaking to God in the assembly until he understands speaking to God in his closet. I believe the closet is less understood than the holiest, at least mentally. The first thing is the closet, that is to say, the door shut on all others save God and yourself; you speak to God in secret. No doubt Moses had been accustomed to do that; he could never have become the man he was in the service of God had he not been accustomed to speak to God in secret. His brother Aaron too could never have had the place he had as priest in Israel, save that he had been accustomed to speak to God in secret. God says, as it were, 'I know him', one of the finest things that could be said of any of us by God. "If any man love God, the same is known of him", and we become known to God as we, as it were, knock at His door. As we seek access, He opens it; the door is opened, as I have been saying. As you enter your closet and shut your door and turn to God in the light in which He has drawn near to you in your circumstances, you will soon find the holiest, you will soon find your closet has become the holiest. The holiest is the presence of God, but in Jesus; it is what Jesus is before God. It is as if God would say to you, 'These are the things that engage Me, and Christ is the centre, and you take a place there'. You are not the centre; Christ is the centre; and the more you draw near, the more you see that all around is holy. Like the holy vessels of the sanctuary, all were anointed and all were in perfect keeping within; they stood in relation to the ark.
So that it was no new thing for Moses to speak to God, he was accustomed to do it. Nor can anyone serve God or be honoured of God save one who speaks to Him, one who makes everything a matter of speaking to God. But now he enters surrounded by all this wealth, the dedication gift of the altar. It is one idea, supplied by twelve princes, each on his day, and Moses enters in the midst of all that wealth to speak to God,
{352}
a very fine moment, for God says, as it were, Moses, I want to speak to you, let Me speak to you first. How beautiful it is to be detained there, beloved, just to wait for a moment to see what God would say. David went in and sat before the Lord, but there was no sitting place in the tabernacle, no seat at all; it is in the temple we have the idea of sitting before the Lord.
But I want to show how the speaking, although in nearness, contemplates the system of things which God has set up to provide for His own majesty, that hearts should be made reverential before Him, that we should have a sense that we have to do with God, the Creator and Sustainer of all things and yet the One who has found a way of speaking directly to our hearts. It is in nearness, but according to God's terms, for it is obvious that whilst He calls upon us to draw near, He will provide for the exigencies of His own holy nature, His own attributes-His own deity, in a word. How perfectly this came out in Jesus as the gospels present Him! Wherever He is, whatever He is saying, in whatever circumstances, He provides for the rights and the majesty of God. A young man runs into the way and says, "Good Master", kneeling down. The Lord says, 'No, that will not do; there is no one good but God'. Was the Lord denying His own deity? Not at all, He was setting that young man right. The Lord would always do that. There is nothing in a way more wonderful than to see how the Lord provided for God and how He would adjust everyone that came near to Him in regard of God. So here, God would speak to Moses, but how? "From off the mercy-seat which was upon the ark of testimony, from between the two cherubim". Now you see, God is speaking in His own circumstances, in circumstances that are in keeping with Himself. How wonderful it is that He admits of us being there, yea invites us to be there, so that it says Moses "heard the voice speaking to him", then as a result, "he
{353}
spoke to Him". Whilst God in His own sphere maintains His own rights and glory, He sets His people in perfect liberty before Him. Indeed, "Perfect love casts out fear", and where is perfect love? In the presence of God, and perfect love casts out fear, that is in one who disallows the flesh. There is no room for it there, beloved; let us not attempt to draw near other than according to the divine requirements, for "Our God is a consuming fire", @Hebrews 12: 29. The very epistle from which I have read says that, and not simply "God is a consuming fire", but "our God", the God of those who understand what it is to enter the holiest and who know Him there.
Well now, I want to show from the passages in Genesis first how the believer is made to feel in God's house that God is pleased with him. @Genesis 35 records the results of God's dealings with a disciplined man, and no one is of any account save a disciplined man. Discipline is the order of the day, beloved, while we are down here in flesh. The discipline of Jacob began early, but in that discipline God assured him that He would never leave him. It is well worth while to accept discipline in such company. God disciplines us as in company with us, in nearness to us, and then He loves to depict in His own way the result of the discipline. The result with Jacob was that he arrived at Bethel where God met him and made known to him that his name was to be changed, that he was a prince with God, and, moreover, that God had a name too, that of Almighty God, and that Jacob was to know Him in His house. That is really the only place where we get a right view of God, in His house. I have been speaking of the attributes of God and the cherubim in the book of Numbers, but then the thought of the house, although it applies in both Exodus and Numbers, has a peculiar kind of meaning in Genesis. In Genesis the principle is that things get their names from persons who experience what
{354}
they are. The name "house of God" arose out of an experience of Jacob. This is a matter well worthy of attention, that names arise very largely out of the experience of God's people; they name things as they experience them. What did Jacob experience? He experienced that God had an interest in him, that He had gone to the pains of setting up a ladder from the earth to heaven, and that angels were ascending and descending upon that ladder in relation to Jacob. They began with Jacob; according to the passage, they did not begin with heaven; the angels are always down here. You say, I thought they were always in heaven, but it does not say so. They are heavenly, but they are "sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation", @Hebrews 1: 14. They are here, and they were there at Luz, and they began with Jacob; they were ready at hand. What a wonderful flood of light there is as that enters the soul; they were ready at hand, watching over him while he was asleep. He alludes to the Angel of God's presence later, but there they were, a testimony to God's interest in him, and he says, "This is none other but the house of God". He had said it was a dreadful place, but he had better thoughts, like many young people; they come to the meetings and things are not just as they wish, but as they think over them they have better thoughts and they begin to see that God is there, and that is their salvation. Those better thoughts in time overcome the wretched thoughts that call the meeting, the assembly where God is, a dreadful place. Jacob had better thoughts and they asserted themselves; they led him to say, "This is ... the house of God", and that is the first mention of it that we have, and the Spirit of God never loses sight of it from that naming.
So it has a peculiar place in Genesis, and in chapter 35 God dwells upon it and says, 'I will disclose My name to Jacob in it'. Is it not worth while, dear
{355}
young people, to get an insight into the house of God, and see what God is there? I am not now speaking of the cherubim, but of what God is Himself in His own house, for it is a place of love. It is a family thought, and what comes out in this passage is that Jacob finally discovered that in the house he was actually pleasing to God, so pleasing that God came down Himself and spoke to him there. He had before stood above the top of the ladder, but now He is by him, standing by Jacob. What a wonderful time Jacob must have had! and he never forgot that spot. It is a question of God speaking in nearness, and you get that nearness uniquely in the house, for it is His own abode. So that Jacob sets up a pillar, not simply the stone that he had for a pillow as in the earlier account, but a stone pillar (chapter 35: 14). It is the material of the pillar now; it has got more dignity; and, moreover, he poured a drink-offering upon it, meaning that he was conscious that God was pleased with him. What an experience is that, dear brethren, the sense that God is pleased with you in the house! Why should you stay away? Why not come into it? Why should you miss the knowledge that God is pleased with you in His own abode? So Jacob, as I said, poured a drink-offering on the pillar that he reared up, and anointed it, meaning that I am not only to the pleasure of God now, but I am dignified. The anointing is dignity, and it qualifies me to have part in the house, for it is only as I am anointed that I can move in the house. I move in the dignity of the house. It is not now how to behave myself in the house; it is the Spirit; for "He that ... has anointed us, is God" (@2 Corinthians 1: 21), and He has anointed us that we might move in dignity before Him.
Now the final thought is that Abraham had the honour of conversing with Jehovah, and that conversation had to do with the world. God deigned to speak to him about the government of this world and about
{356}
the judgment of this world. What can be greater, in a way, than that God should call us aside and tell us what is going to happen, should take us into His secrets? "Shall I hide from Abraham", He says, "that thing which I do ... ?". And then He tells us why. The preceding chapters are full of the deepest interest in this respect. In chapter 17, God occupied him with the death of Christ in type, occupied him with circumcision, and having unfolded that to him, it says that He broke off the conversation, as if to intimate to Abraham that He would resume it later. It is a beautiful conception, the holy confidence that belongs to us as the friends of God, for that is what Abraham represents; he is called the "friend of God". Friendship implies that I am qualified and competent to enter into the affairs of him who regards me as his friend. So God spoke to him about circumcision, and He broke off the conversation, and went up from him. The simplicity of the divine communications in the book of Genesis is beautiful.
Then Abraham circumcised his house; he carried out every command of God, and then "sat at the tent-door in the heat of the day" in the plains of Mamre, "And he lifted up his eyes and saw, and behold, three men standing near him". That is, God is drawing near to him in company. I have no doubt the Trinity is hidden in the statement; it is God Himself. Two angels, of course, were there, but the Old Testament has its own way of conveying the truth. God came in company, and in such a way as to lay Himself open to be invited to be entertained.
Oh, the greatness of entertaining God! Think of it, beloved! God placing Himself so near you that you might do it. He does not ask you to do it, but He places Himself so that you might do it. And Abraham is equal to it. It is now Abraham the believer. How nobly he acts! I need not enter into the detail; you are all conversant with the chapter; if not, you should
{357}
become so. It is a wonderful chapter in this sense. Think of God waiting under a tree for Abraham to bring Him cakes! Think of the simplicity of it! Infidels may sneer at it, but faith exults in it; it is God drawing near. After the refreshment, there they wait under the terebinth for this honoured man and his wife. His servants are all brought into it, and He makes communications to Abraham about the son he is to have, Isaac. He makes communications to him about Christ, but then He is going to make communications to him about the world. God has been making communications to us about Christ; wonderful thoughts have come to us, and the Holy Spirit would open our hearts to let them in.
That is the first part of chapter 18, but in connection with the second part, are we friends enough for God to tell us about what is coming upon the world? to be let into His secrets about the world, what this poor world is coming to? One thing after another is happening to remind us of the end, of what is depicted in the book of Revelation, but then, God would have us not only to read and understand the book of Revelation, but to be in spirit with Himself to get His own thoughts about these things. Will He not communicate to us? Will He not convey things to us? He will, but it is contingent upon certain conditions. "Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do ... ?". God, as it were, challenged Himself as to His own mind, as to whether He would do it to a man. Will He not take the same attitude with us? "Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do; seeing that Abraham shall surely become a great and mighty nation, and all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in him? For I know him, that he will command his children and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do justice and judgment". What a challenge that is to us as to our houses! not only as to our immediate children,
{358}
but our posterity, for every true father has his posterity in mind. The book of Genesis is patriarchal. It is a question of looking forward in the testimony, and in so far as it lies with you, of providing for it. That is the kind of man God honours, and that is the man that stands and listens to God: "Abraham stood yet before the Lord". He allowed the two angels to go off to Sodom, but He stood before this man and spoke to him. I am going down to see Sodom, He said to Abraham. Think of God saying that to an actual man today: I am going out to see what is going on in England, in the world, to see what France is doing, what Italy is doing, or America. Is that not what God says? It is exactly. God is concerned about all those matters. The two angels turned thence and went towards Sodom; God looked towards Sodom and He was going that way. Now He says, I will tell Abraham about it. Well, I pray to God regularly to tell me about these things. God is concerned about international conditions. He has set up the gentile monarchies, and they are running their course. Has God forgotten the book of Daniel? No, beloved. The book of Daniel and what is recorded in it still stands. The monster that God showed Nebuchadnezzar is still there, and the monarchies described in that book are running their course-they are nearing their end in the way God foretold that they should, and God would take us into His confidence as to what all those things mean. It is most important that we should be with God about those things, to be instructed about them. So God says, "Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do ... ?", and He spoke to him about Sodom; and then it says that "Abraham drew near"-how beautiful that is!-and said to God, If there are fifty righteous in the city will You spare it? Yes, I will, God said. What a wonderful conversation that was, Abraham interceding for the world, with a view, of course, to his brother
{359}
Lot in it. Should we not intercede for the world, with a view to our brethren in it, our Lots that are in it, that they might be rescued out of it? Well, God said, I will spare it for fifty. Will You not spare it for forty-five? Yes, for forty-five. For forty? Yes, for forty. For thirty? Yes, for thirty. For twenty?
Yes, for twenty. For ten? Yes, for ten. That is God, beloved, speaking to His friend. Abraham does not venture to go below ten, and so God left Abraham, the conversation was ended. That is how it stands; He did not break it off this time; it is a finished matter now. That is, we are drawing near to the close when the communications are about to stop. God went on, and "Abraham returned to his place", and presently the smoke of Sodom arose like the smoke of a furnace. True enough the word of God was the word of God. There is no doubt about it; the world is doomed; we may as well accept it, but what I am at is this, that Abraham went to the very spot where God spoke to him, that is to say, the suggestion of the nearness of God-of the dignity too-of God's recognition of Abraham in speaking to him about it, and Abraham recognising the spot. I have no doubt he would often think of that spot, the very spot where Jehovah had spoken to him. It is well to keep in mind where Jehovah speaks. Where does He speak today? He speaks in the assembly, in the church. That is where His communications are made, in the temple. "Know ye not", says Paul, "that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you?" (@1 Corinthians 3: 16). That is where God speaks.
Well, that is the place to go. Abraham went there and he saw the destruction of Sodom from that point. I do not believe we see anything aright save from that point. We see things as God sees them, and Abraham saw the destruction of the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah. That is all I had to say, just to stress the thought of speaking in nearness, and then speaking in
{360}
a certain place where circumstances are according to the majesty and dignity that befit God; that we should have recourse to that place so as to be in the mind of God and so get the good of the speaking.
{361}
PRIESTHOOD IN MALACHI
@Malachi 2: 4 - 8; @Malachi 3: 16 - 18; @Luke 2: 36 - 38
J.T. We should look at priesthood as it appears in Malachi. Malachi is written in remnant times and may help many of us as living in similar times. The subject of priesthood is very extensive and occupies more than one-third of the instruction relative to the tabernacle system as found in chapters 25 to 31 of Exodus. This shows its importance, and the subject is carried through to Malachi to its highest features.
The general condition at this time among the captives who had returned from Babylon was very low. The introduction of the subject of priesthood is of great significance, as showing to us what had been in Levi but what had at that time ceased to be normal in the priests, with the result that the service of God had degenerated.
Still there were those who feared the Lord and where the fear of the Lord is there is life. It says they "spake often one to another" and this is the best evidence of right conditions.
Ques. Would the evidence today of right conditions be speaking one to another?
J.T. Our regard for one another is the best evidence of our love.
Ques. What is the main thought of a priest?
J.T. @Exodus 28 brings in the priesthood: Aaron is to minister to the Lord in the priest's office. God says to Moses, "Take thou unto thee Aaron, thy brother". This would direct Moses back to earlier days when at Horeb God said to him, "Is not Aaron the Levite thy brother?". Now Moses is in the place of authority, so that the priest is brother to the one invested: Moses is viewed as a type of Christ in that relation. Here in Malachi we have a reference to
{362}
Levi: "My covenant was with him of life and peace; and I gave them to him for the fear wherewith he feared me, and was afraid before my name".
While he serves Jehovah in the office of a priest, in Malachi it is more the care and ministry to the saints. Speaking often one to another is more than in the meeting.
Ques. Would it take in the question of confidence?
J.T. Yes, you cannot love the brethren if you have no confidence in them. What transpires between the meetings is the test.
Ques. A priest would be of great value at a moment like this when things were on the wane. Do you think priestly conduct should mark us while we speak often one with another?
J.T. Yes, that is where we are tested. The Lord knows what is going on in my heart; the test is how I treat my brethren. I cannot love them if I cannot respect them. One great feature of the priest in Malachi is to bring out the fear of the Lord.
Ques. Would our speech be considering His name?
J.T. Our lack of power in speaking of His name should be humbling. Aaron is rightly a typical priest he had the heart of a brother. He was a man of experience before he is mentioned in Scripture. God said of him, "He can speak well". The test of our speaking is what God thinks of it.
Ques. The law of truth was in his mouth.
J.T. Doubtless it was. That is a fact that comes out here.
Ques. "They ... spake often one to another"; would that be the outcome of fearing the Lord?
J.T. Speaking one to another would show priestly instincts. The principal thing before them is His name.
Ques. Was it because of the remnant character of the day that they spake often one to another?
{363}
J.T. Yes, those that spake often one to another were few.
Rem. As we are in remnant days it is more urgent upon us that we should have priestly characteristics.
J.T. Jehovah tells us He loves us. They, in Malachi's day, challenged that. God said to them, "I have loved you". Think of the love He lavishes on them and yet they challenge this remark. Esau was Jacob's brother but he was not a brother like Aaron. They are all like Esau, a brother nominally but without the essentials. There are many who bear the name of brethren, but where are their affections? God says of Esau, 'Was he not Jacob's brother; yet I hated him?'. God would call attention to the nominal brother, He is taking account of the one who is wanting in affections. In spite of Jacob's way God loved him.
Ques. Is a similar thought connected with the two on the way to Emmaus? The Lord heard and restored them.
J.T. They were wayward, but they do not represent those in Malachi. They were unbelieving.
Rem. It is a great thing to fear the Lord like those in Malachi.
J.T. Quite.
Rem. Anna knew those who feared the Lord.
J.T. Instructions are given for those who fear the Lord so that the future generations may get help.
Anna had the true features of a priest. She, and those with her, would have read Malachi with relish. Speaking one to another we discover where the need is.
Rem. The word of God would come through another.
J.T. Things come up and we learn. It is the Philadelphian order; brotherly love answers to that. They kept the Lord's name.
Ques. If we saw the characteristics of a priest in a brother we would communicate with him?
J.T. Certainly.
{364}
Rem. It is a fine thought, that of a priest being a brother.
J.T. "Ye which are spiritual, restore such an one"; the appeal there is to brotherly sensibilities. We are enjoined to make straight paths for our feet. You are an example to others. See a man go forward in spiritual power and you follow him.
Rem. Where there is the brotherly element we will be found speaking one to another.
J.T. We should bring in His name. God values very much those that bring in His name and what care He expends on them! God regards such as His jewels, and spares them "as a man spareth his own son that serveth him", showing that the activities of God are to Himself. "They should seek the law at his mouth": attention is called to the mouth of a spiritual person. How perfectly this is seen in the Lord! God is pleased with any right speaking to one another. Chapter 4 brings out the law of Moses. God has the whole dispensation in view: remembrance of the law of Moses is not for ourselves only but for all Israel.
Ques. Is the priestly service open to the sisters as well as to the brothers?
J.T. Yes. Anna departed not from the temple night or day, serving God with fastings and prayers. You can see how the sisters come in. The idea is the assembly in its public character, composed of men and women. In fact @Luke 8 includes children too.
Now in the assembly no one is to appear before God empty, but as filled with the Spirit, which implies a priestly condition. Fulness and spiritual power is suggested in chapter 4. Speaking one to another is the first thought and then order comes. Priestly state is to be found in sisters, as in Rebecca. We do not look for what is spiritual only in brothers but in every one. There should be a reservoir of it, so to speak, in the assembly.
{365}
Rem. In loving one another we may love one more than another, but when divine nature is brought in there is no partiality.
J.T. It is a great advantage to get out of your class.
For instance, "Not many noble, are called"; the brother of low degree is to rejoice in his exaltation, the rich in his humiliation; each leaves his class. Certain characteristics mark me as a natural man. I must get rid of them to be a help to my brethren. In speaking often one to another, rich and poor soon leave their classes. The apostle suggests to Philemon to receive Onesimus as a brother. He was out of his class by the power of God. If you remain in your class you will hamper your spirit. There are no distinctions in the death of Christ.
Rem. Anna suggests the way spiritually.
J.T. Certainly. She was in it. She had the greatest opportunity and did not miss it; she was accustomed to be in the temple, and "spake of him to all them that looked for redemption".
{366}
"HE MUST INCREASE"
@John 3: 30; @John 1: 15, 26, 27, 29 - 37
I intend to base my remarks on John's statement, "He must increase". That is, I am to refer to the 'increase of Christ' and in saying this I am not referring to His Person. From John's point of view there can be no thought of any increase in the Lord's Person-He was eternally God.
Luke contemplates increase. As born into this world He was always perfect, so that viewed as a babe He advances, increases in wisdom and stature, so as to bring out the perfection in the Man Christ Jesus. He is a real Man.
That is not John's side, he has in mind a divine Person coming into manhood-the Word became flesh-and as become flesh He could say, "Before Abraham was, I am".
So that in speaking of the increase of Christ I do not refer to His personal increase as shown in Luke, but to increase in His people, in their apprehension of Him. It goes on until He fills all things; that is what John has in view.
The new man is marked by Christ: "Christ is everything and in all", but there are few who would assume to be thus filled. Yet the end of the ministry is that we should be that-with nothing to disturb Him. That is the idea of living: "Christ liveth in me" (@Galatians 2: 20); there we see one who is filled.
I mention that because it illustrates what I have in mind, not that God despises us if we are not filled. Whatever little place we give to Christ He values. In the first chapter of Leviticus we see the idea in the pigeon, sheep and goat. The pigeon would typify a small conception of Christ in the offerer. It speaks of the measure of our filling; it is small, but God respects it.
{367}
You find the thought of small measure in the trespass-offering, and it is humbling to think of the prevalence of trespassing: it is the outcome of having a small appreciation of Christ.
The Spirit of God comments upon it: the measure of meal divided would speak of some little grasp of the humanity of Christ for in the measure God has in mind the degree of apprehension of Christ. Yet the measure of meal in @Leviticus 5 denotes that the person is a believer: he sees something in Jesus, that He is more than a man, and that gives him a footing with God. God takes account of the smallness of the measure of meal; the pigeon or turtle dove is a little more. The pigeon is a living thing, life in the soul, and such a person is of value in the assembly, but his measure is extremely small: there is not much increase of Christ in that man. Presently He will become greater and even nations will be filled with Him. That is the idea John has of Christ.
Hebrews I confirms what I have said, showing how this increase is seen even in the Old Testament. After remarking on the greatness of God's Son, the express image of God's Person and so on, the writer appeals to the Old Testament to show how this greatness of Christ was built up there. He has an increasingly greater place among His people in the Old Testament. It is the outcome of the increase of Christ in anticipation; the more I know Him the greater place I give Him.
Why should I have less conception of Christ than David had? How he saw the glory of Christ in the distance and could speak of it! In @Psalm 2 we have "Thou art my Son". To which of the angels did He say that? The Psalms are full of references to Christ as Son. Then in @Psalm 45 the psalmist is growing, becoming greater and greater: he can say, "Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever". The saints of the Old Testament said that by the Spirit. He was
{368}
not here abiding with them as He is with believers today. We look back to the incarnation and we say, "Thy throne, O God ...". How marvellous that they understood it! Again "I will be to him a Father, and he shall be to me a Son" is seen in a Samuel and 1 Chronicles. The writer of @Psalm 89 laid hold by faith on the position Christ was about to take up here. In coming to the New Testament we get a man prepared of God and capable of taking up all these thoughts. John the baptist, for instance, and Elizabeth spoke beautifully of the Lord Jesus-God on the very portals of Christianity. You find that these words in the Old Testament are giving place to God; the spirit of emulation should rise amongst us.
Simeon's heart was full of Christ, the Spirit of God was upon him. He was here for God and prepared to receive and speak rightly of the Lord Jesus. What an appeal to the brethren! Have you seen the Lord's Christ? Simeon takes Him up in his arms. How would you receive Jesus? That is the test. He speaks by the power of the Spirit, which is the proper way, and he says, "Mine eyes have seen thy salvation". Things hid from the wise and prudent are revealed unto babes. Only such a man could take Christ in his arms and speak of Him as Simeon did. The witness of John the baptist comes in after that. God makes increase in John: he was full of Christ, and what God can do for one man, He can do for a million. John says, "He must increase, but I must decrease". How challenging this is to the heart! John's gospel brings out the deity of Christ. "In the beginning". Is there anybody who could speak of Him slightingly? The Old Testament gives us the thought of it, fills in the thought of it: there is none like Him. John is here, designed of God to speak of God from the standpoint of experience, how He increases in a man or child. He is there of God and is able to speak in a seemly way of God from the standpoint of experience.
{369}
If one has experience with the Lord, the Lord advances until He fills and lives in that person. Witness is the next thing. What did John say? his first statement, and a great one, is in verse 15. John died before he was thirty-five years of age, but before he died he witnessed gloriously for Christ. The point is that he witnessed and how he did it. He witnessed with a cry, "This was he of whom I spake". If John were concerned with his own greatness he would not cry the thing, he would have whispered it. John is able to take a second place. He keeps himself out of sight-the greater vessel is sure to be first-and as soon as I take my place humbly God is with me. The Pharisees heard about John and everybody came to know about him. The priests and Levites said, "Who art thou?" in the presence of one who is serving with great distinction. What a contrast to John in verse 27, where he speaks of His shoe's latchet! John says, I am not worthy to unloose it -- how expressive of his comparative nothingness in the presence of such an One. John is in the full vigour of his service when he makes this statement.
The next thought is that we must have the aid of the Spirit of God (verse 33). If He is to make increase in us then we must seek divine aid. That is a point we should take careful note of. Let us shut our eyes and ears to the hearing of evil; if we are drawn into the course of things of this world the Spirit is quenched. Let us turn to God. He who prepared John to speak well of Christ would prepare us to do the same. The Holy Spirit has greatly helped the brethren in regard to who Christ is-and in regard to what we should say about Him. The greatest creeds formed in the minds of men cannot teach you as to the Person of Christ. The Father can tell us about Him and the Spirit discloses His glories. The question is to get to the Lord and recognise the Holy Spirit; God will tell us all. There is divine activity to bring us into the
{370}
knowledge of the Son of God. John says, 'I have to see too'. Suppose you have not eyes to see, no one can give you eyes, but God is active and John saw "the Spirit descending". Oh that we might see this Person and bear record! He fills all things, why not me? The truth of the Son of God comes out through the eyes, tongue, affections and mind.
Lastly, John refused to be a party leader; now that Jesus is come on the scene he says, "Behold the Lamb of God". Why not the Son of God? The thought is that God comes down to the smallest of us and touches our hearts; the Lamb of God comes in so appealingly. The effect is that two of John's disciples heard him speak and followed Jesus. "What seek ye?", He asks. I feel I need teaching. Then they want to know where He dwelt. He increased and increased in their apprehension until they were so affected that they followed Him.
{371}
THE TOUCH OF CHRIST IN VIEW OF INTELLIGENCE IN THE ASSEMBLY
@Mark 1: 40 - 42, 29 - 31; @Mark 7: 31 - 35; @Mark 8: 22 - 26
You will observe that these scriptures all speak of the divine touch, the touch of Christ. I might have referred to other gospels for some of these incidents, but it occurred to me that what I have to say would be more applicable and forcible at the moment if I limited my reading to Mark. Mark has in mind the ministry and qualification for it, which extends not only to afflicted men and women, but to all who should serve, as seen in the mother-in-law of Simon being raised up. The saints are the means whereby what is of God is now expressed, the Lord Jesus having gone into heaven and being no longer here. He is in heaven, but His body is here, in which He is to be expressed, and this involves a touch, the laying on of His hands, or whatever other form may be needed, in order to convey something of Himself to men in this poor benighted world. Mark has in mind that those by whom the Lord comes into contact with the world should bear His own impress, so that those we have to do with may come within the range of Christ, that is, Christ mediatorially. With this in view we have in the epistles the idea of *the Christ* applying to the saints. The confession as to who Christ was by Peter is "Thou art the Christ". It is a matter of the Lord being representative of God as anointed, that God comes to man through such a One; He is expressed authoritatively and with power. Thus Mark in speaking of the transfiguration, would signify the kingdom of God come, not in word but in power. So in 1 Corinthians, the saints are called the 'Christ', "so also is the Christ" meaning the saints anointed (chapter 12: 12). The anointing extends to the
{372}
hem or skirts of the garments, according to the beautiful and well-known verses in @Psalm 133. It alludes to the saints, the anointing flowing down even to that limit, but not beyond it. It is not a loose end, the word is hem, "the hem of his garments"; which would imply that the saints are regulated, held by a bond, within limitations, so the anointing extends to that limit but not beyond it. The hem is a finished idea, compacted throughout. It is like Jerusalem, a city compacted together, no straggling over the country as with some of our cities, without any boundaries. In the city of God there is definiteness, we know where it ends. The state of Christendom today belies that, but God has brought us back to limitations and demarcations, to a finished thought: it is a very important matter that each saint should be seen in his place within the range of the anointing, and representative in his measure of God in Christ: "So also is the Christ". Would that we had sufficient appreciation of what is ours, of what we are brought into in this respect! "So also is the Christ"; one belongs to that; as having the Spirit of God, one is marked off as of that one body. We are not straggling abroad, or at any loose end; we are not free-lances as is often claimed, but are held by a bond beyond which we will not go, "sanctified in Christ Jesus, called saints".
Well now, Mark having this in mind, brings in these touches which I hope will be intelligible to each of us. The first touch is that in chapter 1, in regard of the leper, a well-known subject. I introduce it first, as properly at the beginning of this subject; for although it is not the beginning in the gospel, it is properly at the beginning morally. A man cannot serve rightly or take on the anointing, apart from being cleansed. The Lord touched the leper, and he was cleansed. Now as we have observed in these scriptures, the Lord enjoins secrecy as to these great works of His; He enjoins that they are not to be spoken about by word
{373}
merely. This applies to the leper; he is to show himself to the priest. It is not what you can say, but what you are, that a change has come over you. The Lord enjoins secrecy in such cases. He means to convey that the thing that is shown is enough, that it is a question of power, and that power is its own testimony. The person himself is the greatest testimony to the power of cleansing. I believe the Lord would instruct us at the present time as to power, and that it is to do its own work. There is to be no suggestion of competition with what is current in christendom. The Lord never undertook to compete with what was at Jerusalem or in the synagogues around, it would have been beneath Him to do so; the power that was displayed was so overwhelming that there was no need of any other testimony, the power itself was enough. The Lord would not compete, nor would He have us to compete with what is current; to take pride in what conversions there may be, in what numbers we have in fellowship, or in the numbers attending the meetings, is beneath the testimony; it is a question of power, and of what God has effected in the persons, what they are. The number of them of course has its own significance, but we may have numbers without any change in persons. It is the change that is the testimony, the change in the person.
So in this case, the Lord says, show yourself, do not speak about it, but show yourself to the priest. This principle might be enlarged upon as to showing oneself, but I am for the moment calling attention to the Lord's injunction to avoid any appearance of competition with what is current. For instance, He recognises the priesthood, there was no need to disregard its claims, He admitted them all; though the claims of the hierarchy are as nothing compared with what we have here, in the cleansing of the leper; they sink into oblivion alongside of this; it is the power that is the testimony, the power of God.
{374}
Well, the first thought here is the cleansing, and I bring it in to apply the idea of being cleansed by the touch of Christ by His work on the cross. It involves the cross: there could be no cleansing of the leper aside from the cross. The cross is anticipated when it is a question of sin. Nothing could be done, and there would be no point in any miracles aside from the cross. The cross is intended to set aside what is here, and to build up another order of man, and all these miracles have their counterpart today, in the operations of the Spirit in the believer. We are made whole. You never get partial healing, for everything that Christ did is complete, that is the idea. God takes on the thing potentially in us now, although it may take years to complete the work in us. So with cleansing, if the man is cleansed it is a complete matter. The Lord would not show a partially cleansed person to the priest, he would very soon pick out the defects. The Lord would never present half-finished work for testimony. So the cleansing is complete; you cannot add to it; it can be shown as the finished work in the man.
Then the next thing is whether we can be useful. The position in Simon's house was peculiarly difficult, for his wife's mother lay sick of a fever. We have been speaking today of difficulties in service; now this situation is peculiarly difficult to adjust. You will observe that it is not only Simon's house, in Mark, but "the house of Simon and Andrew". It belonged to two brothers, and one of them was married; a combination that would be particularly difficult. Household conditions are often peculiarly difficult, but not too hard for the Lord. He loves to do what seems to be impossible, and the impossible seems to be at times in households. Things are so near; the opposing elements, the contrary elements, are with us morning, noon and night in close quarters, and whilst they remain contrary there can be no right representation of God in the house.
{375}
So the Lord is besought about this matter, they ask Him about her. Where difficulties exist, Mark would create in us a sympathetic state. It goes a long way in meeting any household difficulties if the brethren take them on. Very often they are not known, they are private and secret. People are secretive about household difficulties, and they rob themselves of the prayers and sympathies of the saints. It is important therefore to take the brethren into our confidence; christianity is nothing if it is not a system of confidence. If I cannot tell my brother my private difficulties, I am exposing my want of confidence in him. Maybe he is not worthy of my confidence-it is often so, but it goes a long way to the meeting of difficulties and healing diseases in households if we have the prayers of the brethren. God indeed has guaranteed the healing of our diseases, but He has got His own means of doing so. He has means of operation down here and those may be called into service. Why not call them into service? They had no difficulty here in calling the Lord into service. They told Him about her, and He acceded to their wishes at once, and took her by the hand. It is as if He were to say to Peter and Andrew, and Peter's wife, This is My matter now. Nothing is more comforting in the sense of great difficulty than for the Lord to say, 'It is My matter now, you have put it into My hands, and I have taken it on'. He took her hand and the matter was ended; she had no more fever. It is a finished thing; there is nothing partial in any of the miracles of Christ, they are always complete in themselves. She arose and served them; that is to say she is a sister now without partiality. "She served them", she included the Lord doubtless in her service, but she served *them*, that is, all the saints in the locality, as we speak. I suppose Phoebe is a type of this kind of christian. She was "minister of the assembly ... in Cenchrea", we are told, a dignified office, but a servant
{376}
or minister of the assembly does not confine her hospitality, her sympathies, her ministry to the elite of the meeting, as we say; she was a servant "of the assembly", and that includes all. Paul says that if you look at any characteristic church there are "not many wise according to flesh, ... not many high-born"; there may be some, thank God there are, for they are loved of the Lord as much as any, and all are needed to make a good meeting; but there are "not many powerful, not many high-born". The assembly is inclusive of all; and this woman in @Mark 1 served all, and so did Phoebe. She has the most remarkable commendation. Some of us were speaking the other day about *divine* commendations, and Paul's commendation of Phoebe may be regarded as a divine commendation to the church at Rome; and the commendation was that she was "a servant of the church which is at Cenchrea", @Romans 16: 1.
Well now I have in mind to speak of the passages in chapters 7 and 8, because they deal with the saints in their highest capacities. Our hands and feet do not afford the highest capacity for service. The organs that offer the highest capacity in man are his vocal organs, his hearing and his seeing. These are the organs that make man what he is. His body, generally, is but the vehicle for the taking in and giving out involved in the activities of these great organisms of speech and sight and hearing. Man is the masterpiece of God's creation, but particularly so in virtue of those powers by which he expresses himself intelligently, by which he is marked as an intelligent person, and in virtue of which he is a member of the greatest organism in the universe, that is the assembly.
Now, dear brethren, one hopes as I speak these things, simple in themselves, that we shall begin to think in ourselves whether these organs are really available in us and in a fit condition to be employed by the Spirit of God. The first incident deals with a
{377}
man who is deaf and has an impediment in his speech; he "could not speak right" (chapter 7: 32). He might speak, but he could not speak properly. The second case (chapter 8: 22), is a man who could not see. Now I wish you, dear brethren, to patiently hear what I seek to say about this. What great depth of feeling was seen in the Lord as to these afflicted people! There is in this world a great desire for education, and education is the most potent factor of pride that there is. Education gives polish to man as he is, and makes him shine as a man here in this world. The universities have that in mind. They not only give persons instruction as to things, how to learn things, but they have in mind to make ladies and gentlemen of them. Sometimes we hear of seminaries and schools professing to make 'christian gentlemen', a paradoxical expression, for there can be no such thing. The ideas do not belong together. Christians have to learn to read and write in common with all men, because these things are necessary to communicate with one another, and to do business, but all that is for them but a circumstance on the way to heaven; it is by no means to make gentlemen of them for this world. True refinement according to God is learnt elsewhere; the refinement of the world is of no value; refinement according to God is what stands in relation to heaven. There must be refinement; there must be suitability for heaven. Think of the glory that is up there, the refinement and dignity and moral beauty! How alluring it is where faith exists! And the Lord gives us a glimpse of it by the Spirit. He took up Peter and James and John to give them a sight of it on the holy mount. The Lord was transfigured before them that they might see His majesty. Moses and Elias were with Him "appearing in glory" that they might see it. They would never lose that impression, it would dismiss for ever from their minds any thought of earthly glory that might have prevailed. It could
{378}
have no place in the presence of the glory that is up there.
Now in all this, beloved, we need this particular kind of service of the Lord. It is so urgent, and so difficult, to get people to hear right and to see right. The Lord takes this man aside from the crowd. The crowd are not to see this matter. In dealing with it the Lord is not concerned about what people think; He is ready to help anyone, of course. The wickedest man in the world would be interested in a miracle, so the Lord took the man aside from the crowd. I am seeking to impress upon every one of us how urgent and how difficult the matter is. The man is not yet speaking right; that is, he does not know how to speak to God in the assembly, nor to speak to the brethren. He may speak, but he is not speaking right, and he is to enquire about this. So that the Lord sighs, a very touching thing. He sighed in the presence of one man who was deaf and could not speak right. One wonders whether He has ever sighed in regard of oneself in this respect, whether the Lord has ever had to do with one in this way; whether one has caused the Lord pain in the way he has spoken to God and to the brethren at times. The Lord is concerned if we do not hear right, and speak right. It says He sighed, He groaned, and He looked up to heaven, as if to invoke all the power of heaven to make one man hear right and speak right. Is it not urgent, beloved brethren? The Lord is concerned not only about the vocal powers, but about the words we use, and although it does not come in here, about the kind of language we ofttimes employ. The common language of the world is unfit and unsuitable, to say nothing of the poison of asps under people's lips; that poison comes out with every word spoken by unregenerate men in this world.
But now I am speaking of the vocal power of conveying thoughts. The Lord is deeply concerned
{379}
about this man; what is it, beloved, that He would impress upon us? That He wants us to speak right and to hear right in the assembly. And so He groans and spits, a remarkable action mentioned several times in Scripture, and it must have a profound meaning that the Lord should do this; and then He touched the man's tongue. I do not know of any action bringing in the Lord in such detail, bringing Himself into the matter, His feelings, His very nature, conveyed in the spittle and the sighing, His very nature as Man here brought into it and that He should deign to bring this into evidence, to make one man hear and speak properly. Is it not worth our while to consider and see whether we cannot improve?-for that is why these things are recorded. Then He says, "Ephphatha". This is one of the instances in which the Lord's actual words are handed down to us. There is nothing that touches one more than the actual words spoken by Christ. He did not speak English; it did not exist then, but He speaks it now if He speaks to any of us; He speaks in English if we do not know any other language. It is very touching the way the exact words that He used are recorded in this gospel; He says, "Ephphatha" and Mark tells us that it means, "Be opened". So also Mark gives us the word "Abba". Is it not intended to bring the Lord near to us, to bring Himself into this service, and the very words He uses? It is as if He would say, 'Now it is urgent about this matter, that this tongue should be unloosed, that it should become the vehicle of the Spirit of God in the man'. The Spirit has not become incarnate, He cries "Abba, Father" through our vocal powers. So that one is to be in the hands of the Spirit, his tongue is to be under the control of the Spirit, otherwise one will not speak right. But it is the touch of Christ that brings this about, and so the groaning and the looking up to heaven, and the spitting. We have all these things put together, and
{380}
the force of it is that the Lord is exceedingly urgent that I should hear right, and speak right.
Then there is chapter 8, where it is a question of seeing. One comes in contact with brethren, seeking to help as many of us do, and a brother or sister will say 'I do not see that'. They really mean that there is virtue attaching to their blindness, that to say that they do not see is to their credit, but it is not, it is a discredit. They really mean to say: 'I am at liberty not to see it'; but you are not; you are simply exposing your blindness if the thing is seen by others. If you do not see it, there is no virtue in your eyes not seeing, it is simply blindness. No man can help you, you must go to the Lord about that matter.
Why is it you cannot see it? Thousands do see it. This man here did not see, but it says, "They bring a blind man unto him, and besought him to touch him". How much this kind of service is needed, this bringing of a blind man to the Lord; you cannot do it yourself. No one can give eyesight but the Lord. They bring him to the Lord, there was need of this, because if the Lord is ministering things in the power of the Spirit, we want all to see and hear. No true lover of Christ would wish that any should fall into the ditch. Hence the thing is to bring the blind ones to Christ, to bring them to Him. If one might speak freely, prayer is the most important service of all today, and it is within the range of every one of us to tell the Lord about the blind ones, that they do not see, and to bring them to Him. And here again you get the same kind of experience-He took him "by the hand, and led him out of the town". It is a question of opening eyes to what is spiritual, that is the idea; to get people to see things as they are. The Lord spat on his eyes and touched him and asked him if he saw anything. And it says, "He looked up, and said, I see men as trees, walking". This is how we are tested. Sisters in a meeting do not have to say anything so they never
{381}
expose themselves, but brothers do sometimes. The Lord has a way of asking everyone, 'Do you see it?'. The blindness is appalling and the simplest things are often not seen. The question is not what others say but what do you say yourself? What do you see? What have you discovered for yourself? We are brought into a spiritual realm which requires eyesight which only the Lord can give, that we may see things according to God. It is a wholesome thing to make a sort of inventory of what you do see. We have all things brought into view by Christ clearly as we are touched. He asks this man "if he beheld anything", and he says, "I behold men, for I see them, as trees, walking". That is how it should read, I think. His vision was very distorted, but still he saw something, and the Lord did not deny that. He recognised that there was something there, and a possibility of more. That is a fine thing in dealing with souls, to be assured that it is possible to get them right, for if the will is not at work, they will see. It is a question of the will. If you put virtue on your not seeing, your blindness will remain, but if you say, 'I do not see it, and I am sorry', then there is hope for you; you are worthy of notice. As soon as one begins to admit that after all he may be mistaken, there is some hope. The man here says, "I behold men, for I see them, as trees, walking", and the Lord touched him again, "He laid his hands again upon his eyes, and he saw distinctly". The Lord will make the thing perfect. So, dear brethren, if we resign our wills to the Lord and confess that maybe we are wrong, then there is hope for us. So the Lord touched the man again and he saw everything clearly. That is, he would look over the landscape and name everything. Every object can now be perceived, and he does not call a man a tree; he regards him in his true proportion.
What I had in mind was to bring out that the Lord
{382}
would secure here that which is to be representative of Himself, and what is of the greatest importance in that regard is that these organs of intelligence should come under the touch of Christ. As the apostle says, "I speak as to intelligent persons". To be in the assembly according to God, we need all these curative services of Christ. He is deeply concerned that we should be truly in the assembly, knowing how to hear, and to speak and to see. There are many allusions to 'touching' which the Scriptures afford, but as I have said, I confine myself to Mark because he has the ministry in mind, and that which is to be used here is to be marked by this feature of cleansing, so that one is able to speak and hear and see, as belonging to those who form the assembly, the anointed of God.
{383}
ISAIAH'S APPRECIATION OF CHRIST
@Isaiah 53: 11, 4; @Isaiah 40: 11; @Isaiah 63: 9; @Isaiah 46: 4
In this prophet we have the Lord Jesus alluded to in a variety of ways, in a special way as the Servant, "My servant", Jehovah says, "whom I uphold, mine elect in whom my soul delighteth!", @Isaiah 42: 1. One covets coming under that heading in any little way, for all service must take character from Christ. Heaven has peculiar delight in the service that is carried on according to the example of Christ. "My servant", Jehovah says, "... in whom my soul delighteth!". Hence the service carried on in this way affords a constant yield for heaven, "For we are a sweet odour of Christ to God, in the saved and in those that perish to the one an odour from death unto death, but to the others an odour from life unto life" (@2 Corinthians 2: 15, 16), odour of life, odour of Christ; whether it be to life or death. If there be refusal of the message, death is the solemn, gloomy outlook for those that refuse. In David's time there was a full line for life, "one full line", @2 Samuel 8: 2. There were also those marked out for death; it is a very solemn thing to be amongst those doomed, not that God has any pleasure in anyone's doom, for He has no pleasure in the death of the wicked. Judgment is a strange thing to Him; it is not in accord with His disposition, He is obliged to resort to it, but His thought is life; and whether a service is for life, whether it result in life for anyone, or death, in a sense it is always a savour of Christ; that is how the apostle spoke of it.
"My servant whom I uphold, mine elect in whom my soul delighteth!", that is the service that is in mind; Christ is in heaven and what He is before the Father is what He was here as Son; but He was here in service, and service yielding to God, so that no gospel meeting
{384}
carried on as the service of Christ is savourless, even although there be no converts. No converts is 'an odour of death', the apostle says. It is very solemn, nevertheless it is so. God has pleasure in the preaching even if it be not received, and Isaiah is marked by this. Isaiah is a remarkable book, full of holy feelings, and no part of it is more touching than chapter 53. It is Christ here in suffering. In chapter 6 it is Christ in glory, sitting upon His throne; in chapter 53 Christ here in sufferings, and in most touching terms the Spirit of God marks them off and the holy Sufferer. I have in mind to begin with this chapter, in relation to the idea of *bearing* or *carrying*.
The Lord came in, a lowly Servant, to take on all the drudgery that resulted from the activities of sin, and oh! what drudgery there is even in a material sense in this poor benighted world, drudgery of wives, drudgery of children, and of fathers and mothers toiling for their children, sorrowing! It is a world of misery brought about by sin. Every one of us has had his part in it; each of us has contributed his quota to the world, so sorrow-stricken; but the Lord Jesus came into it, not merely to look around to see what was there. He entered into the temple (@Mark 11: 11) and He looked around on everything, and so He looked around on the world, He came into it, we are told; it was made *by* Him; what right He had! He could look up at the sun and regard it as His. The moon, the stars, the mountains and the hills, the rivers and the plains were all His. The world was made by Him; He came into what was made *by* Him. The outline of His creatorial handiwork was there, but morally it knew Him not, "the world knew him not", @John 1: 10. There were those with whom He had entered into special relations, that is, Israel, His own, and they did not know Him, they did not receive Him. How strange it must have seemed! Yet it was not strange, for He could not have been taken by surprise;
{385}
yet the awful reality of the change was felt by Him. He was there, not as a mere visitor. Persons may visit places where there has been suffering; curious persons may visit these places out of curiosity, but the Lord did not. He came in to take account of things as they were. He took account of the physical, but He said little or nothing about it; what He was concerned about was the moral state of things. That is what He is concerned about tonight, not about your position in the world, but your moral state and your moral outlook, your destiny, and He is here tonight, as He came into the world at the beginning, to take on liabilities. How great He was! Like the ark of Noah, He was great enough to take in every thought of God. The ark was a very large vessel relatively, great enough to take in everything, but, more than that, Christ was great enough to carry in His mind, in His heart, every human ill, every human sorrow. He bears our sorrows; He carries them. But what He was concerned about particularly was man's sinfulness, knowing as He did that it must shut man out of God's presence for ever and for ever. So, if He left you as you are tonight, unregenerate, unforgiven, you must be shut out from God for ever and for ever. The prospect is unutterably gloomy for the unsaved. The Lord felt that, He felt for the sin-stricken, and that is therefore the first thing that I have in mind, that He should bear our iniquities. What gospel that is for any sin-stricken person, any person who feels himself a *leper*! Literally what gospel it was as the Lord could stretch out His hand and say, "I will; be cleansed", @Matthew 8: 3. What gospel it is to a sin-worn soul, a conscience consciously pricked by uncountable sins! What gospel it *is*, "He shall bear their iniquities". We do not say *He shall*; we say *He has* done it. Most of us here tonight can say that He has borne our iniquities; He has carried them, not as in His manhood here. No, He took them on to the cross, bore them, and only then. When the
{386}
judgment of God was about to be raised against Him He sustained them there. So that we do not read of a future thing, we speak of an accomplished thing; the Lord Jesus having borne our iniquities, carried them; He sustained them on the cross, and God met Him there; I say, God *met Him there*! He had looked down from heaven upon Him earlier several times, yea, He was always looking down upon Him; there was never a moment that the Father's eye was not upon Him, from the manger to the cross. But now everything has changed. No sinner will get peace without seeing that. The position is changed, for, instead of the Lord being delightful to the eye of the Father, He took on our sins before God, knowing well what the judgment of God was in regard of them; He took them on, every one of them. It is beyond the human mind to take in how He could take every one, but He speaks about the number of them, and He took them on as His own. They were not His own but He took them on as His own and they were in that sense His, "mine iniquities ... are more than the hairs of my head", @Psalm 40: 12. The whole position was changed, for He was bearing the full weight of our iniquities, and judging them, knowing what they meant. How terrible they were, how dreadful to Himself! One would love to be able to enter into that more. He took them on morally, and God dealt with them as if they were His own; they were *not* His own. It was real, no imaginary forsaking, it was a general abandonment of God. He forsook His beloved Son; and the Lord Jesus knew it, He was conscious of it. He sustained the full weight of that judgment and died under it, for death is fallen man's portion. Before He died the awfulness of the suffering was over; but nevertheless He died. Death was publicly upon man, and He died; according to the gospel that Paul preached to the Corinthians, "that Christ died for our sins, according to the scriptures;
{387}
and that he was buried", @1 Corinthians 15: 3, 4. That is another thing, another part of the gospel; He actually went under the ground, yea, in the heart of the earth. He bore our sins. Most of us here can say that He has borne "our sins in his body on the tree", @1 Peter 2: 24. Is there anyone here who cannot say, 'He has borne *my* sins in His own body on the tree'? It is your opportunity to put your name in with ours.
As soon as that movement of faith in your heart has its place, heaven notices it; your history begins in heaven and it goes on eternally. It is a great thing to begin to make history in heaven. Ever since our history began, heaven has been noting down the precious traits of Christ that have come out in us. One would appeal to young or old people who have not put in their name, in this sense, amongst those who can say, "Himself bore our sins in his body on the tree". *He Himself*! He would not do it by a mediator, He did it Himself. There is much that He does mediatorially, for us through others; but these two things He does Himself. He died for us *Himself*, "bore our sins in his body on the tree"; and *He* comes for us, "The Lord himself ... shall descend". These two great services He performs, not mediatorially, but directly, and it ought to touch our hearts. Can anyone sit there on the seat, and be callous about this, make it a trivial matter, or perhaps no matter at all to you, no concern at all to you? How dreadful! God forbid that it should be! We would urge you to take your place with us. Come into the company of the redeemed, and record your name as one whose sins have been borne, whose iniquities have been borne, sustained in the judgment by Christ, and never brought up against you. God says, "Their sins and their lawlessnesses I will never remember any more", @Hebrews 10: 17. That is one part of His covenant. He swears so as to assure our hearts; God cannot lie, but yet He swears, not that anyone demanded Him
{388}
to swear. He swore by Himself (@Hebrews 6: 17, 18). It is to assure our hearts that our sins and our iniquities are remembered no more.
I have spoken of the sorrows (verse 4) that come in, for the believer will have sorrows; his sins are gone, never to be remembered, but he will have sorrows. Verse 4 means that the Lord Jesus takes liability on Him in regard of them. He came into this world, He takes our liabilities on for us, and amongst these, as verse 4 states, He bears our griefs and carries our sorrows. No Christian is without these. The more faithful one is as a Christian, the more sorrow. There are sorrows indeed that come to us through our unfaithfulness; but if we are true to Christ we shall come into griefs, and the Lord undertakes, according to this verse, to bear our griefs and to carry our sorrows. There may be christians here who are going through sorrow of one kind or another. That is part of the gospel, that the Lord takes them on. If there is one undergoing peculiar sorrow here, the gospel is for you. Verse 11 is for the sinner, but verse 4 may have a word of relief for someone here, some person under peculiar sorrow. Maybe nobody knows it but yourself, but the *Lord* knows it. Every man knows "the plague of his own heart", @1 Kings 8: 38. The Lord is ready to take on that plague and carry it Himself; that is verse 4.
Then in verse 11 of chapter 40 we have the young Christian. People make enquiries about young christians, young believers, whether they should be ministered to as such, and the answer is, 'Certainly, but ministered to by persons who *can* minister to them'. The Lord Jesus ministered to the young, He took the very youngest in His arms; little ones, babes, as Matthew says. The greatest Servant does not depute some young person to do it. The little ones are impressionable, and it is peculiarly important that they should get right impressions at this time, for
{389}
"That which is crooked cannot be made straight" (@Ecclesiastes 1: 15); and if young christians do not start well they are apt to be maimed or dwarfed all their history here, which is a disaster. Hence the Lord leads in the way of serving the young, taking the babes in His arms. It is very beautiful to see the Lord Jesus taking an infant in His arms, and of course an infant spiritually too. We may transfer the literal to the spiritual, and say that the Lord ministers to His people according to their growth; whether they be infants, or boys, or girls, or young men, or fathers, He ministers to all. There can be no question that young people can be ministered to as such, but the minister is one who can minister to fathers also; he is not some person of little spirituality who can take Sunday school classes, for the departmental principle of teaching is not scriptural. The servant, a faithful servant, ministers a portion of meat to the household, whether the household be old or young. So chapter 40: 11 is for young christians, that is, infants. If one of you sitting on your seat here tonight receives Christ into your soul as I have been presenting Him to you, then you belong to this class. You may have sorrows and, as I said before, He will take on those also, but He will not only carry the sorrows and the griefs, He will carry you. He has much more delight in carrying you than in carrying your sorrows and griefs; He will carry you, and He will carry you in His bosom. Could I present anything more attractive to a young Christian or a young believer? Could I present anything more attractive to you than the arms of Jesus, the bosom of Jesus? He carries you! Will you not just commit yourself to Him? His arms are strong enough, His bosom is large enough. The idea of bosom is receptiveness, it is an inward thought; the idea of breast in @John 13 suggests firmness, you can lean on it. A bosom is a place to be *in*; John was *in* His bosom, and it is large enough for all believers.
{390}
Would you like to be there? It may be difficult for you to take it into your soul. I quite see that, because young people find it difficult to transfer their thoughts from the natural to the spiritual, but you have to learn to be spiritual; you have to remember that it is part of christianity to get the idea of what is spiritual. "God is a spirit" (@John 4: 24), and if I have to say to God I must ultimately come to the idea of what is spiritual. If I have in me the idea of the spiritual I have the thing instinctively; then the point is to develop that. If you ask me for an indication of this spiritual instinct, I would say, 'Would you like to be with the Lord's people where they talk about Jesus rather than at a game of cricket?'. It is lovely to see young christians sitting down amongst those who are speaking about the things of the Lord. You are ready to sit and listen. You are beginning to be spiritual; the thing is to cultivate that, and see what this means to get into the arms of Jesus. That is what it says here, "He will feed his flock like a shepherd: he will gather the lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom". It is the same Person who is spoken of in chapter 42 as the Servant, the Servant who delights the heart of God, the Servant whom He chose, the Elect who delights His heart, and He gathers the lambs with His arm. Oh, young people, do not let some little thing defeat you! You scamper off, perhaps you want to go somewhere, or a friend entices you to see something, and you do not tell your parents where you are going; and yet the previous night you heard precious things. Why not follow that up? The Lord will come in. An arm is powerful, but it can be gentle; it is not only the expression of power, but it is the expression of love. Eutychus was enfolded in the arms of Paul (@Acts 20: 10). They are expressive of power, but think of power actuated by love"He will gather the lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom". I would like the young people here to follow up these
{391}
thoughts. You have trusted Christ and confessed Him; now get into these thoughts, the feeding like a shepherd, gathering with the arm, carrying in the bosom. It would be difficult for us to get more precious thoughts than these, and it is important, it is urgent, that you should embrace these thoughts and see how they work out; what it is to be fed, to be gathered, to be carried by the Lord Jesus in your youthfulness.
There is the thought of testimony to this kind of thing having been done to others. The Lord has dealt with others in this way, because Scripture not only has its direct teaching to christians, but teaches by example; the Lord says, "Learn from me", @Matthew 11: 29. That is seeing how *He* does things. So in chapter 63: 9 we have an historical statement-not that Scripture specialises in history, but it does present the history of Jesus, and this is one of the historical things presented to us to strengthen us; it is a matter of example. That is to say, something happened before; I need it to happen now, but it has happened before. Think of the millions of conversions, for instance, that happened before; they are all written for us. One could mention thousands of things that have happened before. They happened, and the happening is recorded so that the christian should be concerned. I have been speaking to young people about His carrying them, but now here is an historic thing: "In his love and in his pity he redeemed them; and he bore them and carried them all the days of old". As you get a little help in your soul from what I am saying, the Spirit of God would say, 'Look at that there!'. If you are in a school you are taught by illustration as well as by direct teaching. This is an illustration, an historic fact, that the Lord in His love redeemed His people. He says, "I have borne you on eagles wings and brought you to myself" (@Exodus 19: 4), and here He says that He carried them
{392}
all the days of old. He would call your attention to that, that He carried Israel all the days of old. Why *not carry you*? That is the idea. God would confirm what I have said from chapter 40: 11 by this historic example. How dependent it makes us as we accept the Lord! He not only takes our sorrows and griefs, but takes on *ourselves*, feeding us, gathering us, carrying us in His bosom. Some of us here may not be gathered. You may have believed in the Lord some time ago, you have believed Him, and confessed Him, but you are not gathered. To you Isaiah says later, "Yet will I gather others to him, with those of his that are gathered", @Isaiah 56: 8. Most of us here are gathered: why not you? The Lord would gather you by the power of His Person, so that you feel the power of the Person behind it. He would set you down with a sense of obligation. Gathering implies that I accept obligation. You come into a realm where obligation is present; but it is the obligation of love, "the perfect law, that of liberty", @James 1: 25. If you are not gathered, you are greatly exposed to the wolf and the lion; Satan is "as a roaring lion ... seeking whom he may devour", @1 Peter 5:8. You regard yourself as unattached; you talk about the saints as 'they' and 'them' and so forth; you do not say 'we'. Satan knows you are unattached, and he will attach you to something and destroy your soul. It is most dangerous to be unattached for the christian. But then, as I was saying, this is the historic example, *carrying*.
In chapter 46: 4 the principle of carrying extends to the old ones. Some older brethren here tonight may think they are here to support the gospel; rightly so, but every christian should attend the gospel with an open mind feeling that *he* needs the gospel. I have often thought and said that the apostle Paul would be glad to sit down and listen to Peter. He might present a side of the gospel that Paul had not thought of, and
{393}
*vice versa*; Peter would be glad to listen to Paul; and in fact it would be important that he should, for Paul spoke of "my glad tidings"; Peter never said that. Paul is the only one that said that. It means a particular gospel that every apostle and every saint should listen to; it is the gospel of place; it is the gospel of salvation, too, but it is the gospel of another place. It is the gospel the spies preached to Israel when they searched the land and brought back the grapes of Eshcol. That is the gospel, that God has another place. It is "the glad tidings of the unsearchable riches of the Christ", @Ephesians 3: 8.
Now this verse, chapter 46: 4, as I said, is for the old people here, the grey-haired christian. I do not use the expression 'grey hairs' as a matter of spiritual decay; that is not what is meant here. In other places it does, but here it is not that. In chapter 46 it is, "Even to old age, I am HE, and unto hoary hairs I will carry you: It is I that have made, and I will bear, and I will carry, and will deliver". Now this is for old christians. The gospel is for the lamb, for the infants spiritually; the carrying love of Christ, the gathering love of Christ, the feeding love of Christ, no word about grey hairs there. But then there are not only lambs, but there are those with grey hairs, those who have old age, and heaven sympathises with them. Physical decay tends to weaken us even in our faith: as we pass to old age we are apt to become downcast and depressed. The thing is to be more in line. We have to provide against it that christians should be restful and bright in the apprehension of Christ, although in old age. He is conscious of our old age; it is the love of Christ for the old, the grey haired. It is the saving love of Christ, for we need to be saved to the uttermost. Salvation is not an historic thing; to many of us it is a continuous thing, and the gospel implies that in old age He will carry you. That is a thing to be cherished, for you need the Lord at
{394}
the last. It is an exercise as we face these things and see how the gospel of the grace of God provides for every stage in christianity, every gradation, and how the old are to see to it that they are appropriating what love provides for them, so that their minds may be clear and their faith unimpaired, that their interests in the testimony may go on, that they may contribute to their younger ones and not be a burden to them. They will not be a burden if they are bright spiritually, though old and decrepit. The spiritual regard them as assets and not liabilities. It is a very poor thing for a christian to become a liability to his brethren. The Lord provides that it should not be; this verse provides for that, we should appropriate His provision of love for us, "Even to old age, I am HE", meaning that *He* is unchanged, "and unto hoary hairs I will carry you: It is I that have made, and I will bear, and I will carry, and will deliver". One like Moses could see and his force was unabated (@Deuteronomy 34: 7). One desires to be found thus, so that he has an abundant entrance into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.
{395}
THE WALK OF FAITH
@Hosea 11: 3; @Exodus 12: 37 - 46; @Exodus 13: 20, 21; @Numbers 2: 1 - 9, 17; @Numbers 20: 19
I wish to use these scriptures by the Lord's help to set out the thought of the walk of faith. We are said to walk by faith and not by sight, and for this we have to be taught, as the passage in Hosea indicates, Jehovah saying that He taught Ephraim to walk. We have to be taught of God in every respect, meaning that we do not learn from man, as such. God uses man, of course; indeed the Lord Jesus was a Man, so that when we say that we are not to learn anything from man we mean man naturally as he is. Aside from God coming into Manhood, that is in Christ, we could learn nothing. Every divine thought takes form in Christ become Man, it is only thus it could become intelligible. The vast creation, itself indicative of so much power, could be but little understood aside from what has come out in Christ. So that we learn, even as to the creation, from Christ. Not that He occupies us with astronomy and the like, with science; for the whole thought of God is to teach us of Himself and of His counsels, and these great things that occupy men in the sciences are just a means to an end, and when that end is reached they cease. Teaching has reference to God, and so in regard of walking. The first walking in Scripture is by God Himself, which is a significant matter, significant in regard to the subject before us. We are told that Adam and Eve heard the voice of the Lord God walking in the garden in the cool of the day. Not that they saw Him walking, they heard Him walking. Faith comes by hearing and we are to understand things on that principle, but He walked, and walked under the appellation of "Lord God". That is, God in covenant, the thought that disarms our hearts of fear; so it is significant that that
{396}
title appears in the section of scripture that speaks about the fall, as we call it, more often than in all the rest of scripture. That is, God would assure our hearts, in spite of the presence of sin through us, that He is a covenant God and is true. God is true. So, although He walked in the garden and called for Adam and Adam was hidden away through his fear, God found a means of carrying out His thoughts. For He is never taken by surprise and never baffled, never defeated; He has always an abundance of resource and in the light of that He is spoken of as "Jehovah Elohim", that is, the covenant God, which every Christian heart should cherish, for every true believer drinks of the cup of the Lord's supper which denotes the covenant God, the love of God covenant-wise, meaning a love that is assuring, that condescends to engage itself, to guarantee itself. That is how the subject of walking is introduced to us in the Scriptures. There was a way alongside of God for others to join in the way of walking and we find Enoch and Noah there and many others since. Indeed, every man of faith walks with God and every worker of faith works with God. So that the subject of walking according to God is of the very greatest importance and obviously it is for young people to see how to come into it, to learn it. As God says, "I taught Ephraim to walk". The New Testament teems with the application of the walk of faith. The apostle in writing to the young assembly at Thessalonica brings it forward, exhorts them as to it, how they should walk and please God, even as they did. There is very great encouragement in urging people to keep on with what they are already doing. It is much more difficult to work to bring people into the path of faith than to urge them in it. The apostle urged the Thessalonians to abound in it more and more. The standard of walking is God, God in Christ, whose walk was so delightful, as I need not remind you, as seen in the gospels. John
{397}
the baptist saw Him walking and says, "Behold the Lamb of God". That is to say, the mature thought; the step was firm, not faltering; it was firm, with purpose. So that others came into the path of faith. Throughout the epistles you get the thought stressed, the importance of walking pleasing to God, of coming under God's eye after the pattern of Christ.
I referred to Exodus, which is the infantile book, and yet not infantile for it goes on to the full growth, typically. It begins with the sons of Israel (New Trans.), not the children, sons, which is a mature thought. Satan hated that thought and will do his utmost to destroy those who actually or potentially are walking according to God, and so I read those scriptures in chapters 12 and 13 to show how the allusion in Hosea took form. It is more particularly to call attention to the details mentioned as they begin to move, because the movement of faith is surrounded by a set of circumstances, a sort of soil which is to develop and produce later. But you will notice that they moved. In the verse that I began with it says, "The children of Israel journeyed". They did it. This is a suggestion for every young person here, every young Christian, a challenge to his heart as to whether he has begun to move, to journey. It was night, and what you find immediately is the number of persons who joined in this movement, a very great number. An encouragement to the young heart, that it is not going to be alone. Later he may say that he would walk alone, but not alone, for God would be with him. The true faith implies that I am ready to walk alone, and yet not alone. Indeed the exhortation to Christians to separate today involves much. It involves suffering and the possibility of being alone, at least the outlook might suggest that. "Pursue righteousness, faith, love, peace, with those that call upon the Lord out of a pure heart", and it is with those, so that there is no suggestion that you will be
{398}
alone. There are over six hundred thousand here in this movement, six hundred thousand men besides children and women. As I may say, that is one of the circumstances; there is a mixed multitude, a sorrowful suggestion that you have to be on the watch. What is mixed is always a danger, but they are there. Another thing is that they have got dough, without leaven. Not yet cakes, and it is presented not as their deliberate doing but that God saw to it that they were forced to have dough without leaven. That is God comes in in His governmental ways, for the Egyptians urged them out. The young believer is helped, but not as he would expect to be helped. His best judgment would lead him to put in the leaven to make a cake such as he was accustomed to eat. God operates in this way at the outset; He is helping us without our knowing it. How many of us have proved that, and we are reminded here that dallying around after the light comes into our souls, when the time has come to move, exposes us to the greatest danger. After the light has come in, as sure as possible we will make a cake with leaven and if we carry that cake with us, so to speak, we shall bring the leaven into the new setting, and may be it will leaven the new setting and we had better not come at all than bring leaven. You will remember how the Lord Jesus, as He was about to introduce the church in Matthew's gospel, left the Pharisees and Sadducees and went away. He not only left them but went away; He put a distance between Him and them. His disciples were with Him, they are on the boat and He challenges them as to leaven. You may leave people and take their leaven with you. If you dally about and linger on and say,'The Lord has not made my way clear yet', it is sure that you are making a cake of leaven and you will leaven the company that you come to, if they admit you. It is important that such a challenge should be raised as regards persons who
{399}
would walk with us. We read of those who walked no more with Jesus. Persons may walk a long way and in that walk have the leaven. So that we have to watch that the leaven is not there as persons enter on the path. The path may be taken on with us under circumstances that are not exactly the circumstances of faith, not the outcome of faith in our souls, so that we have to be on our guard as to persons who would walk. The apostle Paul speaks about many walking, of whom, he says, "I ... now tell you even weeping, that they are the enemies of the cross of Christ". It is a question of walking according to God, and hence here you have instruction about the passover. They were forced to omit the leaven, they did omit it and God says, 'I will keep you to it and you must not have it again'. So the ordinance of the passover is that there is to be a night of observance to Jehovah and a remembrance of the passover. There can be no walking according to God without the passover, that is the feast of the passover and the feast of unleavened bread. The unleavened bread is settled because they had unleavened bread and no other; God saw to that. Those of us who care for souls are thankful for the way God acts governmentally to hinder young people from dallying around.
They have not got the leaven. They need instructions with regard to the passover as well as the unleavened bread, and so we get the ordinance of it. It is to be eaten in houses, it is on the principle of a house; young people need to take this into account. It is not a general thing held anywhere; it is held in houses and only in houses and no part is to be taken out of the house; it is to be exclusively in the house. There is the idea of protection, an atmosphere suited.
A bone of it is not to be broken. The young believer is taught these details so that he is to have the whole idea, his mind is not to be scattered, he is not to regard himself as a unit but that he belongs to others,
{400}
that if there are six hundred thousand they are to be one. There is one idea in the mind of God and that idea is developed in the assembly. We are apt to break the bones as we begin to move, divide it into this sect and that sect. If the passover is truly kept there will be no sects at all, there will be only one idea before the mind and that idea is His body, the assembly. I will mention one or two other things: the bones of Joseph, and the divine calendar; both appear in this setting. Four hundred and thirty years was the sojourn, according to the spiritual thought, of the children of Israel in Egypt. It is spiritual because it is not literal; it is from promised time. If we understood the divine calendar we would understand that these four hundred and thirty years began in chapter 15 of Genesis. It is a divine calendar and that is an important thing for the young christian to see; his movement is marked down in that calendar, there is a red mark at that date. God keeps records but not as men do; it is not a question of the number of the revolutions of the earth, or sun; it is a question of how God reckons. He did indeed give the heavenly bodies for times and seasons but He has His own way of reckoning and His way of reckoning has to do with the results that He has in His mind, and these results include every christian; every christian's movement is thought of beforehand and marked off on the calendar, so that heaven knows when you begin to move. You move on time, everything fits in, there is nothing accidental, the movements are exactly on time, on the very day -- not night, that comes in later -- on the very day they moved out of Egypt. Then the night is to be remembered, meaning that the believer moving out goes through a darkness like Abraham. God says, 'Your seed shall sojourn for four hundred years in a strange land'. That is what the believer is to remember, and people that have not had this experience are usually weak and shallow. Never was such a night as this,
{401}
and never has there been such a night in our histories as when we had to do with God about our sins. If I am not judging sin now, why not? I judged it that night, I was sincere that night, I was thrust out, a night never to be forgotten. If I did not have leavened bread that night, why should I have it now? Why should I be insincere now, untrue to God and to the brethren? If I have thought of those six hundred thousand men then, why not now? They are one idea to God, cling to them. It will preserve you from independence. As I say, there are the bones of Joseph, too: they take me back for years, dead indeed but a living testimony, for it is a question of faith. By faith Joseph gave commandment concerning his bones. Moses had faith and Joseph's bones were there. One might say much about that but it is only to bring in the item, so that we might be filled with those thoughts in learning to walk as taught of God. Then you have the moving according to the passage in chapter 13. Now you say, I am on the way, I am moving, walking. Another thing which I might insert before I proceed is that they went out harnessed, in ranks of five. They took account of each other, they were learning to keep step with each other. God says, 'In all these circumstances I am before you'. It was in a visible thick cloud, a pillar. Perhaps there has never been a cloud like it before. It seems to be a new thought, not that a pillar had not been before but this was a cloud in the form of a pillar, a space within it. He is not seen but nevertheless He is there, but with the utmost thoughtfulness. 'If you are walking by day I change the appearance of things, it is a pillar of cloud; if by night, it is a pillar of fire'. There is no cessation of the movement. That is how the matter stands in the initial thought of it in Exodus. It is a book of potential, and indeed actual, manhood, for presently we find these people in the wilderness with their hearts prompting them, bringing their
{402}
heave-offerings to God, saying virtually, 'We want You to abide with us' and in asking Him to live with them they would also provide what He required. We do not introduce our thoughts or our ideas with regard to the divine dwelling-place. There was plenty of the required materials.
That is the first great feature of this instruction, how God taught them to walk; He took them by the hand and led them out of the land of Egypt. Now the next thing is to learn how to walk together and in the walking how to regard each other. I have already spoken of how they went out in harness, not as a mob. They went out in harness, in fives, in a rank, militarily. Now God would teach us as on the move, He would teach us how to regard one another in this moving and in regarding one another how to regard God in His abode, for He is moving too. Although there were encampments, the general thought in the wilderness is movement. "Since the day that I brought up the children of Israel out of Egypt ... I went about in a tent and in a tabernacle", @2 Samuel 7: 6. The general idea is movement but not movement in a lame, straggling, uncertain way, but in definiteness, first as knowing how to regard the brethren, then loving them, and then walking with them. Hence you get the idea of three, first in the encampment and then in their ordered march. Each Israelite was supposed to know the ensign of his father's house and where to pitch. He was to pitch with his own tribe but in relation to two other tribes, and he was to march in relation to two other tribes, which I apprehend to mean the local meeting. There are the four groups of three each, conveying what is local and what is general. There is only one fellowship; that is general, but it works out locally and in the locality I begin to love the brethren. I want to walk with them and keep step with them. I must know how to keep step with them. In the verses read in Numbers there are three
{403}
tribes and in this group we have distinction, for Judah had the first place. In these groups someone has the first place. There is the thought of leadership and without leadership you cannot have an assembly according to God. Now by leadership I mean what God provides, not that sort of leadership that says, like Adonijah, "I will be king". God abominates that. What He has in mind is His own sovereign selection and that is sure to take on something to support it. It requires sovereign leadership and it is a question of moral qualification, and Judah had that. Judah is indicated plainly enough as one who prevailed above his brethren. He did it in love, he pleaded with Joseph for Benjamin, for the youngest. That is the great idea. It is not walking on other peoples heads, it is a question of considering for the youngest. He calls him a little one. That is the idea of Judah, one who could consider for the least and make himself less than the least of all the saints. That is the leader. I am afraid we are not anxious for that sort of leading but it is according to God. So that this group of three under Judah is a model for us; I learn in it to respect leadership according to God and to love the brethren in that setting. The other three groups have their own distinctions; each has its own leadership. The first one is the great idea; it sets me down in that setting that is according to God and into which His sovereignty enters, and in bowing to it I learn how great it is morally and that He has made no mistake. It is walking under these leaders that you think according to what He desires. Am I considering for Jehovah in this setting? They are to march in this order. Verse 17 directs me as to the dwelling-place of God, that in every step I take I have my eye on God. Is God amongst us? What are our meetings, our prayer meetings, readings and fellowship meetings? What are they if they do not promote the dwelling-place of God? What is there to distinguish us if God is not
{404}
with us? Nothing. What distinguishes us is that God puts a distinction upon us. Moses says in effect, How shall we be marked if Thy presence go not with us? (see @Exodus 33: 15, 16). Their faith would always have an eye on the tabernacle. Without it what would Israel do in the wilderness? With it, nothing can overcome Israel, no enemy. And what joys, spiritual I mean, would an Israelite have as he looked from his tent and saw that pillar of cloud and thought of God in that very place in His nearness to them. Let us have an eye in our movements therefore to the dwelling-place of God; and so you will observe that it says, "Then the tabernacle of the congregation shall set forward with the camp of the Levites in the midst of the camp: as they encamp, so shall they set forward, every man in his place by their standards", @Numbers 2: 17. Now alongside this dwelling-place of God you have another thought and that is the camp of the Levites. I hope the brethren will be able to follow these things, because I am persuaded they are full of holy instructions. You have recognised Judah, that is the local setting; then leadership according to God, and the next thing is that I am respecting the tabernacle, and then the camp of the Levites. Who are they? They have access to God through the priests but according to Joshua they are the firstborn ones registered in heaven. We are reminded of our great heavenly profession. So Levi has God Himself as his portion, besides that he has cities to dwell in. It is a heavenly company. Levi represents the heavenly sons. How glorious to regard the saints in this light, surrounding the dwelling-place of God! This great family of firstborn ones comes next to God. So that as we observe the divine principles that regulate our walk here there comes this glorious light, the tabernacle, the divine dwelling surrounded by the heavenly sons. This suggests another thing, not the walk in the wilderness but carried into Joshua what
{405}
Habakkuk speaks of: "He will make me to walk upon mine high places". We are taught already to walk there. It is a spiritual matter, of course, but of all importance that when we get to heaven we shall know how to walk. There is to be one street in that city. I apprehend there are to be no nobility there, one street, no West end and no East end.
As I get toward the end of the wilderness, maybe I have to do with false brethren, and, alas, we have to do with them, and we have to learn to do with them. The heavenly ones have to know how to speak "Thus saith thy brother Israel", @Numbers 20: 14. He is simply making a request that he would be allowed to pass and surely that is the position. It is not the time for quarrelling with our brethren but asking them to let us pass. If they are not on the way, we are. In having to do with persons known as brethren, if you are not on the way I am on the way and I want to pass. I do not want to quarrel. There is no question of the tabernacle or the cloud, it is my own feet. I have got power, for indeed in this chapter they have drunk of the waters, not from the smitten rock, but the rock spoken to. For in this chapter it is the Spirit come down from heaven. (In @Exodus 17 it is the rock smitten.) The allusion is to the state of the saints. Both they and their cattle drank, and as having drunk into one Spirit we have feet of our own but they are united feet. They say, "I will ... go through on my feet". It is a collective thought, how beautiful that we are walking as one. As the apostle says, "Let us therefore, as many as be perfect, be thus minded: and if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you. Nevertheless, whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the same thing", @Philippians 3: 15, 16. What is this rule? The rule of new creation. Do you ever think of that rule? It is an entirely new theme brought in here. It is not that we
{406}
agree to differ in anything; it means present unity. Walk by the same rule; think the same thing. It is a great feature in Philippians and so in walking, walk by the same rule. What suggestions are these things for us! "And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God", @Galatians 6: 16. Now you see how beautiful this is, what righteousness is in this. It is enough to move any brother's heart, to lead him to open the way and let his brother pass by. Edom would not do it but Edom is a false brother. It is a sorrowful thought. God says of Esau that He hated him. It is because of his falsity as a brother. "I loved Jacob", @Malachi 1: 2. How God delighted in this speech of Israel's. He is an orderly man; he does not take advantage: "We will go by the highway; and if I and my cattle drink of thy water, then I will pay for it: I will only ... go through on my feet". Go through, pass on, but pass on in righteousness, pass on in nobility, in dignity, as one who is conscious of the power of God. You have got your own feet. If we walk in the Spirit we shall not fulfil the lusts of the flesh. It is walking by the Spirit that enables me to say this. If you will look at the speech of Israel you will see how manly it is. He knows exactly where he is and he only wants to pass from that point to another. He is going to Canaan, heaven as we say; he is fit to go, he has been through Romans, he is adjusted. He walks by the Spirit. If we live in the Spirit let us also walk by the Spirit, and if we walk by the Spirit we shall not fulfil the lusts of the flesh. That is all I have to say, I think you will see the links right through. God teaches us how to walk and to use our own feet on the highway, producing righteousness as we go and qualifying for the heavenly land.
{407}
THE LORD DOMINANT AS SON
@2 Samuel 12: 24, 25; @1 Chronicles 22: 11; @1 Chronicles 23: 1 - 6; @1 Chronicles 29: 22 - 25
I intended, dear brethren, to speak of the Lord's sonship, believing that these scriptures are intended to develop the thought of His sonship, not in its abstract relations, but as applied and as becoming dominant: and I may remark that in reading these scriptures I bear in mind that Scripture is not intended to be merely historical. Commentators generally work out the Old Testament scriptures in historical settings, whereas their bearing is always present and moral; certain events are selected for certain purposes and are arranged by the Spirit of God with such skill as to produce a certain impression, which faith receives and which the Spirit uses for instruction and formation. So that instances such as I have read of omit much that curiosity would wish to know, and indeed which a historian would supply, whereas the Spirit is taken up with our souls in His writing; whatsoever was written was written for us, as we have so often remarked. In recording for us the birth and naming of Solomon, the Spirit intends to produce in our minds the thought of Christ as Son. We begin with Him properly in His Solomonic character in this verse in 2 Samuel; not that Solomon is not named before, he is; his birth is referred to earlier anticipatively, but here it has actually occurred. Moreover, the fight of Solomon as a son was presented to his father without naming him, at least so far as the record goes; and it produced an effect on king David which I would just touch on for a moment so that the same effect may be produced, in a general way, in our minds now.
He had in his heart to build a house for Jehovah,
{408}
and conveyed his mind to Nathan, a prophet and trusted friend. It drew out from Nathan sympathetic confirmation of David's thought. But that night the word of Jehovah came to Nathan to remind him that he had been a little premature in his confirmation of David's thought. Indeed, dear brethren, we always need to hold ourselves open for correction in this way, though it be but mild, gentle correction. It is always well, when we speak of great matters, to say in the language of the Lord Jesus, "What shall I say?". That is what He said at a critical moment. Nathan did not say that; had he thought the matter over perhaps he would not have said anything to David, but reserved his judgment; but he said, "Do all that is in thy heart; for Jehovah is with thee". He had to be corrected; and he immediately goes to David and tells him, in the word of Jehovah, that he is not to build the house. Light is thus introduced negatively: one thing is clear, David is not to build the house. But then we get positive light brought in in a beautiful and forceful way: 'Thy seed', Nathan says to David, 'shall build the house', without naming him, but the important thing at that moment was that he was to be Jehovah's son, David's seed indeed, but Jehovah's son. Nowadays people tell us He was Jehovah's son first and David's seed afterwards. The two things go together in the truth; that is, sonship is concurrent with incarnation; Jehovah says, "I will be his father, and he shall be my son". A flood of light is conveyed and received; this is an example for us as to how light is received and acted upon. David makes no complaint, no effort to change the mind of the Lord; he definitely allows the rightness of it, and goes inside the house, or whatever it was, and sits before Jehovah. He sat there as if he was at home there, the word might mean 'tarried' there, with his soul full of light as to the mind of God, which is, indeed, the only acceptable way in which to sit in the
{409}
presence of God. We are not to be there in darkness and uncertainty, but in the light of His mind, and particularly His mind as to the sonship, the dominant sonship, of the Lord Jesus. And so David sits there and speaks beautifully to Jehovah, fully accepting the position.
Now that is the basis of all that follows in regard to Solomon. It may be extended backward to the eternal counsels of God, and forward to the present position of the Lord Jesus in heaven and in the house of God. However much David understood the light he received, as we see it now, it may be carried backward into the divine counsels before the world was, for He predestinated us unto sonship before the foundation of the world, through Jesus Christ to Himself; and it may be carried forward to the present moment, when Christ is exalted in heaven, and is over the house as having built it as Son. It was David's throne, that is the great foundational idea; it is what is laid in my soul. God operates subsequently in His own way according to what is laid thus. So it was with Peter, the foundation was laid in his soul, the Father having revealed to him that the lowly Man he had been with here, Jesus of Nazareth, was the Christ, the Son of the living God; and that foundation awaited the superstructure, which has now come about; the Lord Jesus, that is the Son, says, 'I will build it'.
Well, the birth of Solomon is presented first as actually present, but in a small way. We have to view the types thus, not only in their literality as referring to a babe born, but in connection with the place the Son may have in our souls. It may be very small, or it may be very great, as I hope to show in @1 Chronicles 29. The thought that God has in His mind is that it should be very great and dominate every one of our souls, and dominate the house of God, that is, in a practical way. And so as Solomon is born, David names him, using a word of great significance, 'Solomon'
{410}
(meaning 'peaceful'). It was certainly said reflectively by David, for he needed that his soul should be bathed in peace with God after the harrowing experience he had been through; but the suggestion applies today, in this very town. How the brethren have been lacerated by conflict, and need to have their souls bathed with peace, implied in the name 'Solomon'; that is, in Christ. For the great word in Isaiah about Him is, "Unto us a child is born", here, today, in this town; "unto us a son is given, ... his name is called Wonderful, Counsellor, Mighty God, Father of Eternity, Prince of Peace". It is called that now; how often we have proved it everyone who has had to do with Jesus in his service and walk here can verify that His name is Wonderful. He is Wonderful to most of us, I am sure. And then Counsellor: how we need counsel. The Lord is ready to give it even to poor Laodicea with its callous, careless worldliness, how much more to those who love Him and seek to keep His commandments, how ready to furnish all the counsel that is needed. Counsel is a most important matter, in the sense of advice from Him who can give it with certainty. Mighty God is another thought touched on in that chapter-all that is mighty is behind His counsel; in refusing His counsel we miss His might; as accepting His counsel His might is ready for us. The Father of Eternity -- that is One who has long experience in fatherly care, the everlasting arms, it is not a mere name abstractly given, but it expresses a practical service: "I will be to you for a Father", @2 Corinthians 6: 18. He takes on all that belongs to a Father, as we get throughout the gospels, the expressions 'son', 'child', 'daughter'; He takes on all the cares of His people. And then finally, Prince of Peace; we may well be peaceful in the acceptance of such a blaze of glory. David begins with 'Solomon', and it was, no doubt, balm for his soul at that time.
{411}
He calls him Solomon; but that is not enough; and I mention it now, dear brethren, because peace coming into our souls has to be confirmed prophetically. It is one thing when a flash of light comes in and relieves us, and another thing to have that con firmed and amplified prophetically. So that we have a mission, the sending of Nathan. Jehovah loved the child, there could be no doubt about that, but "he sent by the hand of Nathan the prophet; and he called his name Jedidiah, for Jehovah's sake". We have to connect Jehovah with Jesus in the house as Son, Jehovah's part in Him, not only our part, but His part. The name Jedidiah is not employed by the Spirit later, but it is an established thing now. Jehovah has His part in that little bit of light you have in your soul of Jesus as the Son of God. Jehovah loved him; He has even a claim on that. How balancing that is, dear brethren, in the house as here now, what Christ is to me, but what He is to God. God added to the name Solomon, Jedidiah, for He loved him. Well now, you can see what progress there is; we have a real Solomon now, not simply a promised one; and we have not come into the house really unless in a sense that things are realised. Christianity is not simply a question of promises; it is a realm of realities, of things that have come to pass and are made real to us by the power of the Spirit of God, for He is no less than a divine Person: God dwells here 'in Spirit'. As He spoke "in Son", as we are told in @Hebrews 1, so He dwells here "in Spirit": it is a divine Person in each case.
So in chapter 22 we have an increase in this thought. I do not think Solomon is actually mentioned between these periods, indicating that much has to be gone through before we come to the thought of manhood. He is young and tender yet, but in manhood. Now we have David handing over formally the commission to build the house. He says, 'It is yours to do'.
{412}
David did not have the direction to do it. And that raises a point that may be worth mentioning in regard to these types in which David figures so much. We have first the great thought of Deity: God, God in His supremacy in the heavens; secondly we have the ark of the covenant, denoting the power of God here in mysteriousness, in outwardly humble circumstances, but it is the power of God in those circumstances. Then we have David, who is sometimes God in a representative sense, at other times he is just a believer, and at other times he represents royalty, a great thought which we are not to put far away from us; it belongs to us; and, fourthly, we have the Son; that is to say, Christ known in that relation. It is not so much power, although power is there, of course, for He is declared Son of God with power; but it is the dignity of Christ, and the affection and all that goes with the glorious title of Son which He has taken with God. These four things are to be kept in mind. I am speaking now to show you how He becomes dominant in these settings. So that the commission to build does not belong to David, but to the son, as if God would shut out all else in the building; for in truth, dear brethren, building is by love. It is enjoyed when we come to what sonship really is, that relationship in which love shines out most attractively. In @John 17 we read that the Lord says to His Father, "I have made known to them thy name, and will make it known; that the love with which thou hast loved me may be in them and I in them". Now I want you to look at that verse; it is that *kind* of love, not simply covenant love but the love of the Father to the Son, that is to be in our hearts. That is what enters into the building. It is love that is eternal; it goes right through into eternity in the building. "And I in them": we love Him with that kind of love, a great thought, one that I know little about myself, but I see it. That is the Lord's final thought in that
{413}
wonderful chapter, and you can see what it means; it goes right through.
Well then it says, "My son, Jehovah be with thee, that thou mayest prosper, and build the house of Jehovah thy God, as he has said of thee", @1 Chronicles 22: 11. You see how perfectly David had the thing in his mind, shutting out all selfishness. If I allow any little bit of selfishness in my heart, I am dislocating things in relation to the house of God. David had the truth beautifully poised in his mind. And then in the next chapter it says that "David was old and full of days; and he made Solomon his son king over Israel". Now all through this part I may further observe that the idea of the son is passive, not active, but waiting to be active. In other words, it is a question of whether we will allow it to become active; and gradually the way is made for Solomon to become active. David is, as it were, giving way; he would make him king while he was yet alive. Have I done that? In my relations in the house of God, have I set Him up instead of myself? That means entire self-abnegation in me. Not that David loses anything; he is still king. The Lord will not rob us of our dignity; greater dignity would be in keeping with Himself, for His dignity is infinite. The greater my dignity according to God's mind, the greater place He has. He towers infinitely beyond the greatest dignity. The greater dignity I have the more ready I am to let others be dignified. The Lord as Priest is so great. He has passed through all the heavens; who can tower up there? No one. He has got His place; that is the point. As He gets His place in me He displaces me; He is to become greater and greater. That does not mean that I am getting any less; as a son I do not need to. And so David makes him king as he becomes old; that is to say, the son is on the throne, but not yet sitting; we do not get that until the end, when the son becomes active in his
{414}
place and is predominant in it. Now you have peace and joy and love unhampered, and so David immediately gathers the princes and priests and Levites; for in these circumstances you must have the son for the service of God, it is not to be in the hands of mere officials now, it is the glorious blessed benign influence of the son pervading all. David is making room for it: that is the point. The instruction in all this is, am I making room for it? It is waiting, and ready to come in. I may effectively shut it out if I am allowing my own will or having myself before me. The first book of Chronicles shows how effectively this is brought in; and what a glorious time they had. I could say much about the ordering of the courses of the priests, and so forth. How wonderful it was that David carried all this out when he had become old and feeble; but it is a question of the power of God. If Solomon is even only partially dominant, you see, we have all this.
In the last chapter you find that Solomon is made king the second time, and they "anointed him to Jehovah to be prince". Now they have a word that has a great place in the house of God. It is a question of the dominance of the Son, His authority as Son in the house. He has been waiting all the time. As David put him on the throne, how he would fill the people with admiration! Have we all made Him King the second time? It is your turn now. I may have been shutting Him out by the action of my will, cherishing some other object-now it is my turn to make Him King the second time. They anointed him to Jehovah to be prince; they put their hands on him as if to say, 'Jehovah, You have loved Him all these years, now we put our hands on Him in relation to Thee as the Father's delight': "This is my beloved Son, in whom I have found my delight". So they anoint him to Jehovah, and also Zadok the priest. The two thoughts run together, Zadok alluding to the
{415}
kind of priesthood that has been proved in the sufferings of David, the kind of priesthood that will come out by and by, according to Ezekiel. It is the priesthood that attaches to the Son as anointed unto the Lord. Now what a time the brethren will have! And, dear brethren, it applies to the smallest gathering as it did to the thousands of Israel, or to Pentecost, and as it will apply when the Lord Jesus comes in as King and Priest. What a blessing He sheds upon us as we let Him have His place, give Him full sway as Son. It says Solomon sat on the throne; now you have him acting. He takes his place; He will take it as we afford it to Him. It was on the throne of Jehovah, no less than that, a great position. And, moreover, it is instead of David his father; he has the full place now. The point is that full place is to be made for the Son. And it says he prospered. David said he would prosper. That is the climax of the subject, royal majesty. The next book tells us what he did. How important it is that in our little way we should make way for Him; He is Son now. He says of Himself, The Son abides in the house for ever. He has built the house and He is Son over it, and our wisdom is to let Him have full sway, resigning our wills and purposes in regard to ourselves. What glorious times await us as we are submissive!
{416}
THE LORD LIFTED UP
@John 3: 14, 15; @John 8: 28; @John 12: 31 - 33
J.T. The thought in view is to consider these three allusions by the Lord Himself to His death under the heading of being lifted up. The first alludes to @Numbers 21, the Lord looking back to the position of the children of Israel in the wilderness, and making a present application of the type. The type is alluded to elsewhere, as in @Romans 8, but the Lord Himself in alluding to it here, is setting out the great fundamental truth in conjunction with the truth of new birth; and in reverting to the type, what will have been observed by those conversant with it is that it comes in at the end of the wilderness journey; that is, abundant time had been given to discover the state of man as it shows itself in the believer, even in the believer who is advanced in the truth. @Numbers 20 tells us that the people had drunk of the water from the rock, they and their cattle, for there was abundance of it; and subsequently they acted as advanced in the truth, collectively, as one, to Edom. Israel spoke as Edom's brother and proposed to pass through his territory, and showed a brotherly spirit; so that typically we see the believer in @Numbers 20 as advanced in the full light and understanding of objective truth. He understands his responsibilities, and can give an account of God's ways with him; and he is ready to act the man in regard of Edom his brother. Yet in @Numbers 21 the people are impatient because they had to go round another way; and they spoke against God and against Moses; indeed, they said that their soul loathed the light bread, alluding to the manna, manifesting a thorough despisal of Christ as presented in the manna. All this would remind us that though we may be advanced in knowledge from the standpoint
{417}
of objective truth, that is, the truth as presented to us in Christ, yet, not having learnt what the flesh is in ourselves, we are capable of the most serious conduct. They spoke against God and against Moses, and despised the manna.
H.E.F. What was it that brought out the flesh in that terrible character?
J.T. It says that they had to go round by the Red Sea to encompass the land of Edom. Typically it means that the brethren are unreasonable with me, and put me to unnecessary trouble or journeying, and I grow impatient. I have not learnt how easily I may be provoked, and that is because I have not learnt the state I am in, sin in the flesh. I have not learnt how to use the Spirit to hold it in check; I have not learnt how to control myself. I need to learn the truth of @Romans 7. As I learn that, I see that it is the flesh that is active. Speaking against God and against Moses, and despising the manna means that the flesh is not controlled in me. I have not judged it, nor formed a true estimate of it, nor have I learnt to keep it in control.
W.C.P. What is involved in the lifting up?
J.T. The first of the three allusions to it in this gospel brings out the fact of the lifting up, not who did it as in chapter 8. It involves reproach, and the most painful and ignominious death conceivable, expressing a curse; the person becomes a spectacle to heaven and earth. From the type we learn that, as lifted up, the serpent was in the view of everybody; the object of faith can be seen by all.
Ques. Is it on account of the state you refer to, that they spoke against God? Is that why the serpent was lifted up?
J.T. Their speaking against God shows that the working of sin in the flesh is directed against God. The serpent said to Eve, "Yea, hath God said ... ?", suggesting that God was not unselfish in proposing a
{418}
limit on Adam and Eve. The attack was on God; so that the use of the serpent in the figure, first in the sending of the fiery serpents, is to remind us of the source or origin of sin, and that it has to be dealt with basically, that is, at its root, if the thing is to be dealt with effectively. It is not a question of mere restraining measures, but of the total judgment of it at its source.
T.E.W. Have we to learn the aspect of the Lord's death that would apply to the state to which you refer?
J.T. The fiery serpents sent among the people by God were to bring home to them the state they were in, typically, and the origin of it, that it arose from the devil. "The devil sinneth from the beginning" (@1 John 3: 8); and we have to come to the solemn fact that he is actually operating through us, though we are believers and profess to love God and to love Christ.
P.J.B. In referring to Edom have you in mind that it has a bearing on us in our relations with one another in our localities?
J.T. It is remarkable that our treatment of one another brings out this sort of thing more than anything else. Any unreasonable attitude on the part of the brethren, or any reasonable attitude which I am not ready to understand, is calculated to draw out this feature in us more effectually than anything else; and that is why Edom is mentioned in @Numbers 21.
J.I. Is the remedy being occupied with the object lifted up?
J.T. It shows the extreme way in which God was obliged to deal with sin in the flesh. The Lord was lifted up as a spectacle to heaven and earth. It was to be understood universally, in heaven and in earth, what sin in the flesh is: "Cursed is every one that hangeth on a tree". The Lord used the expression "lifted up" in another feature in chapter 8, and with
{419}
still another bearing in chapter 12; but this first one is the most important practically, because of the need with all of us, and especially with the young ones, of understanding the vicious nature of sin in the flesh. Even though one may love the Lord, and may have been a believer for a long time, certain elements bring out this venomous condition. So one has to see how God has taken account of it, and dealt with it thoroughly; as it says, "God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh" (@Romans 8: 3); He *condemned* it.
H.E.F. Does it help us to get clear of this matter when we can trace it to the source of the trouble, which is not in the circumstances through which Israel passes, but in Satan as the source of it?
J.T. It is a most terrible thing to wake up to the fact that I am being actually used of Satan in sinning; not simply that I am doing it, but that the root of the thing is Satan, and I am actually in his hands for the moment. Moses, at the beginning of his ministry, had to do with the serpent as a figure of this: "The Lord said unto him, What is that in thine hand? And he said, A rod", @Exodus 4: 2. God tells him to cast it on the ground, and when he does so it becomes a serpent, pointing to the fact that if I take myself out of the hands of God or, in measure, out of the hands of the brethren, I fall into the hands of the enemy, and he has power over me. I do not mean nor wish to be a tool of the devil, but I may be; and this radical type is to teach me that God has foreseen this, and has dealt with it thoroughly in this extreme way, so that sin in the flesh should not be active, and so that Satan should not have a footing among the people of God.
H.E.F. Is there another feature of the truth running alongside our being able to trace this matter up to the source? I mean that God has condemned the thing in its source, in order to make way for the
{420}
Spirit, and that is the positive power by which we are going to be set free in regard to this matter.
J.T. The first thing is that it is condemned; but as you say, the Lord has in mind that the believer "should not perish, but have everlasting life". That is the first result according to @John 3, but @Romans 8: 4 connects it with the path in the wilderness: "That the righteous requirement of the law should be fulfilled in us, who do not walk according to flesh but according to Spirit".
G.P. Does the Lord's authority normally find expression amongst the brethren?
J.T. That is the normal way in which the Lord's authority works out amongst us; that is, as we are in His hand rather than in the enemy's hand. The rod as cast on the ground becomes a serpent; as under the enemy's hand it is detached; but the brethren held under the hand of Christ are usable; so that henceforth the rod becomes the symbol in the wilderness of divine rule and authority. But how dreadful it is, if instead of being in the Lord's hand as the expression of His authority, I am in the hands of the enemy; and yet I may be far advanced in my spiritual history, for @Numbers 20 involves the end of the wilderness.
Ques. Is it significant that the Lord says this to Nicodemus who was a most refined man as to religious flesh, "the teacher of Israel"?
J.T. Yes, he had to learn this truth. But the type contemplates the end of the wilderness; it contemplates the saints as having advanced in the truth on the objective side, but as never having learnt their terrible state and that one is liable at any time to come into the hands of the devil. As never having learnt the terrible fact that comes out here, one is liable to speak against Moses and against God, and to despise the manna. I think we ought to bear in mind
{421}
the length of time Israel had been in the desert before this type is introduced, and compare it with our own histories since we believed in the Lord Jesus, to see if we have learnt to judge sin in the flesh, and have resolved that we shall never be released from the Lord's hold. As soon as I allow fleshly motives in my relations with the brethren, I shall withdraw myself from the Lord's hold to that extent; I may be still outwardly retaining my status, but to that extent I am serving the devil. It is very serious.
H.D'A.C. Nicodemus was a ruler; possibly his rod of rule had become a serpent.
J.T. It certainly had in the case of the Pharisees; but I should say that Nicodemus was moving on toward the truth, and the Lord recognises that, and had in mind that Nicodemus should go the whole road into eternal life; but the history would indicate that he was hindered. In chapter 19, however, he comes out as identifying himself with the Lord in His death, so that at the end he made some headway. In chapter 7 he is seen sitting in the council; that is, he had never learnt to leave his class. Christianity involves that I must leave my class. Whether it be a learned class, a socially elevated class, or a socially degraded class, class spirit is always wrong. We often identify the word 'class' with those who are educated or have a status in this world, but it refers also to those who have no status, and it is as harmful in them as in the others. We have to leave our class. The rich has to glory in his humiliation, and the brother of low degree in his elevation (@James 1: 10); that means that each gets out of his class. If I am a Radical, a Trade Unionist, or a Bolshevik, I am belonging to a class; I may pretend that I do not, but I do; and they are as harmful as any other class. Nicodemus had not left his class in @John 7: 50, "being one of themselves", it says.
W.C.P. Does the overcoming of this become a
{422}
matter of faith, having our hearts set on the Son of man lifted up?
J.T. That comes out in chapter 12; but here the Lord is Himself dealing with the thing, making it fit in with the teaching He is setting forth, so that we may learn at the very beginning, as believers, to judge the flesh. The Lord does not leave it to the end of His teaching in chapter 12; He brings it in here as fundamental truth. Chapter 3 is foundational teaching according to John's ministry. It is not truth for us to leave to the end of our journey; it is truth to be learnt at the beginning.
Ques. Why does the Lord speak as "the Son of man" in each of these cases?
J.T. It is a title that the Lord takes as rejected by Israel. He uses it more sparingly in John than in the synoptic gospels; but in each case you find some particular truth connected with it, and here He is dealing with sin in the flesh-in the flesh of man; not simply in the Jew (though it comes out in the Jewish profession) but in man as such. So when the Lord says, "As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness", He does not say which part of the wilderness, but reminds us that it is for the wilderness, whether the beginning or the end of it; as soon as I enter the wilderness it should be before me.
A.G. What we are as after the flesh can never enter into the land of divine purpose.
J.T. If this state is unjudged and allowed to act in me, it effectively hinders my entrance into eternal life; because the Lord says that He was lifted up in order that whosoever believed in Him should not perish, but have eternal life.
C.O.B. What is the thought of perishing in this verse?
J.T. I think the allusion is to falling in the wilderness; it is used elsewhere with reference to perishing
{423}
in the wilderness (see @1 Corinthians 10: 5); it really means perishing, that I am lost.
H.E.F. Do you think Satan acts on the flesh to hinder us from coming into the purpose of God for us? Is that his object?
J.T. That is what he does. The Lord has that in mind. In alluding to @Numbers 21 here, He does not bring in the fact that they spoke against Moses and against God; it is a question of the love of God; verse 16 comes in immediately after: "God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life". It is a question of everlasting life; the Lord has that in His mind.
H.E.F. I think you have said that we have the two sources here; the question of sin traced up to its source, and the love of God traced up to its source.
J.T. I think it is very instructive and searching to keep in mind the two sources. "The devil sinneth from the beginning", as John says; he is the author of it; but then love has its source in God; so that the two things stand over against each other: the source of sin in Satan, and the source of love in God. Which do I prefer? Romans shows that my heart is to be the vessel of the love of God, and I am to enter on eternal life.
Ques. Is it important that the Lord refers to heavenly things just before the reference to the lifting up of the serpent in the wilderness?
J.T. It is what He has in mind. The Spirit of God indited John's gospel after Paul's ministry was introduced, and it involves Paul's ministry. It brings out what supports Paul's ministry, from the Lord's ministry when here in flesh. So the conversation with Nicodemus and what follows has the whole of Christianity in mind, the heavenly thing. The Lord says further, "No man hath ascended up to heaven, but he that came down from heaven, even the Son of
{424}
man which is in heaven". The heavenly things are developed in Paul's ministry; so that John includes the whole truth of christianity in his gospel.
H.E.F. Do you put eternal life in the heavenly things or not?
J.T. Eternal life is evidently for the earth as to actual enjoyment; but with regard to ourselves as the heavenly saints, it belongs to our blessings; as it says, we are blessed "with every spiritual blessing in the heavenlies in Christ" (@Ephesians 1: 3); that is where they all he for us. That does not mean that the relations in which eternal fife in the millennium as enjoyed by Israel will be there; that will be on earth, but with us the setting of every relation is heavenly, clearly, for the church's place is heavenly, and we have part in eternal life thus.
H.E.F. You mean that the church will enjoy it as no other family will?
J.T. Yes, it has its own fulness with us.
H.D'A.C. There will be a similarity in eternal life on earth to the way in which we have it now in the enjoyment of the love of God, the love of Christ, and love one to another.
J.T. Quite so; only anything that the church has it has uniquely in view of its great intelligence and formation. What it has is enhanced on account of the knowledge and intelligence and formation that the assembly has as superior to all other families. So the Lord in @John 10: 10 speaks of it in the sense of abundance, "I am come that they might have fife, and might have it abundantly". Everything we have, I apprehend, takes character from what we are as superior in intelligence and formation and dignity. I think that could be easily illustrated in human affairs: "The king himself is dependent upon the field", Ecclesiastes s: g. He has to eat vegetables like the poorest man, but you see how the product of the field is enhanced on his table. That and other illustrations
{425}
indicate that while Israel and the nations have everlasting life on earth by and by, they have it in a different way; it has not the same dignity and lustre that it has as enjoyed by the heavenly saints today; for after all, though our place is in heaven, we are made to live on earth; but what we enjoy there is enhanced in the church, so that I think eternal life may be included in the heavenly things of which the Lord speaks. It is Paul's fine; he speaks of eternal life, and links it on with the great system that he has in mind.
S.B. Is the truth in connection with this lifting up important for us in view of our getting the gain of the Spirit?
J.T. That is what is taught in @Romans 8, which alludes to the brazen serpent, only the bearing of that is our continuance in the wilderness, fulfilling the righteous requirement of the law; whereas the bearing of @John 3 is the land, that is, that the believer might have everlasting life. God is concerned that we should not miss what He has for us, that we should not be hindered in our enjoyment of it by allowing this poisonous thing called sin in the flesh, which He has dealt with so radically and effectively in His own Son as lifted up.
H.E.F. Would you say that while @Romans 8 has in view that we should be in victory in the wilderness, @John 3 has in view that we should enter now on the purpose of God for us?
J.T. That is exactly the point; hence we get the love of God immediately following, "For God so loved the world". That verse indicates what His love would bring us into. "The world" there, I apprehend, is abstract; it refers to an ordered system which God ever had in His mind, that which is indicated in @Genesis 1, and which will again take form; it is "the world" in that sense, that He loves.
H.E.F. And He will never give up the thought of it.
{426}
J.T. He will have men in it, alive and living; death will be removed.
W.C.P. Does the expression here stand in contrast to what we have in other passages, such as, "The prince of this world"?
J.T. That refers to the moral system. The Lord Jesus came into this world. @John 1 speaks of it as having been made by Him. That is not the moral system; that is the ornamental system that God had in His mind in creation, and with men in it. That is what God loves. The world was made by Him, but it has come under the power of the devil, so that it says, "The world knew him not". But that is dealt with, and sin is removed, so that the world might answer to the mind of God.
H.D'A.C. "The world was made by him", does not refer to a world of wicked men.
J.T. No; I think it is an allusion to what God loved.
H.D'A.C. That is very fine; the world was made by Him, and God loved the world that was made by Him.
J.T. Quite so; He will revert to it too; the Lord takes away the sin of it, so it will answer to the mind of God, filled with life; death will be there no more.
H.E.F. When it says, "Again, when he brings in the firstborn into the habitable world" (@Hebrews 1: 6), is that when the world is brought into accordance with God's mind?
J.T. Yes, "He formed it to be inhabited", @Isaiah 45: 18. He expended great thought on the world in those six days referred to in @Genesis 1 in order to bring it about as it was then. He said it was "very good", but He did not say that until man was in it. How delightful that world was to God, to Him who came into the garden to walk in it! But sin invaded the world and spoilt it; hence the need of redemption, and the dealing with sin at its source.
{427}
H.D'A.C. God never gives up His original thought.
J.T. No, He comes back to it now in redemption.
Ques. Do we get an illustration of it in the Israel over which Solomon ruled according to Chronicles?
J.T. That is right. We see in 1 Chronicles how Solomon came into dominance in Israel. He does not begin to act until David dies, as far as the record goes, but he "sat on the throne of Jehovah" (@1 Chronicles 29: 23); and then the opening of 2 Chronicles shows what he did, how he filled the scene with glory; in the type there was nothing to set aside: there was "neither adversary nor evil event", @1 Kings 5: 4. That is typical of what we come to by and by, when there will be no adversary nor evil event. The adversary and evil having been dealt with, the scene will be filled with glory, life and joy. That is a good type of what we have here, what God loves and what He will effect and bring into being.
H.E.F. So that God would set us free from the flesh now in order that we might have present entrance into that world?
J.T. That is right. Romans is intended to open that up to us. But it is well to point out that while eternal life may be regarded as heavenly in character, as one of the blessings with which we are blessed in the heavenlies, for we cannot exclude eternal life from "every spiritual blessing in the heavenlies" because it is definitely called "the blessing" in the Old Testament (@Psalm 133: 3), yet it is not the idea of the life of heaven, but rather that which the triumph of God has effected *here* in which we have part. We have what is higher and goes beyond that in sonship.
H.E.F. Would you say that every family that comes into blessing will have part in eternal life?
J.T. Obviously-every family that comes into blessing under the heading of redemption. It is not applicable to the angels who did not fall. The light of Christ as having become Man is for *men*: "In him
{428}
was life, and the life was the light of men", @John 1: 4. It is a question of men, and it does not go beyond them. Angels can never lay any claim to it. Unfallen angels stand in their original state; eternal life has no force with regard to them.
H.E.F. But the assembly has entrance into blessings both now and eternally which no other family can ever touch.
A.P.B. How are we to take up practically this aspect of the lifting up?
J.T. It is what has been done: "As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up; that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have eternal life". That is a thing for the believer to grasp clearly. In order to grasp it I have to be taught. The type in @Numbers 21 is intended to help us in regard to this. I find myself in the midst of the brethren as one of them, and certain things arise which provoke my soul. I am forced to do something by some unreasonable act of others, as Israel was forced by Edom, and my soul is provoked; I complain bitterly. Why is all this? It is because I have never seen that this thing called sin in the flesh has been dealt with in the cross. I have seen my sins dealt with, but I may have never seen my state dealt with. God has gone to the extreme to do so in this figure of crucifixion; for that is what is in mind, the most hideous form of death or penalty, the most ignominious, the most painful; for a person might hang on a cross for days without dying, a spectacle to heaven and earth. God has resorted to that in the death of Christ so that I might see how He abominates the thing, and has dealt with it most effectively. I take sides with Him in that, and now He says, 'I have given you the Spirit so that you might maintain that judgment, so that sin in the flesh might not hinder you in entering your purposed portion, that is, eternal life'. There is nothing to hinder
{429}
in @Romans 8; there is the fulfilment of the righteous requirement of the law, and the enjoyment of life and peace. That is the setting of it. It is a solemn lesson for every one of us, and that the attitude of the brethren towards me brings this out in me is very humbling. It was Edom's unreasonable conduct that brought this out in Israel's case.
H.E.F. It helps, too, to see that from this point in their history the children of Israel began to move definitely with the land in view.
J.T. That is what you get in this chapter; they immediately begin to journey from point to point until we get the remarkable statement, "the book of the wars of the Lord". I am in the midst of enemies; the geographical setting of @Numbers 21 is full of enemies. How am I to overcome? It is Edom that is specially mentioned; that is, the brethren. How am I to overcome? There is "the book of the wars of the Lord": what kind of entry is going to be made in that book? Some war is on, whatever it may be. The book has its entries, and what entry is going to be made in this skirmish or this battle, or whatever conflict it is? An entry is going to be made, whether I figure in it as a man of war or not. Then the next thing is that they reach the well of which the Lord had already spoken. It was something which had been already in the mind of God: "That is the well of which Jehovah spoke to Moses, Assemble the people, and I will give them water" (verse 16). That is what they needed; and hence the digging of the well. It is the recognition of the Spirit. They sing unto it; and then they proceed further and reach the top of Pisgah. So that there is steady progress in soul after this is learnt.
S.B. Is there not a danger of our not realising the working of this form of the flesh?
J.T. It is a great disadvantage if you do not locate the enemy in any warfare. It is a great matter to
{430}
locate the enemy, and to discern the kind of power he is using.
T.W. Is the sphere of eternal life on earth the circle of the brethren?
J.T. Yes, that is where it is realised and enjoyed. "*We* know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the brethren", @1 John 3:14.
T.W. And is this conflict also amongst the brethren?
J.T. That is exactly what is in view in @Numbers 21. Of course there is a Canaanitish conflict referred to at the beginning of the chapter in which Israel was completely successful. Israel vowed a vow, as you remember, to effect their utter destruction. The word 'Hormah' gets its meaning there. There is no difficulty on that line, but the difficulty is with Edom. It is what takes place among the brethren that brings out this poisonous condition in me.
T. W. You spoke of the authority that is found with the brethren as helping.
J.T. We were speaking of the rod of Moses. It was cast on the ground and became a serpent; that means that if we pull ourselves away from the Lord's hold, from the hand of God, we immediately come under the power of the devil. But the serpent was taken by the tail, and it became a rod; that means if I am in the Lord's hand I become usable for the maintenance of His authority. Conflict among the brethren usually brings out this activity of the flesh; and the great thing is that there should be no casualties.
H.D'A.C. What is to be learnt from the fact that it was a serpent of brass? There was no poison there; nor could it be charged with anything; it had done no harm whatever.
J.T. It is an allusion to Christ viewed in that way, brass denoting judgment, as One in whom judgment could be effectively carried out.
{431}
H.D'A.C. If we really took that in, what a great result it would have in us.
J.T. That is the point. When any man was bitten by a serpent, he looked to the serpent of brass. It was lifted up to be seen by all.
H.D'A.C. "This man hath done nothing amiss", @Luke 23: 41.
J.T. Exactly; but as the antitype of the serpent of brass the judgment was carried out in Him.
H.E.F. He became absolutely the thing that had to be dealt with.
J.T. Yes, He was made sin.
R.P. Have you any sympathy with pious christians who, in wearing a crucifix, think they are pleasing to God?
J.T. It is idolatry; it is like Nehushtan. You remember how the brazen serpent had been made an idol in Israel afterwards, and Hezekiah called it Nehushtan, meaning that after all it was nothing but a bit of brass, or a piece of metal (@2 Kings 18: 4). A person who carries a crucifix about is idolatrous to that extent. It comes under the heading of "My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge", @Hosea 4: 6. It is ignorance.
J.H.B. Will you give us a word as to the other two scriptures in John referring to the lifting up of the Son of man?
J.T. Yes, they are so important. In @John 8 it is the Lord saying that *they* would lift Him up; whereas in chapter 3 it is that He must be lifted up, and it is a foundational matter in regard of our souls deliverance. But chapter 8 has not that in view. The Lord puts the onus of it on the Jews, the Pharisees: "When ye shall have lifted up the Son of man, then ye shall know that I am he"; that is, Israel's guilt is implied, and the result would be that they should know who He is: "that I am he". I apprehend that His deity,
{432}
His Person, is involved in what would be known as a consequence of their act.
J.H.B. Has that been fulfilled yet?
J.T. I think it has. They should *know*. Certainly if you take one of them, Saul of Tarsus, it is evident that *he* knew. It is abstract in that sense; it does not mean that all the Pharisees should know, for the natural mind is incapable of taking in these things. "Ye shall know" implies that they did, and that they came into this great light of the Person of the Son of God; for chapter 8 is wonderful: the Lord is, as it were, forced-for it was not a voluntary admission -- to bring out the truth of His Person, and that this wicked act of the Jews should become the means of the great truth of His Person coming to light. That is a great moral victory. It always is so. God overcomes; and the wickedness of man only serves His ends. The truth of the Lord's Person comes to light.
H.D'A.C. When He says, "Then shall ye know that I am he", does it refer to His being Jehovah?
J.T. I think so: "Unless ye shall believe that I am he, ye shall die in your sins" (verse 24). It is "I AM" there, of course.
H.D'A.C. And He says again later on, "I AM".
J.T. Yes, "Before Abraham was, I am" (verse 58). "Jesus therefore said to them, When ye shall have lifted up the Son of man, then ye shall know that I am". The expression occurring throughout this chapter alludes, I believe, to His deity.
J.I. In what way would they know Him because of His being lifted up?
J.T. The truth of His deity, and of His Person, would come to light, referring to Calvary and the cross, and what happened there. It looks on to the full result of it, for instance as He says, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?", @Matthew 27: 46. In saying that He cried with a loud voice, and He cried again with a loud voice, and gave up the ghost,
{433}
denoting that it was a divine Person who was there. The centurion, having seen it, said, "Truly this man was Son of God" (verse 54). That is one point; it is really what the Lord is alluding to, only there is much more. Take Saul of Tarsus as one of them; he was a Pharisee who came into the full knowledge of the Son of God, into the apprehension of His Person, "I am he", involving absolute Deity. "Before Abraham was, I am", and in this verse 28, where it is literally "I am".
H.E.F. Have you in mind that the opposition of the enemy in recent years has brought out more clearly who this Person is?
J.T. Exactly. There has been something, I am afraid, which corresponds to the 'lifting up' in the opposition, and the disposition to hurl reproach at certain persons and to hold them up to scorn. It is the same sort of thing, holding up to scorn and ridicule. Let anyone unbiased read the literature that has been printed so profusely, and they will see that it is full of that sort of thing. But the Lord has turned it to account and gain; He is better known now than before. It is "Then ye shall know that I am": how great and glorious it is for our souls to take in: "Ye shall know that I am".
Ques. Do you mean that the deity of Christ is presented in God's final answer to the onslaught of the enemy in that way?
J.T. What could be greater? God Himself was presented to them in that Person. He came into the world, into the world that was made by Him. "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. *He* was in the beginning with God. All things received being through him, and without him not one thing received being which has received being ... . He was in the world, and the world had its being through him, and the world knew him not. He came to his own, and his
{434}
own received him not; but as many as received him, to them gave he the right to be children of God, to those that believe on his name", @John 1: 1 - 12. That is the point in John, to bring that out. The crucifixion has brought all that out. What a complete victory it is over all the malice of man and Satan that this lowly Man, held up to scorn and ridicule and taunted on the cross, was God Himself! It was man's heart exposed in hatred to God: "Now have they both seen and hated both me and my Father", @John 15: 24.
Ques. Would it be the full development of men speaking against God?
J.T. Exactly. In @John 8 the scribes and Pharisees are exposed as speaking against God, for the Lord speaks of the Father and Himself in relation to the testimony rendered; He says, quoting from their law, "The testimony of two men is true". He condescends to bring in the thought of the Father's testimony and His own testimony as being adequate. He condescends to do it, and they are exposed.
Ques. Will you say a word in relation to the passage in chapter 12: "I, if I be lifted up out of the earth, will draw all to me"?
J.T. That is the final thought. You observe a little change in the phraseology of the Lord's comment He says, "I, if I be lifted up out of the earth, will draw all to me". And it is formally stated, "This he said signifying by what death he was about to die". He is most specific here as to the cross, the kind of death He was about to die, calling attention to the ignominy of it, as Paul alludes to his own position "We have become a spectacle to the world, both to angels and men", @1 Corinthians 4: 9. The Lord was held up in scorn in that way deliberately by men. He points out here that in spite of that effort of the devil, as lifted up He is attractive. The enemy would make that a hindrance to the attractiveness of Christ; it is "the Nazarene": but where God works we are not
{435}
ashamed of the cross. 1 Corinthians shows how Paul regarded it, and he says to the Galatians, "God forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world", @Galatians 6: 14. Christ was all to Paul; He was attractive to Paul; he says, "For to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain", @Philippians 1: 21.
J.H.B. What is the difference between the two figures used by the Lord in this part of chapter 12? He speaks of Himself as the corn of wheat falling into the ground; then He speaks of Himself as lifted up out of the earth.
J.T. The first, of course, is not man's act at all; it is not a question of man's doing; it is the necessity from the divine side, if there is to be a crop. It is an agricultural figure which the Lord graciously uses to show that He had to fall into the ground and die. In His being lifted up it is more a question of the ignominy of the cross; but that He had to fall into the ground and die was so that He might bring forth a crop like Himself. So the brethren are like the Lord, the fruit of His death. The being lifted up "out of the earth" calls attention to His being taken up out of it.
H.D'A.C. How far does the word "all" go, "draw all to me"? Does it refer to everyone in the sense of God making everyone see what He has done in the cross, facing them with it? Or does it apply to those who actually believe?
J.T. It applies to the latter according to John's way of presenting things; it is only those who are really drawn. The full force of it will be seen by and by when the Lord comes, and the whole universe will be centred in Him, not held merely by arbitrary authority but by His attractiveness. He is so attractive! It is an astronomical figure. He holds all by the power of attraction. It is now true for those who are believers; in spite of the ignominy, He holds us.
{436}
-.E. Does "out of the earth" suggest resurrection?
J.T. No; it is the death He should die; because He was taken down from the cross and buried. It tells us that He alluded to the death He should die. He says, "Now is the judgment of this world". The judgment seemed to be on Him outwardly, but God completely turned the tables so that the world is judged by that act, and faith understands it, and is drawn to Christ.
-.E. Is it as risen in that way that He draws to Himself?
J.T. It is rather that He is presented as the crucified One, so that at Corinth Paul said that he was determined to know nothing "save Jesus Christ, and him crucified", @1 Corinthians 2: 2. Paul also presented Him to them in resurrection, but he presented His crucifixion because the Corinthians needed to have that side presented. The fact that I am drawn to Him as thus presented means that I am ready to be with Christ in spite of the ignominy.
Ques. Would the brazen altar answer to it?
J.T. The allusion is really to the court of the tabernacle, an area or space between heaven and earth. "Out of the earth" involves His being a spectacle to heaven and earth; everybody sees it. There is no attempt to hide the shame of the cross in the gospel; it is exposed to the view of everyone.
C.O.B. Is this the closing up of the Lord's public testimony in this gospel?
J.T. Chapter 12 is that; so that you get Isaiah quoted twice. John quotes @Isaiah 53 first as the final testimony to Israel, and then @Isaiah 6. After that the Lord is occupied with His own. Of course the crucifixion actually happened afterwards.
H.E.F. So would you say that the more ignominy is poured out upon Him, the more attractive He is to those who love Him?
{437}
J.T. Yes. No attempt is made to hide it. I am afraid that hinders many; they try to evade the shame. According to John's way of presenting things the effect of the work of God is that a person who is the subject of it would be drawn, in spite of the shame.
W.C.P. Does the lifting up out of the earth suggest that such an one is fit for neither heaven nor earth?
J.T. Yes; the jeers and gibes hurled at Him would indicate what men felt about Him.
G.S. Is that why John stood by the cross of Jesus at the end?
J.T. That is a good reference, and there were a good number of women there, too, standing by the cross of Jesus. John gives it great prominence, more than any of the other writers. John was near enough to the cross, in spite of the shame, to become usable to the Lord in regard of what was most precious to Him; He entrusted His mother to John. Had John been ashamed of the cross he could not have been used of the Lord in such a great and privileged service as that of caring for His mother.
J.I. The Lord shows His disciples His hands and His side at the end of John's gospel.
J.T. That would be the testimony to His love; His feet are not mentioned in this connection in John's gospel, but His hands and His side; it is the love side. In Canticles the hand is referred to as expressing love.
J.I. He was effective in that way in drawing them to Himself.
J.T. Quite so.
