{1}
1  Blessed is the man that walketh not in the counsel of the wicked, and standeth not in the way of sinners, and sitteth not in the seat of scorners;
2  But his delight is in Jehovah's law, and in his law doth he meditate day and night.
3  And he [is] as a tree planted by brooks of water, which giveth its fruit in its season, and whose leaf fadeth not; and all that he doeth prospereth.
4  The wicked are not so; but are as the chaff which the wind driveth away.
5  Therefore the wicked shall not stand in the judgment, nor sinners in the assembly of the righteous.
6  For Jehovah knoweth the way of the righteous, but the way of the wicked shall perish.
{2}
1  Why are the nations in tumultuous agitation, and [why] do the peoples meditate a vain thing?
2  The kings of the earth set themselves, and the princes plot together, against Jehovah and against his anointed:
3  Let us break their bonds asunder, and cast away their cords from us!
4  He that dwelleth in the heavens shall laugh, the Lord shall have them in derision.
5  Then will he speak to them in his anger, and in his fierce displeasure will he terrify them:
6  And *I* have anointed my king upon Zion, the hill of my holiness.
7  I will declare the decree: Jehovah hath said unto me, Thou art my Son; *I* this day have begotten thee.
8  Ask of me, and I will give thee nations for an inheritance, and for thy possession the ends of the earth:
9  Thou shalt break them with a sceptre of iron, as a potter's vessel thou shalt dash them in pieces.
10  And now, O kings, be ye wise, be admonished, ye judges of the earth.
11  Serve Jehovah with fear, and rejoice with trembling.
12  Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish in the way, though his anger burn but a little. Blessed are all who have their trust in him.
{3}
1  <i>A Psalm of David, when he fled from Absalom his son.</i><br>Jehovah, how many are they that trouble me, many they that rise up against me!
2  Many say of my soul, There is no salvation for him in God. Selah.
3  But thou, Jehovah, art a shield about me; my glory, and the lifter up of my head.
4  With my voice will I call to Jehovah, and he will answer me from the hill of his holiness. Selah.
5  I laid me down and slept; I awaked, for Jehovah sustaineth me.
6  I will not fear for myriads of the people that have set themselves against me round about.
7  Arise, Jehovah; save me, my God! For thou hast smitten all mine enemies upon the cheekbone, thou hast broken the teeth of the wicked.
8  Salvation is of Jehovah; thy blessing is upon thy people. Selah.
{4}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. On stringed instruments. A Psalm of David.</i><br>When I call, answer me, O God of my righteousness: in pressure thou hast enlarged me; be gracious unto me, and hear my prayer.
2  Ye sons of men, till when is my glory [to be put] to shame? [How long] will ye love vanity, will ye seek after a lie? Selah.
3  But know that Jehovah hath set apart the pious [man] for himself: Jehovah will hear when I call unto him.
4  Be moved with anger, and sin not; meditate in your own hearts upon your bed, and be still. Selah.
5  Offer sacrifices of righteousness, and confide in Jehovah.
6  Many say, Who shall cause us to see good? Lift up upon us the light of thy countenance, O Jehovah.
7  Thou hast put joy in my heart, more than in the time that their corn and their new wine was in abundance.
8  In peace will I both lay me down and sleep; for thou, Jehovah, alone makest me to dwell in safety.
{5}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. Upon Nehiloth. A Psalm of David.</i><br>Give ear to my words, O Jehovah; consider my meditation.
2  Hearken unto the voice of my crying, my king and my God; for to thee will I pray.
3  Jehovah, in the morning shalt thou hear my voice; in the morning will I address myself to thee, and will look up.
4  For thou art not a +God that hath pleasure in wickedness; evil shall not sojourn with thee.
5  Insolent fools shall not stand before thine eyes; thou hatest all workers of iniquity.
6  Thou wilt destroy them that speak lies: Jehovah abhorreth a man of blood and deceit.
7  But as for me, in the greatness of thy loving-kindness will I enter thy house; I will bow down toward the temple of thy holiness in thy fear.
8  Lead me, Jehovah, in thy righteousness, because of my foes; make thy way plain before me.
9  For there is no certainty in their mouth; their inward part is perversion, their throat is an open sepulchre; they flatter with their tongue.
10  Bring guilt upon them, O God; let them fall by their own counsels: drive them out in the multitude of their transgressions, for they have rebelled against thee.
11  And all that trust in thee shall rejoice: for ever shall they shout joyously, and thou wilt protect them; and they that love thy name shall exult in thee.
12  For thou, Jehovah, wilt bless the righteous [man]; with favour wilt thou surround him as [with] a shield.
{6}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. On stringed instruments, upon Sheminith. A Psalm of David.</i><br>Jehovah, rebuke me not in thine anger, and chasten me not in thy hot displeasure.
2  Be gracious unto me, Jehovah, for I am withered; Jehovah, heal me, for my bones tremble.
3  And my soul trembleth exceedingly: and thou, Jehovah, till how long?
4  Return, Jehovah, free my soul; save me for thy loving-kindness' sake.
5  For in death there is no remembrance of thee; in Sheol who shall give thanks unto thee?
6  I am wearied with my groaning; all the night make I my bed to swim; I dissolve my couch with my tears.
7  Mine eye wasteth away through grief; it hath grown old because of all mine oppressors.
8  Depart from me, all ye workers of iniquity; for Jehovah hath heard the voice of my weeping.
9  Jehovah hath heard my supplication; Jehovah receiveth my prayer.
10  All mine enemies shall be ashamed and tremble exceedingly; they will turn, they will be ashamed suddenly.
{7}
1  <i>Shiggaion of David, which he sang to Jehovah, concerning the words of Cush the Benjaminite.</i><br>Jehovah my God, in thee have I trusted: save me from all my pursuers, and deliver me;
2  Lest he tear my soul like a lion, crushing it while there is no deliverer.
3  Jehovah my God, if I have done this, if there be iniquity in my hands;
4  If I have rewarded evil to him that was at peace with me; (indeed I have freed him that without cause oppressed me;)
5  Let the enemy pursue after my soul, and take [it], and let him tread down my life to the earth, and lay my glory in the dust. Selah.
6  Arise, Jehovah, in thine anger; lift thyself up against the raging of mine oppressors, and awake for me: thou hast commanded judgment.
7  And the assembly of the peoples shall encompass thee; and for their sakes return thou on high.
8  Jehovah shall minister judgment to the peoples. Judge me, Jehovah, according to my righteousness, and according to mine integrity which is in me.
9  Oh let the wrong of the wicked come to an end, and establish thou the righteous [man]; even thou that triest the hearts and reins, the righteous God.
10  My shield is with God, who saveth the upright in heart.
11  God is a righteous judge, and a +God who is indignant all the day.
12  If one turn not, he will sharpen his sword; he hath bent his bow and made it ready,
13  And he hath prepared for him instruments of death; his arrows hath he made burning.
14  Behold, he travaileth with iniquity, yea, he hath conceived mischief, and brought forth falsehood:
15  He digged a pit, and hollowed it out, and is fallen into the hole that he made.
16  His mischief shall return upon his own head, and his violence shall come down upon his own pate.
17  I will praise Jehovah according to his righteousness, and will sing forth the name of Jehovah the Most High.
{8}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. Upon the Gittith. A Psalm of David.</i><br>Jehovah our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth! who hast set thy majesty above the heavens.
2  Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings hast thou established praise because of thine adversaries, to still the enemy and the avenger.
3  When I see thy heavens, the work of thy fingers, the moon and stars, which thou hast established;
4  What is man, that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man, that thou visitest him?
5  Thou hast made him a little lower than the angels, and hast crowned him with glory and splendour.
6  Thou hast made him to rule over the works of thy hands; thou hast put everything under his feet:
7  Sheep and oxen, all of them, and also the beasts of the field;
8  The fowl of the heavens, and the fishes of the sea, [whatever] passeth through the paths of the seas.
9  Jehovah our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth!
{9}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. Upon Muthlabben. A Psalm of David.</i><br>I will praise Jehovah with my whole heart; I will recount all thy marvellous works.
2  I will be glad and rejoice in thee; I will sing forth thy name, O Most High.
3  When mine enemies turned back, they stumbled and perished at thy presence:
4  For thou hast maintained my right and my cause. Thou sittest on the throne, judging righteously.
5  Thou hast rebuked the nations, thou hast destroyed the wicked; thou hast put out their name for ever and ever.
6  O enemy! destructions are ended for ever. -- Thou hast also destroyed cities, even the remembrance of them hath perished.
7  But Jehovah sitteth for ever; he hath ordained his throne for judgment.
8  And it is he that will judge the world with righteousness; he shall execute judgment upon the peoples with equity.
9  And Jehovah will be a refuge to the oppressed one, a refuge in times of distress.
10  And they that know thy name will confide in thee; for thou, Jehovah, hast not forsaken them that seek thee.
11  Sing psalms to Jehovah who dwelleth in Zion; tell among the peoples his doings.
12  For when he maketh inquisition for blood, he remembereth them; the cry of the afflicted ones hath he not forgotten.
13  Be gracious unto me, O Jehovah; consider mine affliction from them that hate me, lifting me up from the gates of death:
14  That I may declare all thy praise in the gates of the daughter of Zion. I will be joyful in thy salvation.
15  The nations are sunk down in the pit [that] they made; in the net that they hid is their own foot taken.
16  Jehovah is known [by] the judgment he hath executed: the wicked is ensnared in the work of his own hands. Higgaion. Selah.
17  The wicked shall be turned into Sheol, all the nations that forget God.
18  For the needy one shall not be forgotten alway; the hope of the meek shall not perish for ever.
19  Arise, Jehovah; let not man prevail: let the nations be judged in thy sight.
20  Put them in fear, Jehovah: that the nations may know themselves to be but men. Selah.
{10}
1  Why, Jehovah, standest thou afar off? [Why] hidest thou thyself in times of distress?
2  The wicked, in his pride, doth hotly pursue the afflicted. They shall be taken in the devices that they have imagined.
3  For the wicked boasteth of his soul's desire, and he blesseth the covetous; he contemneth Jehovah.
4  The wicked [saith], in the haughtiness of his countenance, He doth not search out: all his thoughts are, There is no God!
5  His ways always succeed; thy judgments are far above out of his sight; [as for] all his adversaries, he puffeth at them.
6  He saith in his heart, I shall not be moved; from generation to generation I shall be in no adversity.
7  His mouth is full of cursing, and deceit, and oppression; under his tongue is mischief and iniquity.
8  He sitteth in the lurking-places of the villages; in the secret places doth he slay the innocent: his eyes watch for the wretched.
9  He lieth in wait secretly, like a lion in his thicket; he lieth in wait to catch the afflicted: he doth catch the afflicted, drawing him into his net.
10  He croucheth, he boweth down, that the wretched may fall by his strong ones.
11  He saith in his heart, +God hath forgotten, he hideth his face, he will never see [it].
12  Arise, Jehovah; O +God, lift up thy hand: forget not the afflicted.
13  Wherefore doth the wicked contemn God? He hath said in his heart, Thou wilt not require [it].
14  Thou hast seen [it], for thou thyself beholdest trouble and vexation, to requite by thy hand. The wretched committeth himself unto thee; thou hast been the helper of the fatherless.
15  Break thou the arm of the wicked, and as for the evil man, seek out his wickedness [till] thou find none.
16  Jehovah is King for ever and ever: the nations have perished out of his land.
17  Jehovah, thou hast heard the desire of the meek, thou hast established their heart: thou causest thine ear to hear,
18  To do justice to the fatherless and the oppressed one, that the man of the earth may terrify no more.
{11}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. [A Psalm] of David.</i><br>In Jehovah have I put my trust: how say ye to my soul, Flee [as] a bird to your mountain?
2  For behold, the wicked bend the bow, they make ready their arrow upon the string, that they may in darkness shoot at the upright in heart.
3  If the foundations be destroyed, what shall the righteous do?
4  Jehovah [is] in the temple of his holiness; Jehovah, -- his throne is in the heavens: his eyes behold, his eyelids try the children of men.
5  Jehovah trieth the righteous one; but the wicked, and him that loveth violence, his soul hateth.
6  Upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone; and scorching wind shall be the portion of their cup.
7  For righteous is Jehovah; he loveth righteousness, his countenance doth behold the upright.
{12}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. Upon Sheminith. A Psalm of David.</i><br>Save, Jehovah, for the godly man is gone; for the faithful have failed from among the children of men.
2  They speak falsehood every one with his neighbour: [with] flattering lip, with a double heart, do they speak.
3  Jehovah will cut off all flattering lips, the tongue that speaketh proud things,
4  Who have said, With our tongue will we prevail, our lips are our own: who [is] lord over us?
5  Because of the oppression of the afflicted, because of the sighing of the needy, now will I arise, saith Jehovah, I will set [him] in safety, at whom they puff.
6  The words of Jehovah are pure words, silver tried in the furnace of earth, purified seven times.
7  Thou, Jehovah, wilt keep them, thou wilt preserve them from this generation for ever.
8  The wicked walk about on every side, when vileness is exalted among the children of men.
{13}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. A Psalm of David.</i><br>How long, Jehovah, wilt thou forget me for ever? how long wilt thou hide thy face from me?
2  How long shall I take counsel in my soul, with sorrow in my heart daily? how long shall mine enemy be exalted over me?
3  Consider, answer me, O Jehovah my God! lighten mine eyes, lest I sleep the [sleep of] death;
4  Lest mine enemy say, I have prevailed against him! [lest] mine adversaries be joyful when I am moved.
5  As for me, I have confided in thy loving-kindness; my heart shall be joyful in thy salvation.
6  I will sing unto Jehovah, for he hath dealt bountifully with me.
{14}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. [A Psalm] of David.</i><br>The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God. They have corrupted themselves, they have done abominable works: there is none that doeth good.
2  Jehovah looked down from the heavens upon the children of men, to see if there were any that did understand, that did seek God.
3  They have all gone aside, they are together become corrupt: there is none that doeth good, not even one.
4  Have all the workers of iniquity no knowledge, eating up my people [as] they eat bread? They call not upon Jehovah.
5  There were they in great fear; for God is in the generation of the righteous.
6  Ye have shamed the counsel of the afflicted, because Jehovah [was] his refuge.
7  Oh that the salvation of Israel were come out of Zion! When Jehovah turneth again the captivity of his people, Jacob shall be glad, Israel shall rejoice.
{15}
1  <i>A Psalm of David.</i><br>Jehovah, who shall sojourn in thy tent? who shall dwell in the hill of thy holiness?
2  He that walketh uprightly, and worketh righteousness, and speaketh the truth from his heart.
3  [He that] slandereth not with his tongue, doeth not evil to his companion, nor taketh up a reproach against his neighbour;
4  In whose eyes the depraved person is contemned, and who honoureth them that fear Jehovah; who, if he have sworn to his own hurt, changeth it not;
5  [He that] putteth not out his money to usury, nor taketh reward against the innocent. He that doeth these [things] shall never be moved.
{16}
1  <i>Michtam of David.</i><br>Preserve me, O +God: for I trust in thee.
2  Thou [my soul] hast said to Jehovah, Thou art the Lord: my goodness [extendeth] not to thee; -- 
3  To the saints that are on the earth, and to the excellent [thou hast said], In them is all my delight.
4  Their sorrows shall be multiplied that hasten after another: their drink-offerings of blood will I not offer, and I will not take up their names into my lips.
5  Jehovah is the portion of mine inheritance and of my cup: thou maintainest my lot.
6  The lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places; yea, I have a goodly heritage.
7  I will bless Jehovah, who giveth me counsel; even in the nights my reins instruct me.
8  I have set Jehovah continually before me; because [he is] at my right hand, I shall not be moved.
9  Therefore my heart rejoiceth, and my glory exulteth; my flesh moreover shall dwell in hope.
10  For thou wilt not leave my soul to Sheol, neither wilt thou allow thy Holy One to see corruption.
11  Thou wilt make known to me the path of life: thy countenance is fulness of joy; at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore.
{17}
1  <i>A Prayer of David.</i><br>Hear the right, O Jehovah, attend unto my cry; give ear unto my prayer, which is not out of feigned lips.
2  Let my judgment come forth from thy presence, let thine eyes regard equity.
3  Thou hast proved my heart, thou hast visited me by night; thou hast tried me, thou hast found nothing: my thought goeth not beyond my word.
4  Concerning the works of men, by the word of thy lips I have kept from the paths of the violent [man].
5  When thou holdest my goings in thy paths, my footsteps slip not.
6  I have called upon thee, for thou answerest me, O +God. Incline thine ear unto me, hear my speech.
7  Shew wondrously thy loving-kindnesses, O thou that savest by thy right hand them that trust [in thee] from those that rise up [against them].
8  Keep me as the apple of the eye, hide me under the shadow of thy wings,
9  From the wicked that destroy me, my deadly enemies, who compass me about.
10  They are enclosed in their own fat; with their mouth they speak proudly.
11  They have now encompassed us in our steps; their eyes have they set, bowing down to the earth.
12  He is like a lion that is greedy of its prey, and as a young lion lurking in secret places.
13  Arise, Jehovah, anticipate him, cast him down: deliver my soul from the wicked, thy sword;
14  From men [who are] thy hand, O Jehovah, from men of this age: their portion is in [this] life, and their belly thou fillest with thy hid [treasure]; they have their fill of sons, and leave the rest of their [substance] to their children.
15  As for me, I will behold thy face in righteousness; I shall be satisfied, when I awake, with thy likeness.
{18}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. [A Psalm] of David, the servant of Jehovah, who spoke to Jehovah the words of this song in the day that Jehovah had delivered him out of the hand of all his enemies and out of the hand of Saul. And he said,</i><br>I will love thee, O Jehovah, my strength.
2  Jehovah is my rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer; my +God, my rock, in whom I will trust; my shield, and the horn of my salvation, my high tower.
3  I will call upon Jehovah, who is to be praised: so shall I be saved from mine enemies.
4  The bands of death encompassed me, and torrents of Belial made me afraid.
5  The bands of Sheol surrounded me, the cords of death encountered me.
6  In my distress I called upon Jehovah, and I cried out to my God; he heard my voice out of his temple, and my cry came before him, into his ears.
7  Then the earth shook and quaked, and the foundations of the mountains trembled and shook, because he was wroth.
8  There went up a smoke out of his nostrils, and fire out of his mouth devoured: coals burned forth from it.
9  And he bowed the heavens, and came down; and darkness was under his feet.
10  And he rode upon a cherub and did fly; yea, he flew fast upon the wings of the wind.
11  He made darkness his secret place, his tent round about him: darkness of waters, thick clouds of the skies.
12  From the brightness before him his thick clouds passed forth: hail and coals of fire.
13  And Jehovah thundered in the heavens, and the Most High uttered his voice: hail and coals of fire.
14  And he sent his arrows, and scattered [mine enemies]; and he shot forth lightnings, and discomfited them.
15  And the beds of the waters were seen, and the foundations of the world were uncovered at thy rebuke, Jehovah, at the blast of the breath of thy nostrils.
16  He reached forth from above, he took me, he drew me out of great waters:
17  He delivered me from my strong enemy, and from them that hated me; for they were mightier than I.
18  They encountered me in the day of my calamity, but Jehovah was my stay.
19  And he brought me forth into a large place; he delivered me, because he delighted in me.
20  Jehovah hath rewarded me according to my righteousness; according to the cleanness of my hands hath he recompensed me.
21  For I have kept the ways of Jehovah, and have not wickedly departed from my God.
22  For all his ordinances were before me, and I did not put away his statutes from me;
23  And I was upright with him, and kept myself from mine iniquity.
24  And Jehovah hath recompensed me according to my righteousness, according to the cleanness of my hands in his sight.
25  With the gracious thou dost shew thyself gracious; with the upright man thou dost shew thyself upright;
26  With the pure thou dost shew thyself pure; and with the perverse thou dost shew thyself contrary.
27  For it is thou that savest the afflicted people; but the haughty eyes wilt thou bring down.
28  For it is thou that makest my lamp to shine: Jehovah my God enlighteneth my darkness.
29  For by thee I have run through a troop; and by my God have I leaped over a wall.
30  As for +God, his way is perfect; the word of Jehovah is tried: he is a shield to all that trust in him.
31  For who is +God save Jehovah? and who is a rock if not our God?
32  The +God who girdeth me with strength, and maketh my way perfect,
33  Who maketh my feet like hinds' [feet], and setteth me upon my high places;
34  Who teacheth my hands to war, and mine arms bend a bow of brass;
35  And thou didst give me the shield of thy salvation, and thy right hand held me up; and thy condescending gentleness hath made me great.
36  Thou didst enlarge my steps under me, and mine ankles have not wavered.
37  I pursued mine enemies, and overtook them; and I turned not again till they were consumed.
38  I crushed them, and they were not able to rise: they fell under my feet.
39  And thou girdedst me with strength to battle; thou didst subdue under me those that rose up against me.
40  And mine enemies didst thou make to turn their backs unto me, and those that hated me I destroyed.
41  They cried, and there was none to save; -- unto Jehovah, and he answered them not.
42  And I did beat them small as dust before the wind; I did cast them out as the mire of the streets.
43  Thou hast delivered me from the strivings of the people; thou hast made me the head of the nations: a people I knew not doth serve me.
44  At the hearing of the ear, they obey me: strangers come cringing unto me.
45  Strangers have faded away, and they come trembling forth from their close places.
46  Jehovah liveth; and blessed be my rock; and exalted be the God of my salvation,
47  The +God who hath avenged me, and hath subjected the peoples to me;
48  Who hath delivered me from mine enemies: yea, thou hast lifted me up above them that rose up against me; from the man of violence hast thou delivered me.
49  Therefore will I give thanks to thee, Jehovah, among the nations, and will sing psalms to thy name.
50  [It is he] who giveth great deliverances to his king, and sheweth loving-kindness to his anointed, to David, and to his seed for evermore.
{19}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. A Psalm of David.</i><br>The heavens declare the glory of +God; and the expanse sheweth the work of his hands.
2  Day unto day uttereth speech, and night unto night sheweth knowledge.
3  There is no speech and there are no words, yet their voice is heard.
4  Their line is gone out through all the earth, and their language to the extremity of the world. In them hath he set a tent for the sun,
5  And he is as a bridegroom going forth from his chamber; he rejoiceth as a strong man to run the race.
6  His going forth is from the end of the heavens, and his circuit unto the ends of it; and there is nothing hid from the heat thereof.
7  The law of Jehovah is perfect, restoring the soul; the testimony of Jehovah is sure, making wise the simple;
8  The precepts of Jehovah are right, rejoicing the heart; the commandment of Jehovah is pure, enlightening the eyes;
9  The fear of Jehovah is clean, enduring for ever; the judgments of Jehovah are truth, they are righteous altogether:
10  They are more precious than gold, yea, than much fine gold; and sweeter than honey and the dropping of the honeycomb.
11  Moreover, by them is thy servant enlightened; in keeping them there is great reward.
12  Who understandeth [his] errors? Purify me from secret [faults].
13  Keep back thy servant also from presumptuous [sins]; let them not have dominion over me: then shall I be perfect, and I shall be innocent from great transgression.
14  Let the words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart be acceptable in thy sight, O Jehovah, my rock, and my redeemer.
{20}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. A Psalm of David.</i><br>Jehovah answer thee in the day of trouble; the name of the God of Jacob protect thee;
2  May he send thee help from the sanctuary, and strengthen thee out of Zion;
3  Remember all thine oblations, and accept thy burnt-offering; Selah.
4  Grant thee according to thy heart, and fulfil all thy counsels.
5  We will triumph in thy salvation, and in the name of our God will we set up our banners. Jehovah fulfil all thy petitions!
6  Now know I that Jehovah saveth his anointed; he answereth him from the heavens of his holiness, with the saving strength of his right hand.
7  Some make mention of chariots, and some of horses, but we of the name of Jehovah our God.
8  They are bowed down and fallen; but we are risen and stand upright.
9  Save, Jehovah! Let the king answer us in the day we call.
{21}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. A Psalm of David.</i><br>The king shall joy in thy strength, Jehovah; and in thy salvation how greatly shall he rejoice.
2  Thou hast given him his heart's desire, and hast not withholden the request of his lips. Selah.
3  For thou hast met him with the blessings of goodness; thou hast set a crown of pure gold on his head.
4  He asked life of thee; thou gavest [it] him, length of days for ever and ever.
5  His glory is great through thy salvation; majesty and splendour hast thou laid upon him.
6  For thou hast made him to be blessings for ever; thou hast filled him with joy by thy countenance.
7  For the king confideth in Jehovah: and through the loving-kindness of the Most High he shall not be moved.
8  Thy hand shall find out all thine enemies; thy right hand shall find out those that hate thee.
9  Thou shalt make them as a fiery furnace in the time of thy presence; Jehovah shall swallow them up in his anger, and the fire shall devour them:
10  Their fruit shalt thou destroy from the earth, and their seed from among the children of men.
11  For they intended evil against thee; they imagined a mischievous device, which they could not execute.
12  For thou wilt make them turn their back; thou wilt make ready thy bowstring against their face.
13  Be thou exalted, Jehovah, in thine own strength: we will sing and celebrate thy power.
{22}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. Upon Aijeleth-Shahar. A Psalm of David.</i><br>My +God, my +God, why hast thou forsaken me? [why art thou] far from my salvation, from the words of my groaning?
2  My God, I cry by day, and thou answerest not; and by night, and there is no rest for me:
3  And thou art holy, thou that dwellest amid the praises of Israel.
4  Our fathers confided in thee: they confided, and thou didst deliver them.
5  They cried unto thee, and were delivered; they confided in thee, and were not confounded.
6  But I am a worm, and no man; a reproach of men, and the despised of the people.
7  All they that see me laugh me to scorn; they shoot out the lip, they shake the head, [saying:]
8  Commit it to Jehovah -- let him rescue him; let him deliver him, because he delighteth in him!
9  But thou art he that took me out of the womb; thou didst make me trust, upon my mother's breasts.
10  I was cast upon thee from the womb; thou art my +God from my mother's belly.
11  Be not far from me, for trouble is near; for there is none to help.
12  Many bulls have encompassed me; Bashan's strong ones have beset me round.
13  They gape upon me with their mouth, [as] a ravening and a roaring lion.
14  I am poured out like water, and all my bones are out of joint: my heart is become like wax; it is melted in the midst of my bowels.
15  My strength is dried up like a potsherd, and my tongue cleaveth to my palate; and thou hast laid me in the dust of death.
16  For dogs have encompassed me; an assembly of evil-doers have surrounded me: they pierced my hands and my feet.
17  I may count all my bones. They look, they stare upon me;
18  They part my garments among them, and cast lots upon my vesture.
19  But thou, Jehovah, be not far [from me]; O my strength, haste thee to help me.
20  Deliver my soul from the sword; my only one from the power of the dog;
21  Save me from the lion's mouth. Yea, from the horns of the buffaloes hast thou answered me.
22  I will declare thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the congregation will I praise thee.
23  Ye that fear Jehovah, praise him; all ye the seed of Jacob, glorify him; and revere him, all ye the seed of Israel.
24  For he hath not despised nor abhorred the affliction of the afflicted; neither hath he hid his face from him: but when he cried unto him, he heard.
25  My praise is from thee, in the great congregation; I will pay my vows before them that fear him.
26  The meek shall eat and be satisfied; they shall praise Jehovah that seek him: your heart shall live for ever.
27  All the ends of the earth shall remember and turn unto Jehovah, and all the families of the nations shall worship before thee:
28  For the kingdom is Jehovah's, and he ruleth among the nations.
29  All the fat ones of the earth shall eat and worship; all they that go down to the dust shall bow before him, and he that cannot keep alive his own soul.
30  A seed shall serve him; it shall be accounted to the Lord for a generation.
31  They shall come, and shall declare his righteousness unto a people that shall be born, that he hath done [it].
{23}
1  <i>A Psalm of David.</i><br>Jehovah is my shepherd; I shall not want.
2  He maketh me to lie down in green pastures; he leadeth me beside still waters.
3  He restoreth my soul; he leadeth me in paths of righteousness for his name's sake.
4  Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil: for thou art with me; thy rod and thy staff, they comfort me.
5  Thou preparest a table before me in the presence of mine enemies; thou hast anointed my head with oil; my cup runneth over.
6  Surely, goodness and loving-kindness shall follow me all the days of my life; and I will dwell in the house of Jehovah for the length of the days.
{24}
1  <i>Of David. A Psalm.</i><br>The earth is Jehovah's, and the fulness thereof; the world, and they that dwell therein.
2  For it was he that founded it upon seas, and established it upon floods.
3  Who shall ascend into the mount of Jehovah? and who shall stand in his holy place?
4  He that hath blameless hands and a pure heart; who lifteth not up his soul unto vanity, nor sweareth deceitfully:
5  He shall receive blessing from Jehovah, and righteousness from the God of his salvation.
6  This is the generation of them that seek unto him, that seek thy face, O Jacob. Selah.
7  Lift up your heads, ye gates, and be ye lifted up, ye everlasting doors, and the King of glory shall come in.
8  Who is this King of glory? Jehovah strong and mighty, Jehovah mighty in battle.
9  Lift up your heads, ye gates; yea, lift up, ye everlasting doors, and the King of glory shall come in.
10  Who is he, this King of glory? Jehovah of hosts, he is the King of glory. Selah.
{25}
1  <i>[A Psalm] of David.</i><br>Unto thee, Jehovah, do I lift up my soul.
2  My God, I confide in thee; let me not be ashamed, let not mine enemies triumph over me.
3  Yea, none that wait on thee shall be ashamed: they shall be ashamed that deal treacherously without cause.
4  Make me to know thy ways, O Jehovah; teach me thy paths.
5  Make me to walk in thy truth, and teach me: for thou art the God of my salvation; on thee do I wait all the day.
6  Remember, Jehovah, thy tender mercies and thy loving-kindnesses; for they are from everlasting.
7  Remember not the sins of my youth, nor my transgressions; according to thy loving-kindness remember thou me, for thy goodness' sake, Jehovah.
8  Good and upright is Jehovah; therefore will he instruct sinners in the way:
9  The meek will he guide in judgment, and the meek will he teach his way.
10  All the paths of Jehovah are loving-kindness and truth for such as keep his covenant and his testimonies.
11  For thy name's sake, O Jehovah, thou wilt indeed pardon mine iniquity; for it is great.
12  What man is he that feareth Jehovah? him will he instruct in the way [that] he should choose.
13  His soul shall dwell in prosperity, and his seed shall inherit the earth.
14  The secret of Jehovah is with them that fear him, that he may make known his covenant to them.
15  Mine eyes are ever toward Jehovah; for he will bring my feet out of the net.
16  Turn toward me, and be gracious unto me; for I am solitary and afflicted.
17  The troubles of my heart are increased: bring me out of my distresses;
18  Consider mine affliction and my travail, and forgive all my sins.
19  Consider mine enemies, for they are many, and they hate me [with] cruel hatred.
20  Keep my soul, and deliver me: let me not be ashamed; for I trust in thee.
21  Let integrity and uprightness preserve me; for I wait on thee.
22  Redeem Israel, O God, out of all his troubles.
{26}
1  <i>[A Psalm] of David.</i><br>Judge me, O Jehovah, for I have walked in mine integrity, and I have confided in Jehovah: I shall not slip.
2  Prove me, Jehovah, and test me; try my reins and my heart:
3  For thy loving-kindness is before mine eyes, and I have walked in thy truth.
4  I have not sat with vain persons, neither have I gone in with dissemblers;
5  I have hated the congregation of evil-doers, and I have not sat with the wicked.
6  I will wash my hands in innocency, and will encompass thine altar, O Jehovah,
7  That I may cause the voice of thanksgiving to be heard, and declare all thy marvellous works.
8  Jehovah, I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place where thy glory dwelleth.
9  Gather not my soul with sinners, nor my life with men of blood;
10  In whose hands are evil devices, and their right hand is full of bribes.
11  But as for me, I will walk in mine integrity. Redeem me, and be gracious unto me.
12  My foot standeth in an even place; in the congregations will I bless Jehovah.
{27}
1  <i>[A Psalm] of David.</i><br>Jehovah is my light and my salvation; whom shall I fear? Jehovah is the strength of my life; of whom shall I be afraid?
2  When evil-doers, mine adversaries and mine enemies, came upon me to eat up my flesh, they stumbled and fell.
3  If a host encamp against me, my heart shall not fear; if war rise against me, in this will I be confident.
4  One [thing] have I asked of Jehovah, that will I seek after: that I may dwell in the house of Jehovah all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of Jehovah, and to inquire [of him] in his temple.
5  For in the day of evil he will hide me in his pavilion; in the secret of his tent will he keep me concealed: he will set me high upon a rock.
6  And now shall my head be lifted up above mine enemies round about me; and I will offer in his tent sacrifices of shouts of joy: I will sing, yea, I will sing psalms unto Jehovah.
7  Hear, Jehovah; with my voice do I call; be gracious unto me, and answer me.
8  My heart said for thee, Seek ye my face. Thy face, O Jehovah, will I seek.
9  Hide not thy face from me; put not thy servant away in anger: thou hast been my help; cast me not off, neither forsake me, O God of my salvation.
10  For had my father and my mother forsaken me, then had Jehovah taken me up.
11  Teach me thy way, Jehovah, and lead me in an even path, because of mine enemies.
12  Deliver me not over to the will of mine adversaries; for false witnesses are risen up against me, and such as breathe out violence.
13  Unless I had believed to see the goodness of Jehovah in the land of the living...!
14  Wait for Jehovah; be strong and let thy heart take courage: yea, wait for Jehovah.
{28}
1  <i>[A Psalm] of David.</i><br>Unto thee, Jehovah, do I call; my rock, be not silent unto me, lest, [if] thou keep silence toward me, I become like them that go down into the pit.
2  Hear the voice of my supplications, when I cry unto thee, when I lift up my hands toward the oracle of thy holiness.
3  Draw me not away with the wicked, and with the workers of iniquity, who speak peace to their neighbours, and mischief is in their heart.
4  Give them according to their doing, and according to the wickedness of their deeds; give them after the work of their hands, render to them their desert.
5  For they regard not the deeds of Jehovah, nor the work of his hands: he will destroy them, and not build them up.
6  Blessed be Jehovah, for he hath heard the voice of my supplications.
7  Jehovah is my strength and my shield; my heart confided in him, and I was helped: therefore my heart exulteth, and with my song will I praise him.
8  Jehovah is their strength; and he is the stronghold of salvation to his anointed one.
9  Save thy people, and bless thine inheritance; and feed them, and lift them up for ever.
{29}
1  <i>A Psalm of David.</i><br>Give unto Jehovah, ye sons of the mighty ones, give unto Jehovah glory and strength;
2  Give unto Jehovah the glory of his name; worship Jehovah in holy splendour.
3  The voice of Jehovah is upon the waters: the +God of glory thundereth, -- Jehovah upon great waters.
4  The voice of Jehovah is powerful; the voice of Jehovah is full of majesty.
5  The voice of Jehovah breaketh cedars; yea, Jehovah breaketh the cedars of Lebanon:
6  And he maketh them to skip like a calf, Lebanon and Sirion like a young buffalo.
7  The voice of Jehovah cleaveth out flames of fire.
8  The voice of Jehovah shaketh the wilderness; Jehovah shaketh the wilderness of Kadesh.
9  The voice of Jehovah maketh the hinds to calve, and layeth bare the forests; and in his temple doth every one say, Glory!
10  Jehovah sitteth upon the flood; yea, Jehovah sitteth as king for ever.
11  Jehovah will give strength unto his people; Jehovah will bless his people with peace.
{30}
1  <i>A Psalm of David: dedication-song of the house.</i><br>I will extol thee, Jehovah; for thou hast delivered me, and hast not made mine enemies to rejoice over me.
2  Jehovah my God, I cried unto thee, and thou hast healed me.
3  Jehovah, thou hast brought up my soul from Sheol, thou hast quickened me from among those that go down to the pit.
4  Sing psalms unto Jehovah, ye saints of his, and give thanks in remembrance of his holiness.
5  For a moment [is passed] in his anger, a life in his favour; at even weeping cometh for the night, and at morn there is rejoicing.
6  As for me, I said in my prosperity, I shall never be moved.
7  Jehovah, by thy favour thou hadst made my mountain to stand strong: thou didst hide thy face; I was troubled.
8  I called to thee, Jehovah, and unto the Lord did I make supplication:
9  What profit is there in my blood, in my going down to the pit? shall the dust praise thee? shall it declare thy truth?
10  Hear, O Jehovah, and be gracious unto me; Jehovah, be my helper.
11  Thou hast turned for me my mourning into dancing; thou hast loosed my sackcloth, and girded me with gladness;
12  That [my] glory may sing psalms of thee, and not be silent. Jehovah my God, I will praise thee for ever.
{31}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. A Psalm of David.</i><br>In thee, Jehovah, do I trust; let me never be ashamed: deliver me in thy righteousness.
2  Incline thine ear to me, deliver me speedily; be a strong rock to me, a house of defence to save me.
3  For thou art my rock and my fortress; and, for thy name's sake, thou wilt lead me and guide me.
4  Draw me out of the net that they have hidden for me; for thou art my strength.
5  Into thy hand I commit my spirit: thou hast redeemed me, Jehovah, [thou] +God of truth.
6  I have hated them that observe lying vanities; and as for me, I have confided in Jehovah.
7  I will be glad and rejoice in thy loving-kindness, for thou hast seen mine affliction; thou hast known the troubles of my soul,
8  And hast not shut me up into the hand of the enemy: thou hast set my feet in a large place.
9  Be gracious unto me, Jehovah, for I am in trouble: mine eye wasteth away with vexation, my soul and my belly.
10  For my life is spent with sorrow, and my years with sighing; my strength faileth through mine iniquity, and my bones are wasted.
11  More than to all mine oppressors, I am become exceedingly a reproach, even to my neighbours, and a fear to mine acquaintance: they that see me without flee from me.
12  I am forgotten in [their] heart as a dead man; I am become like a broken vessel.
13  For I have heard the slander of many -- terror on every side -- when they take counsel together against me: they plot to take away my life.
14  But I confided in thee, Jehovah; I said, thou art my God.
15  My times are in thy hand: deliver me from the hand of mine enemies, and from my persecutors.
16  Make thy face to shine upon thy servant; save me in thy loving-kindness.
17  Jehovah, let me not be ashamed; for I have called upon thee: let the wicked be ashamed, let them be silent in Sheol.
18  Let the lying lips become dumb, which speak insolently against the righteous in pride and contempt.
19  [Oh] how great is thy goodness, which thou hast laid up for them that fear thee, [which] thou hast wrought for them that trust in thee, before the sons of men!
20  Thou keepest them concealed in the secret of thy presence from the conspiracies of man; thou hidest them in a pavilion from the strife of tongues.
21  Blessed be Jehovah; for he hath shewn me wondrously his loving-kindness in a strong city.
22  As for me, I said in my haste, I am cut off from before thine eyes; nevertheless thou heardest the voice of my supplications when I cried unto thee.
23  Love Jehovah, all ye his saints. Jehovah preserveth the faithful, and plentifully requiteth the proud doer.
24  Be strong, and let your heart take courage, all ye that hope in Jehovah.
{32}
1  <i>Of David. Instruction.</i><br>Blessed is he [whose] transgression is forgiven, [whose] sin is covered!
2  Blessed is the man unto whom Jehovah reckoneth not iniquity, and in whose spirit there is no guile!
3  When I kept silence, my bones waxed old, through my groaning all the day long.
4  For day and night thy hand was heavy upon me; my moisture was turned into the drought of summer. Selah.
5  I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity I covered not; I said, I will confess my transgressions unto Jehovah, and *thou* forgavest the iniquity of my sin. Selah.
6  For this shall every one that is godly pray unto thee at a time when thou mayest be found: surely in the floods of great waters they will not reach him.
7  Thou art a hiding-place for me; thou preservest me from trouble; thou dost encompass me with songs of deliverance. Selah.
8  I will instruct thee and teach thee the way in which thou shalt go; I will counsel [thee] with mine eye upon thee.
9  Be ye not as a horse, as a mule, which have no understanding: whose trappings must be bit and bridle, for restraint, or they will not come unto thee.
10  Many sorrows hath the wicked; but he that confideth in Jehovah, loving-kindness shall encompass him.
11  Rejoice in Jehovah, and be glad, ye righteous; and shout for joy, all ye upright in heart.
{33}
1  Exult, ye righteous, in Jehovah: praise is comely for the upright.
2  Give thanks unto Jehovah with the harp; sing psalms unto him with the ten-stringed lute.
3  Sing unto him a new song; play skilfully with a loud sound.
4  For the word of Jehovah is right, and all his work is in faithfulness.
5  He loveth righteousness and judgment: the earth is full of the loving-kindness of Jehovah.
6  By the word of Jehovah were the heavens made, and all the host of them by the breath of his mouth.
7  He gathereth the waters of the sea together as a heap; he layeth up the deeps in storehouses.
8  Let all the earth fear Jehovah; let all the inhabitants of the world stand in awe of him.
9  For *he* spoke, and it was [done]; *he* commanded, and it stood fast.
10  Jehovah frustrateth the counsel of the nations; he maketh the thoughts of the peoples of none effect.
11  The counsel of Jehovah standeth for ever, the thoughts of his heart from generation to generation.
12  Blessed is the nation whose God is Jehovah, the people that he hath chosen for his inheritance!
13  Jehovah looketh from the heavens; he beholdeth all the sons of men:
14  From the place of his habitation he looketh forth upon all the inhabitants of the earth;
15  He who fashioneth the hearts of them all, who considereth all their works.
16  The king is not saved by the multitude of [his] forces; a mighty man is not delivered by much strength.
17  The horse is a vain thing for safety; neither doth he deliver by his great power.
18  Behold, the eye of Jehovah is upon them that fear him, upon them that hope in his loving-kindness,
19  To deliver their soul from death, and to keep them alive in famine.
20  Our soul waiteth for Jehovah: he is our help and our shield.
21  For in him shall our heart rejoice, because we have confided in his holy name.
22  Let thy loving-kindness, O Jehovah, be upon us, according as we have hoped in thee.
{34}
1  <i>[A Psalm] of David; when he changed his behaviour before Abimelech, who drove him away, and he departed.</i><br>I will bless Jehovah at all times; his praise shall continually be in my mouth.
2  My soul shall make its boast in Jehovah: the meek shall hear, and rejoice.
3  Magnify Jehovah with me, and let us exalt his name together.
4  I sought Jehovah, and he answered me, and delivered me from all my fears.
5  They looked unto him, and were enlightened, and their faces were not confounded.
6  This afflicted one called, and Jehovah heard [him], and saved him out of all his troubles.
7  The angel of Jehovah encampeth round about them that fear him, and delivereth them.
8  Taste and see that Jehovah is good: blessed is the man that trusteth in him!
9  Fear Jehovah, ye his saints; for there is no want to them that fear him.
10  The young lions are in need and suffer hunger; but they that seek Jehovah shall not want any good.
11  Come, ye sons, hearken unto me: I will teach you the fear of Jehovah.
12  What man is he that desireth life, [and] loveth days, that he may see good?
13  Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile;
14  Depart from evil, and do good; seek peace, and pursue it.
15  The eyes of Jehovah are upon the righteous, and his ears are toward their cry;
16  The face of Jehovah is against them that do evil, to cut off the remembrance of them from the earth:
17  [The righteous] cry, and Jehovah heareth, and delivereth them out of all their troubles.
18  Jehovah is nigh to those that are of a broken heart, and saveth them that are of a contrite spirit.
19  Many are the adversities of the righteous, but Jehovah delivereth him out of them all:
20  He keepeth all his bones; not one of them is broken.
21  Evil shall destroy the wicked; and they that hate the righteous shall bear their guilt.
22  Jehovah redeemeth the soul of his servants; and none of them that trust in him shall bear guilt.
{35}
1  <i>[A Psalm] of David.</i><br>Strive, O Jehovah, with them that strive with me; fight against them that fight against me:
2  Take hold of shield and buckler, and stand up for my help;
3  And draw out the spear, and stop [the way] against my pursuers: say unto my soul, I am thy salvation.
4  Let them be put to shame and confounded that seek after my life; let them be turned backward and brought to confusion that devise my hurt:
5  Let them be as chaff before the wind, and let the angel of Jehovah drive [them] away;
6  Let their way be dark and slippery, and let the angel of Jehovah pursue them.
7  For without cause have they hidden for me their net [in] a pit; without cause they have digged [it] for my soul.
8  Let destruction come upon him unawares, and let his net which he hath hidden catch himself: for destruction let him fall therein.
9  And my soul shall be joyful in Jehovah; it shall rejoice in his salvation.
10  All my bones shall say, Jehovah, who is like unto thee, who deliverest the afflicted from one stronger than he, yea, the afflicted and the needy from him that spoileth him!
11  Unrighteous witnesses rise up; they lay to my charge things which I know not.
12  They reward me evil for good, [to] the bereavement of my soul.
13  But as for me, when they were sick, my clothing was sackcloth; I chastened my soul with fasting, and my prayer returned into mine own bosom:
14  I behaved myself as though [he had been] a friend, a brother to me; I bowed down in sadness, as one that mourneth [for] a mother.
15  But at my halting they rejoiced, and gathered together: the slanderers gathered themselves together against me, and I knew [it] not; they did tear [me], and ceased not:
16  With profane jesters for bread, they have gnashed their teeth against me.
17  Lord, how long wilt thou look on? Rescue my soul from their destructions, my only one from the young lions.
18  I will give thee thanks in the great congregation; I will praise thee among much people.
19  Let not them that are wrongfully mine enemies rejoice over me; let them not wink with the eye that hate me without cause.
20  For they speak not peace; and they devise deceitful words against the quiet in the land.
21  And they opened their mouth wide against me; they said, Aha! aha! our eye hath seen [it].
22  Thou hast seen [it], Jehovah: keep not silence; O Lord, be not far from me.
23  Stir up thyself, and awake for my right, for my cause, my God and Lord!
24  Judge me, Jehovah my God, according to thy righteousness, and let them not rejoice over me.
25  Let them not say in their heart, Aha! so would we have it. Let them not say, We have swallowed him up.
26  Let them be ashamed and brought to confusion together that rejoice at mine adversity; let them be clothed with shame and dishonour that magnify themselves against me.
27  Let them exult and rejoice that delight in my righteousness; and let them say continually, Jehovah be magnified, who delighteth in the prosperity of his servant.
28  And my tongue shall talk of thy righteousness, [and] of thy praise, all the day.
{36}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. [A Psalm] of the servant of Jehovah; of David.</i><br>The transgression of the wicked uttereth within my heart, There is no fear of God before his eyes.
2  For he flattereth himself in his own eyes, [even] when his iniquity is found to be hateful.
3  The words of his mouth are wickedness and deceit: he hath left off to be wise, to do good.
4  He deviseth wickedness up on his bed; he setteth himself in a way that is not good: he abhorreth not evil.
5  Jehovah, thy loving-kindness is in the heavens, and thy faithfulness [reacheth] unto the clouds.
6  Thy righteousness is like the high mountains; thy judgments are a great deep: thou, Jehovah, preservest man and beast.
7  How precious is thy loving-kindness, O God! So the sons of men take refuge under the shadow of thy wings.
8  They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house; and thou wilt make them drink of the river of thy pleasures.
9  For with thee is the fountain of life: in thy light shall we see light.
10  Continue thy loving-kindness unto them that know thee, and thy righteousness to the upright in heart;
11  Let not the foot of pride come against me, and let not the hand of the wicked drive me away.
12  There are the workers of iniquity fallen: they are cast down, and are not able to rise.
{37}
1  <i>[A Psalm] of David.</i><br>Fret not thyself because of evil-doers, and be not envious of them that work unrighteousness;
2  for they shall soon be cut down like the grass, and fade as the green herb.
3  Confide in Jehovah, and do good; dwell in the land, and feed on faithfulness;
4  and delight thyself in Jehovah, and he will give thee the desires of thy heart.
5  Commit thy way unto Jehovah, and rely upon him: he will bring [it] to pass;
6  and he will bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and thy judgment as the noonday.
7  Rest in Jehovah, and wait patiently for him: fret not thyself because of him that prospereth in his way, because of the man that bringeth mischievous devices to pass.
8  Cease from anger, and forsake wrath; fret not thyself: it [would be] only to do evil.
9  For evil-doers shall be cut off; but those that wait on Jehovah, they shall possess the land.
10  For yet a little while, and the wicked is not; and thou considerest his place, but he is not.
11  But the meek shall possess the land, and shall delight themselves in the abundance of prosperity.
12  The wicked plotteth against the righteous, and gnasheth his teeth against him.
13  The Lord laugheth at him; for he seeth that his day is coming.
14  The wicked have drawn out the sword, and have bent their bow, to cast down the afflicted and needy, to slay those that are upright in [the] way:
15  their sword shall enter into their own heart, and their bows shall be broken.
16  The little that the righteous hath is better than the abundance of many wicked;
17  for the arms of the wicked shall be broken, but Jehovah upholdeth the righteous.
18  Jehovah knoweth the days of the perfect; and their inheritance shall be for ever:
19  they shall not be ashamed in the time of evil, and in the days of famine they shall be satisfied.
20  For the wicked shall perish, and the enemies of Jehovah shall be as the fat of lambs: they shall consume, like smoke shall they consume away.
21  The wicked borroweth, and payeth not again; but the righteous is gracious and giveth:
22  for those blessed of him shall possess the land, and they that are cursed of him shall be cut off.
23  The steps of a man are established by Jehovah, and he delighteth in his way:
24  though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down, for Jehovah upholdeth his hand.
25  I have been young, and now am old, and I have not seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed seeking bread:
26  all the day he is gracious and lendeth, and his seed shall be a blessing.
27  Depart from evil, and do good, and dwell for evermore;
28  for Jehovah loveth judgment, and will not forsake his saints: They are preserved for ever; but the seed of the wicked shall be cut off.
29  The righteous shall possess the land, and dwell therein for ever.
30  The mouth of the righteous proffereth wisdom, and his tongue speaketh judgment;
31  the law of his God is in his heart; his goings shall not slide.
32  The wicked watcheth the righteous, and seeketh to slay him:
33  Jehovah will not leave him in his hand, nor condemn him when he is judged.
34  Wait for Jehovah, and keep his way, and he will exalt thee to possess the land: when the wicked are cut off, thou shalt see [it].
35  I have seen the wicked in great power, and spreading like a green tree in its native soil:
36  but he passed away, and behold, he was not; and I sought him, but he was not found.
37  Mark the perfect, and behold the upright, for the end of [that] man is peace;
38  but the transgressors shall be destroyed together; the future of the wicked shall be cut off.
39  But the salvation of the righteous is of Jehovah: he is their strength in the time of trouble.
40  And Jehovah will help them and deliver them: he will deliver them from the wicked, and save them; for they trust in him.
{38}
1  <i>A Psalm of David, to bring to remembrance.</i><br>Jehovah, rebuke me not in thy wrath; neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure.
2  For thine arrows stick fast in me, and thy hand cometh down upon me.
3  There is no soundness in my flesh because of thine indignation; no peace in my bones, because of my sin.
4  For mine iniquities are gone over my head: as a heavy burden they are too heavy for me.
5  My wounds stink, they are corrupt, because of my foolishness.
6  I am depressed; I am bowed down beyond measure; I go mourning all the day.
7  For my loins are full of burning, and there is no soundness in my flesh.
8  I am faint and broken beyond measure; I roar by reason of the agitation of my heart.
9  Lord, all my desire is before thee, and my sighing is not hid from thee.
10  My heart throbbeth, my strength hath left me; and the light of mine eyes, it also is no more with me.
11  My lovers and mine associates stand aloof from my stroke; and my kinsmen stand afar off.
12  And they that seek after my life lay snares [for me]; and they that seek my hurt speak mischievous things, and meditate deceits all the day long.
13  But I, as a deaf [man], hear not; and am as a dumb man that openeth not his mouth.
14  Yea, I am as a man that heareth not, and in whose mouth are no reproofs.
15  For in thee, Jehovah, do I hope: *thou* wilt answer, O Lord my God.
16  For I said, Let them not rejoice over me! When my foot slipped, they magnified [themselves] against me.
17  For I am ready to halt, and my pain is continually before me.
18  For I will declare mine iniquity, I am grieved for my sin.
19  But mine enemies are lively, they are strong; and they that hate me wrongfully are multiplied:
20  And they that render evil for good are adversaries unto me; because I pursue what is good.
21  Forsake me not, Jehovah; O my God, be not far from me.
22  Make haste to help me, O Lord, my salvation.
{39}
1  <i>To the chief Musician, to Jeduthun. A Psalm of David.</i><br>I said, I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue: I will keep my mouth with a muzzle, while the wicked is before me.
2  I was dumb with silence, I held my peace from good; and my sorrow was stirred.
3  My heart burned within me; the fire was kindled in my musing: I spoke with my tongue,
4  Make me to know, Jehovah, mine end, and the measure of my days, what it is: I shall know how frail I am.
5  Behold, thou hast made my days [as] hand-breadths, and my lifetime is as nothing before thee; verily, every man, [even] the high placed, is altogether vanity. Selah.
6  Verily, man walketh in a vain show; verily they are disquieted in vain; he heapeth up [riches], and knoweth not who shall gather them.
7  And now, what wait I for, Lord? my hope is in thee.
8  Deliver me from all my transgressions; make me not the reproach of the foolish.
9  I was dumb, I opened not my mouth; for *thou* hast done [it].
10  Remove thy stroke away from me: I am consumed by the blow of thy hand.
11  When thou with rebukes dost correct a man for iniquity, thou makest his beauty to consume away like a moth: surely, every man is vanity. Selah.
12  Hear my prayer, Jehovah, and give ear unto my cry; be not silent at my tears: for I am a stranger with thee, a sojourner, like all my fathers.
13  Look away from me, and let me recover strength, before I go hence and be no more.
{40}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. Of David. A Psalm.</i><br>I waited patiently for Jehovah; and he inclined unto me, and heard my cry.
2  And he brought me up out of the pit of destruction, out of the miry clay, and set my feet upon a rock; he hath established my goings:
3  And he hath put a new song in my mouth, praise unto our God. Many shall see it, and fear, and shall confide in Jehovah.
4  Blessed is the man that hath made Jehovah his confidence, and turneth not to the proud, and to such as turn aside to lies.
5  Thou, O Jehovah my God, hast multiplied thy marvellous works, and thy thoughts toward us: they cannot be reckoned up in order unto thee; would I declare and speak [them], they are more than can be numbered.
6  Sacrifice and oblation thou didst not desire: ears hast thou prepared me. Burnt-offering and sin-offering hast thou not demanded;
7  Then said I, Behold, I come, in the volume of the book it is written of me -- 
8  To do thy good pleasure, my God, is my delight, and thy law is within my heart.
9  I have published righteousness in the great congregation: behold, I have not withheld my lips, Jehovah, *thou* knowest.
10  I have not hidden thy righteousness within my heart; I have declared thy faithfulness and thy salvation: I have not concealed thy loving-kindness and thy truth from the great congregation.
11  Withhold not thou, Jehovah, thy tender mercies from me; let thy loving-kindness and thy truth continually preserve me.
12  For innumerable evils have compassed me about: mine iniquities have taken hold upon me, so that I cannot see; they are more than the hairs of my head: and my heart hath failed me.
13  Be pleased, O Jehovah, to deliver me; Jehovah, make haste to my help.
14  Let them be ashamed and brought to confusion together that seek after my soul to destroy it; let them be turned backward and confounded that take pleasure in mine adversity;
15  Let them be desolate, because of their shame, that say unto me, Aha! Aha!
16  Let all those that seek thee be glad and rejoice in thee; let such as love thy salvation say continually, Jehovah be magnified!
17  But I am afflicted and needy: the Lord thinketh upon me. Thou art my help and my deliverer: my God, make no delay.
{41}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. A Psalm of David.</i><br>Blessed is he that understandeth the poor: Jehovah will deliver him in the day of evil.
2  Jehovah will preserve him, and keep him alive; he shall be made happy in the land; and thou wilt not deliver him to the will of his enemies.
3  Jehovah will sustain him upon the bed of languishing: thou turnest all his bed in his sickness.
4  As for me, I said, Jehovah, be gracious unto me: heal my soul; for I have sinned against thee.
5  Mine enemies wish me evil: When will he die, and his name perish?
6  And if one come to see [me], he speaketh falsehood; his heart gathereth wickedness to itself: he goeth abroad, he telleth [it].
7  All that hate me whisper together against me; against me do they devise my hurt.
8  A thing of Belial cleaveth fast unto him; and now that he is laid down, he will rise up no more.
9  Yea, mine own familiar friend, in whom I confided, who did eat of my bread, hath lifted up [his] heel against me.
10  But thou, Jehovah, be gracious unto me, and raise me up, that I may requite them.
11  By this I know that thou delightest in me, because mine enemy doth not triumph over me.
12  But as for me, thou upholdest me in mine integrity, and settest me before thy face for ever.
13  Blessed be Jehovah, the God of Israel, from eternity to eternity! Amen, and Amen.
{42}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. An instruction; of the sons of Korah.</i><br>As the hart panteth after the water-brooks, so panteth my soul after thee, O God.
2  My soul thirsteth for God, for the living +God: when shall I come and appear before God?
3  My tears have been my bread day and night, while they say unto me all the day, Where is thy God?
4  These things I remember and have poured out my soul within me: how I passed along with the multitude, how I went on with them to the house of God, with the voice of joy and praise, a festive multitude.
5  Why art thou cast down, my soul, and art disquieted in me? hope in God; for I shall yet praise him, [for] the health of his countenance.
6  My God, my soul is cast down within me; therefore do I remember thee from the land of the Jordan, and the Hermons, from mount Mizar.
7  Deep calleth unto deep at the noise of thy cataracts; all thy breakers and thy billows are gone over me.
8  In the day-time will Jehovah command his loving-kindness, and in the night his song shall be with me, a prayer unto the +God of my life.
9  I will say unto +God my rock, Why hast thou forgotten me? why go I mourning because of the oppression of the enemy?
10  As with a crushing in my bones mine adversaries reproach me, while they say unto me all the day, Where is thy God?
11  Why art thou cast down, my soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? hope in God; for I shall yet praise him, [who is] the health of my countenance, and my God.
{43}
1  Judge me, O God, and plead my cause against an ungodly nation; deliver me from the deceitful and unrighteous man.
2  For thou art the God of my strength: why hast thou cast me off? why go I about mourning because of the oppression of the enemy?
3  Send out thy light and thy truth: *they* shall lead me, *they* shall bring me to thy holy mount, and unto thy habitations.
4  Then will I go unto the altar of God, unto the +God of the gladness of my joy: yea, upon the harp will I praise thee, O God, my God.
5  Why art thou cast down, my soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? hope in God; for I shall yet praise him, [who is] the health of my countenance, and my God.
{44}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. Of the sons of Korah. An instruction.</i><br>O God, with our ears have we heard, our fathers have told us, the work thou wroughtest in their days, in the days of old:
2  Thou, by thy hand, didst dispossess the nations, but them thou didst plant; thou didst afflict the peoples, but them didst thou cause to spread out.
3  For not by their own sword did they take possession of the land, neither did their own arm save them; but thy right hand, and thine arm, and the light of thy countenance, because thou hadst delight in them.
4  Thou thyself art my king, O God: command deliverance for Jacob.
5  Through thee will we push down our adversaries; through thy name will we tread them under that rise up against us.
6  For I will not put confidence in my bow, neither shall my sword save me.
7  For thou hast saved us from our adversaries, and hast put them to shame that hate us.
8  In God will we boast all the day, and we will praise thy name for ever. Selah.
9  But thou hast cast off, and put us to confusion, and dost not go forth with our armies;
10  Thou hast made us to turn back from the adversary, and they that hate us spoil for themselves;
11  Thou hast given us over like sheep [appointed] for meat, and hast scattered us among the nations;
12  Thou hast sold thy people for nought, and hast not increased [thy wealth] by their price;
13  Thou makest us a reproach to our neighbours, a mockery and a derision for them that are round about us;
14  Thou makest us a byword among the nations, a shaking of the head among the peoples.
15  All the day my confusion is before me, and the shame of my face hath covered me,
16  Because of the voice of him that reproacheth and blasphemeth; by reason of the enemy and the avenger.
17  All this is come upon us; yet have we not forgotten thee, neither have we dealt falsely against thy covenant:
18  Our heart is not turned back, neither have our steps declined from thy path;
19  Though thou hast crushed us in the place of jackals, and covered us with the shadow of death.
20  If we had forgotten the name of our God, and stretched out our hands to a strange +god,
21  Would not God search this out? for he knoweth the secrets of the heart.
22  But for thy sake are we killed all the day long; we are reckoned as sheep for slaughter.
23  Awake, why sleepest thou, Lord? arise, cast [us] not off for ever.
24  Wherefore hidest thou thy face, [and] forgettest our affliction and our oppression?
25  For our soul is bowed down to the dust; our belly cleaveth unto the earth.
26  Rise up for our help, and redeem us for thy loving-kindness' sake.
{45}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. Upon Shoshannim. Of the sons of Korah. An instruction; -- a song of the Beloved.</i><br>My heart is welling forth [with] a good matter: I say what I have composed touching the king. My tongue is the pen of a ready writer.
2  Thou art fairer than the sons of men; grace is poured into thy lips: therefore God hath blessed thee for ever.
3  Gird thy sword upon [thy] thigh, O mighty one, [in] thy majesty and thy splendour;
4  And [in] thy splendour ride prosperously, because of truth and meekness [and] righteousness: and thy right hand shall teach thee terrible things.
5  Thine arrows are sharp -- peoples fall under thee -- in the heart of the king's enemies.
6  Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever; a sceptre of uprightness is the sceptre of thy kingdom:
7  Thou hast loved righteousness, and hated wickedness; therefore God, thy God, hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy companions.
8  Myrrh and aloes, cassia, are all thy garments; out of ivory palaces stringed instruments have made thee glad.
9  Kings' daughters are among thine honourable women; upon thy right hand doth stand the queen in gold of Ophir.
10  Hearken, daughter, and see, and incline thine ear; and forget thine own people and thy father's house:
11  And the king will desire thy beauty; for he is thy Lord, and worship thou him.
12  And the daughter of Tyre with a gift, the rich ones among the people, shall court thy favour.
13  All glorious is the king's daughter within; her clothing is of wrought gold:
14  She shall be brought unto the king in raiment of embroidery; the virgins behind her, her companions, shall be brought in unto thee:
15  With joy and gladness shall they be brought; they shall enter into the king's palace.
16  Instead of thy fathers shall be thy sons; princes shalt thou make them in all the earth.
17  I will make thy name to be remembered throughout all generations; therefore shall the peoples praise thee for ever and ever.
{46}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. Of the sons of Korah. On Alamoth. A song.</i><br>God is our refuge and strength, a help in distresses, very readily found.
2  Therefore will we not fear though the earth be removed, and though the mountains be carried into the heart of the seas;
3  Though the waters thereof roar [and] foam, though the mountains shake with the swelling thereof. Selah.
4  There is a river the streams whereof make glad the city of God, the sanctuary of the habitations of the Most High.
5  God is in the midst of her; she shall not be moved: God shall help her at the dawn of the morning.
6  The nations raged, the kingdoms were moved; he uttered his voice, the earth melted.
7  Jehovah of hosts is with us; the God of Jacob is our high fortress. Selah.
8  Come, behold the works of Jehovah, what desolations he hath made in the earth:
9  He hath made wars to cease unto the end of the earth; he breaketh the bow, and cutteth the spear in sunder; he burneth the chariots in the fire.
10  Be still, and know that I am God: I will be exalted among the nations, I will be exalted in the earth.
11  Jehovah of hosts is with us; the God of Jacob is our high fortress. Selah.
{47}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. Of the sons of Korah. A Psalm.</i><br>All ye peoples, clap your hands; shout unto God with the voice of triumph!
2  For Jehovah, the Most High, is terrible, a great king over all the earth.
3  He subdueth the peoples under us, and the nations under our feet.
4  He hath chosen our inheritance for us, the excellency of Jacob whom he loved. Selah.
5  God is gone up amid shouting, Jehovah amid the sound of the trumpet.
6  Sing psalms of God, sing psalms; sing psalms unto our King, sing psalms!
7  For God is the King of all the earth; sing psalms with understanding.
8  God reigneth over the nations; God sitteth upon the throne of his holiness.
9  The willing-hearted of the peoples have gathered together, [with] the people of the God of Abraham. For unto God [belong] the shields of the earth: he is greatly exalted.
{48}
1  <i>A Song; a Psalm. Of the sons of Korah.</i><br>Great is Jehovah, and greatly to be praised in the city of our God, in the hill of his holiness.
2  Beautiful in elevation, the joy of the whole earth, is mount Zion, [on] the sides of the north, the city of the great King.
3  God is known in her palaces as a high fortress.
4  For behold, the kings assembled themselves, they passed by together;
5  They saw, -- so they marvelled; they were troubled, they fled in consternation:
6  Trembling took hold upon them there; anguish, as of a woman in travail.
7  With an east wind thou hast broken the ships of Tarshish.
8  As we have heard, so have we seen, in the city of Jehovah of hosts, in the city of our God: God doth establish it for ever. Selah.
9  We have thought, O God, of thy loving-kindness, in the midst of thy temple.
10  According to thy name, O God, so is thy praise unto the ends of the earth: thy right hand is full of righteousness.
11  Let mount Zion rejoice, let the daughters of Judah be glad, because of thy judgments.
12  Walk about Zion, and go round about her: count the towers thereof;
13  Mark ye well her bulwarks, consider her palaces: that ye may tell it to the generation following.
14  For this God is our God for ever and ever; he will be our guide until death.
{49}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. Of the sons of Korah. A Psalm.</i><br>Hear this, all ye peoples; give ear, all inhabitants of the world:
2  Both men of low and men of high degree, rich and poor alike.
3  My mouth shall speak wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding:
4  I will incline mine ear to a parable, I will open my riddle upon the harp.
5  Wherefore should I fear in the days of adversity, [when] the iniquity of my supplanters encompasseth me? -- 
6  They depend upon their wealth, and boast themselves in the abundance of their riches. ...
7  None can by any means redeem his brother, nor give to God a ransom for him,
8  (For the redemption of their soul is costly, and must be given up for ever,)
9  That he should still live perpetually, [and] not see corruption.
10  For he seeth that wise men die; all alike, the fool and the brutish perish, and they leave their wealth to others.
11  Their inward thought is, that their houses are for ever, their dwelling-places from generation to generation: they call the lands after their own names.
12  Nevertheless, man being in honour abideth not: he is like the beasts that perish.
13  This their way is their folly, yet they that come after them delight in their sayings. Selah.
14  Like sheep are they laid in Sheol: Death feedeth on them; and the upright shall have dominion over them in the morning; and their comeliness shall be for Sheol to consume, that there be no habitation for them.
15  But God will redeem my soul from the power of Sheol: for he will receive me. Selah.
16  Be not afraid when a man becometh rich, when the glory of his house is increased:
17  For when he dieth, he shall carry nothing away; his glory shall not descend after him.
18  Though he blessed his soul in his lifetime, -- and men will praise thee when thou doest well to thyself, -- 
19  It shall go to the generation of his fathers: they shall never see light.
20  Man that is in honour, and understandeth not, is like the beasts that perish.
{50}
1  <i>A Psalm. Of Asaph.</i><br>+God, Elohim-Jehovah, hath spoken, and called the earth from the rising of the sun unto the going down thereof.
2  Out of Zion, the perfection of beauty, God hath shined forth.
3  Our God will come, and will not keep silence: fire shall devour before him, and it shall be very tempestuous round about him.
4  He will call to the heavens from above, and to the earth, that he may judge his people:
5  Gather unto me my godly ones, those that have made a covenant with me by sacrifice!
6  And the heavens shall declare his righteousness; for God executeth judgment himself. Selah.
7  Hear, my people, and I will speak; O Israel, and I will testify unto thee: I am God, thy God.
8  I will not reprove thee for thy sacrifices, or thy burnt-offerings, continually before me;
9  I will take no bullock out of thy house, [nor] he-goats out of thy folds:
10  For every beast of the forest is mine, the cattle upon a thousand hills;
11  I know all the fowl of the mountains, and the roaming creatures of the field are mine:
12  If I were hungry, I would not tell thee; for the world is mine, and the fulness thereof.
13  Should I eat the flesh of bulls, and drink the blood of goats?
14  Offer unto God thanksgiving, and perform thy vows unto the Most High;
15  And call upon me in the day of trouble; I will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify me.
16  But unto the wicked God saith, What hast thou to do to declare my statutes, or that thou shouldest take my covenant into thy mouth,
17  Seeing thou hast hated correction and hast cast my words behind thee?
18  When thou sawest a thief, thou didst take pleasure in him, and thy portion was with adulterers;
19  Thou lettest thy mouth loose to evil, and thy tongue frameth deceit;
20  Thou sittest [and] speakest against thy brother, thou revilest thine own mother's son:
21  These [things] hast thou done, and I kept silence; thou thoughtest that I was altogether as thyself: [but] I will reprove thee, and set [them] in order before thine eyes.
22  Now consider this, ye that forget +God, lest I tear in pieces, and there be no deliverer.
23  Whoso offereth praise glorifieth me; and to him that ordereth [his] way will I shew the salvation of God.
{51}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. A Psalm of David; when Nathan the prophet came to him, after he had gone in to Bath-sheba.</i><br>Be gracious unto me, O God, according to thy loving-kindness; according to the abundance of thy tender mercies, blot out my transgressions.
2  Wash me fully from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin.
3  For I acknowledge my transgressions, and my sin is continually before me.
4  Against thee, thee only, have I sinned, and done what is evil in thy sight; that thou mayest be justified when thou speakest, be clear when thou judgest.
5  Behold, in iniquity was I brought forth, and in sin did my mother conceive me.
6  Behold, thou wilt have truth in the inward parts; and in the hidden [part] thou wilt make me to know wisdom.
7  Purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean; wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow.
8  Make me to hear gladness and joy; [that] the bones which thou hast broken may rejoice.
9  Hide thy face from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities.
10  Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a steadfast spirit within me.
11  Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not the spirit of thy holiness from me.
12  Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation, and let a willing spirit sustain me.
13  I will teach transgressors thy ways, and sinners shall return unto thee.
14  Deliver me from blood-guiltiness, O God, thou God of my salvation: my tongue shall sing aloud of thy righteousness.
15  Lord, open my lips, and my mouth shall declare thy praise.
16  For thou desirest not sacrifice; else would I give it: thou hast no pleasure in burnt-offering.
17  The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit: a broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou wilt not despise.
18  Do good in thy good pleasure unto Zion; build the walls of Jerusalem.
19  Then shalt thou have sacrifices of righteousness, burnt-offering, and whole burnt-offering; then shall they offer up bullocks upon thine altar.
{52}
1  <i>To the chief Musician: an instruction. Of David; when Doeg the Edomite came and told Saul, and said unto him, David came to the house of Ahimelech.</i><br>Why boastest thou thyself in evil, thou mighty man? The loving-kindness of +God [abideth] continually.
2  Thy tongue deviseth mischievous things, like a sharp razor, practising deceit.
3  Thou hast loved evil rather than good, lying rather than to speak righteousness. Selah.
4  Thou hast loved all devouring words, O deceitful tongue!
5  +God shall likewise destroy thee for ever; he shall take thee away, and pluck thee out of [thy] tent, and root thee out of the land of the living. Selah.
6  The righteous also shall see, and fear, and shall laugh at him, [saying,]
7  Behold the man that made not God his strength, but put confidence in the abundance of his riches, [and] strengthened himself in his avarice.
8  But as for me, I am like a green olive-tree in the house of God: I will confide in the loving-kindness of God for ever and ever.
9  I will praise thee for ever, because thou hast done [it]; and I will wait on thy name, before thy godly ones, for it is good.
{53}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. On Mahalath: an instruction. Of David.</i><br>The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God! They have corrupted themselves, and have done abominable iniquity: there is none that doeth good.
2  God looked down from the heavens upon the children of men, to see if there were any that did understand, that did seek God.
3  Every one of them is gone back, they are together become corrupt: there is none that doeth good, not even one.
4  Have the workers of iniquity no knowledge, eating up my people [as] they eat bread? they call not upon God.
5  There were they in great fear, where no fear was; for God scattereth the bones of him that encampeth against thee. Thou hast put [them] to shame, for God hath despised them.
6  Oh that the salvation of Israel were come out of Zion! When God turneth again the captivity of his people, Jacob shall be glad, Israel shall rejoice.
{54}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. On stringed instruments: an instruction. Of David; when the Ziphites came, and said to Saul, Is not David hiding himself with us?</i><br>O God, by thy name save me, and by thy strength do me justice.
2  O God, hear my prayer; give ear to the words of my mouth.
3  For strangers are risen up against me, and the violent seek after my life: they have not set God before them. Selah.
4  Behold, God is my helper; the Lord is among them that uphold my soul.
5  He will requite evil to mine enemies: in thy truth cut them off.
6  I will freely sacrifice unto thee; I will praise thy name, O Jehovah, because it is good.
7  For he hath delivered me out of all trouble; and mine eye hath seen [its desire] upon mine enemies.
{55}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. On stringed instruments: an instruction. Of David.</i><br>Give ear to my prayer, O God; and hide not thyself from my supplication.
2  Attend unto me, and answer me: I wander about in my plaint, and I moan aloud,
3  Because of the voice of the enemy; because of the oppression of the wicked: for they cast iniquity upon me, and in anger they persecute me.
4  My heart is writhing within me, and the terrors of death are fallen upon me.
5  Fear and trembling are come upon me, and horror hath overwhelmed me.
6  And I said, Oh that I had wings like a dove! I would fly away, and be at rest;
7  Behold, I would flee afar off, I would lodge in the wilderness; Selah;
8  I would hasten my escape from the stormy wind, from the tempest.
9  Swallow [them] up, Lord; divide their tongue: for I have seen violence and strife in the city.
10  Day and night they go about it upon the walls thereof; and iniquity and mischief are in the midst of it.
11  Perversities are in the midst thereof; and oppression and deceit depart not from its streets.
12  For it is not an enemy that hath reproached me -- then could I have borne it; neither is it he that hateth me that hath magnified [himself] against me -- then would I have hidden myself from him;
13  But it was thou, a man mine equal, mine intimate, my familiar friend. ...
14  We who held sweet intercourse together. To the house of God we walked amid the throng.
15  Let death seize upon them, let them go down alive into Sheol. For wickedness is in their dwellings, in their midst.
16  As for me, unto God will I call; and Jehovah will save me.
17  Evening, and morning, and at noon, will I pray and moan aloud; and he will hear my voice.
18  He hath redeemed my soul in peace from the battle against me: for there were many about me.
19  +God will hear, and afflict them: he that is seated of old, (Selah) ...because there is no change in them, and they fear not God.
20  He hath put forth his hands against such as are at peace with him; he hath profaned his covenant.
21  Smooth were the milky [words] of his mouth, but his heart was war; his words were softer than oil, yet are they drawn swords.
22  Cast thy burden upon Jehovah, and *he* will sustain thee: he will never suffer the righteous to be moved.
23  And thou, O God, wilt bring them down into the pit of destruction: bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half their days. But as for me, I will confide in thee.
{56}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. On Jonathelem-rechokim. Of David. Michtam; when the Philistines took him in Gath.</i><br>Be gracious unto me, O God; for man would swallow me up: all the day long fighting he oppresseth me.
2  Mine enemies would swallow [me] up all the day long; for they are many that fight against me haughtily.
3  In the day that I am afraid, I will confide in thee.
4  In God will I praise his word, in God I put my confidence: I will not fear; what can flesh do unto me?
5  All the day long they wrest my words; all their thoughts are against me for evil.
6  They gather themselves together, they hide themselves; they mark my steps, because they wait for my soul.
7  Shall they escape by iniquity? In anger cast down the peoples, O God.
8  *Thou* countest my wanderings; put my tears into thy bottle: are they not in thy book?
9  Then shall mine enemies return backward in the day when I call: this I know, for God is for me.
10  In God will I praise [his] word; in Jehovah will I praise [his] word.
11  In God have I put my confidence: I will not fear; what can man do unto me?
12  Thy vows are upon me, O God: I will render thanks unto thee.
13  For thou hast delivered my soul from death; [wilt thou] not [keep] my feet from falling, that I may walk before God in the light of the living?
{57}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. 'Destroy not.' Of David. Michtam; when he fled from Saul in the cave.</i><br>Be gracious unto me, O God, be gracious unto me; for my soul taketh refuge in thee: yea, in the shadow of thy wings do I take refuge, until the calamities be overpast.
2  I will call unto God, the Most High; unto +God that performeth [all] for me.
3  He will send from the heavens and save me; he hath covered with reproach him that would swallow me up. Selah. God hath sent forth his loving-kindness and his truth.
4  My soul is in the midst of lions; I lie down [among] them that breathe out flames, the sons of men, whose teeth are spears and arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword.
5  Be exalted above the heavens, O God; let thy glory be above all the earth!
6  They have prepared a net for my steps; my soul was bowed down: they have digged a pit before me; they are fallen into the midst thereof. Selah.
7  My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed: I will sing, yea, I will sing psalms.
8  Awake, my glory; awake, lute and harp: I will wake the dawn.
9  I will give thee thanks among the peoples, O Lord; of thee will I sing psalms among the nations:
10  For thy loving-kindness is great unto the heavens, and thy truth unto the clouds.
11  Be exalted above the heavens, O God; let thy glory be above all the earth!
{58}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. 'Destroy not.' Of David. Michtam.</i><br>Is righteousness indeed silent? Do ye speak it? Do ye judge with equity, ye sons of men?
2  Yea, in heart ye work wickedness; ye weigh out the violence of your hands in the earth.
3  The wicked go astray from the womb; they err as soon as they are born, speaking lies.
4  Their poison is like the poison of a serpent: [they are] like the deaf adder which stoppeth her ear;
5  Which doth not hearken to the voice of enchanters, of one charming ever so wisely.
6  O God, break their teeth in their mouth; break out the great teeth of the young lions, O Jehovah.
7  Let them melt away as waters that flow off; when he aimeth his arrows, let them be as blunted:
8  Let them be as a snail that melteth as it passeth away; [like] the untimely birth of a woman, let them not see the sun.
9  Before your pots feel the thorns, green or burning, -- they shall be whirled away.
10  The righteous shall rejoice when he seeth the vengeance; he shall wash his footsteps in the blood of the wicked:
11  And men shall say, Verily there is fruit for the righteous; verily there is a God that judgeth in the earth.
{59}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. 'Destroy not.' Of David. Michtam; when Saul sent, and they watched the house to kill him.</i><br>Deliver me from mine enemies, O my God; secure me on high from them that rise up against me.
2  Deliver me from the workers of iniquity, and save me from men of blood.
3  For behold, they lie in wait for my soul; strong ones are gathered against me: not for my transgression, nor for my sin, O Jehovah.
4  They run and prepare themselves without [my] fault: awake to meet me, and behold.
5  Yea, do thou, Jehovah, the God of hosts, the God of Israel, arise to visit all the nations: be not gracious to any plotters of iniquity. Selah.
6  They return in the evening; they howl like a dog, and go round about the city:
7  Behold, they belch out with their mouth; swords are in their lips: for who [say they] doth hear?
8  But thou, Jehovah, wilt laugh at them; thou wilt have all the nations in derision.
9  Their strength! ...I will take heed to thee; for God is my high fortress.
10  God, whose loving-kindness will come to meet me, -- God shall let me see [my desire] upon mine enemies.
11  Slay them not, lest my people forget; by thy power make them wander, and bring them down, O Lord, our shield.
12  [Because of] the sin of their mouth, the word of their lips, let them even be taken in their pride; and because of cursing and lying which they speak.
13  Make an end in wrath, make an end, that they may be no more; that they may know that God ruleth in Jacob, unto the ends of the earth. Selah.
14  And in the evening they shall return, they shall howl like a dog, and go round about the city.
15  They shall wander about for meat, and stay all night if they be not satisfied.
16  But as for me, I will sing of thy strength; yea, I will sing aloud of thy loving-kindness in the morning; for thou hast been to me a high fortress, and a refuge in the day of my trouble.
17  Unto thee, my strength, will I sing psalms; for God is my high fortress, the God of my mercy.
{60}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. On Shushan. Testimony. Michtam of David; to teach: when he strove with the Syrians of Mesopotamia, and the Syrians of Zobah, and Joab returned, and smote the Edomites in the valley of salt, twelve thousand.</i><br>O God, thou hast cast us off, thou hast scattered us, thou hast been displeased: restore us again.
2  Thou hast made the earth to tremble, thou hast rent it: heal the breaches thereof; for it shaketh.
3  Thou hast shewn thy people hard things; thou hast made us to drink the wine of bewilderment.
4  Thou hast given a banner to them that fear thee, that it may be displayed because of the truth, (Selah,)
5  That thy beloved ones may be delivered. Save with thy right hand, and answer me.
6  God hath spoken in his holiness: I will exult, I will divide Shechem, and mete out the valley of Succoth.
7  Gilead is mine, and Manasseh is mine, and Ephraim is the strength of my head; Judah is my law-giver;
8  Moab is my wash-pot; upon Edom will I cast my sandal; Philistia, shout aloud because of me.
9  Who will bring me into the strong city? who will lead me unto Edom?
10  [Wilt] not thou, O God, who didst cast us off? and didst not go forth, O God, with our armies?
11  Give us help from trouble; for vain is man's deliverance.
12  Through God we shall do valiantly; and he it is that will tread down our adversaries.
{61}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. On a stringed instrument. [A Psalm] of David.</i><br>Hear, O God, my cry; attend unto my prayer.
2  From the end of the earth will I call unto thee, when my heart is overwhelmed: thou wilt lead me on to a rock which is too high for me.
3  For thou hast been a refuge for me, a strong tower from before the enemy.
4  I will sojourn in thy tent for ever; I will take refuge in the covert of thy wings. Selah.
5  For thou, O God, hast heard my vows; thou hast given [me] the inheritance of those that fear thy name.
6  Thou wilt add days to the days of the king: his years shall be as many generations.
7  He shall abide before God for ever: bestow loving-kindness and truth, that they may preserve him.
8  So will I sing forth thy name for ever, performing my vows from day to day.
{62}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. On Jeduthun. A Psalm of David.</i><br>Upon God alone doth my soul rest peacefully; from him is my salvation.
2  He only is my rock and my salvation; my high fortress: I shall not be greatly moved.
3  How long will ye assail a man; will ye [seek], all of you, to break him down as a bowing wall or a tottering fence?
4  They only consult to thrust [him] down from his excellency; they delight in lies; they bless with their mouth, but in their inward part they curse. Selah.
5  Upon God alone, O my soul, rest peacefully; for my expectation is from him.
6  He only is my rock and my salvation; my high fortress: I shall not be moved.
7  With God is my salvation and my glory; the rock of my strength, my refuge is in God.
8  Confide in him at all times, ye people; pour out your heart before him: God is our refuge. Selah.
9  Men of low degree are only vanity; men of high degree, a lie: laid in the balance, they go up together [lighter] than vanity.
10  Put not confidence in oppression, and become not vain in robbery; if wealth increase, set not your heart upon it.
11  Once hath God spoken, twice have I heard this, that strength [belongeth] unto God.
12  And unto thee, O Lord, [belongeth] loving-kindness; for *thou* renderest to every man according to his work.
{63}
1  <i>A Psalm of David; when he was in the wilderness of Judah.</i><br>O God, thou art my +God; early will I seek thee. My soul thirsteth for thee, my flesh languisheth for thee, in a dry and weary land without water:
2  To see thy power and thy glory, as I have beheld thee in the sanctuary;
3  For thy loving-kindness is better than life: my lips shall praise thee.
4  So will I bless thee while I live; I will lift up my hands in thy name.
5  My soul is satisfied as with marrow and fatness, and my mouth shall praise [thee] with joyful lips.
6  When I remember thee upon my bed, I meditate on thee in the night-watches:
7  For thou hast been my help, and in the shadow of thy wings will I sing for joy.
8  My soul followeth hard after thee: thy right hand upholdeth me.
9  But those that seek my soul, to destroy [it], shall go into the lower parts of the earth;
10  They shall be given over to the power of the sword; they shall be the portion of foxes.
11  But the king shall rejoice in God; every one that sweareth by him shall glory: for the mouth of them that speak lies shall be stopped.
{64}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. A Psalm of David.</i><br>Hear, O God, my voice in my plaint; preserve my life from fear of the enemy:
2  Hide me from the secret counsel of evil-doers, from the tumultuous crowd of the workers of iniquity,
3  Who have sharpened their tongue like a sword, [and] have aimed their arrow, a bitter word;
4  That they may shoot in secret at the perfect: suddenly do they shoot at him, and fear not.
5  They encourage themselves in an evil matter, they concert to hide snares; they say, Who will see them?
6  They devise iniquities: We have it ready, the plan is diligently sought out. And each one's inward [thought] and heart is deep.
7  But God will shoot an arrow at them: suddenly are they wounded;
8  By their own tongue they are made to fall over one another: all that see them shall flee away.
9  And all men shall fear, and shall declare God's doing; and they shall wisely consider his work.
10  The righteous shall rejoice in Jehovah, and trust in him; and all the upright in heart shall glory.
{65}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. A Psalm of David: a Song.</i><br>Praise waiteth for thee in silence, O God, in Zion; and unto thee shall the vow be performed.
2  O thou that hearest prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come.
3  Iniquities have prevailed against me: our transgressions, thou wilt forgive them.
4  Blessed is he whom thou choosest and causest to approach: he shall dwell in thy courts. We shall be satisfied with the goodness of thy house, of thy holy temple.
5  By terrible things in righteousness wilt thou answer us, O God of our salvation, thou confidence of all the ends of the earth, and of the distant regions of the sea. ...
6  Who by his strength established the mountains, being girded with power;
7  Who stilleth the raging of the seas, the raging of their waves, and the tumult of the peoples.
8  And they that dwell in the uttermost parts are afraid at thy tokens; thou makest the outgoings of the morning and evening to rejoice.
9  Thou hast visited the earth, thou hast watered it; thou greatly enrichest it: the river of God is full of water; thou providest their corn, when thou hast so prepared it:
10  Thou dost satiate its furrows, thou smoothest its clods, thou makest it soft with showers; thou blessest the springing thereof.
11  Thou crownest the year with thy goodness, and thy paths drop fatness:
12  They drop upon the pastures of the wilderness, and the hills are girded with gladness.
13  The meadows are clothed with flocks, and the valleys are covered over with corn; they shout for joy, yea, they sing.
{66}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. A Song: a Psalm.</i><br>Shout aloud unto God, all the earth:
2  Sing forth the glory of his name, make his praise glorious;
3  Say unto God, How terrible are thy works! because of the greatness of thy strength, thine enemies come cringing unto thee.
4  All the earth shall worship thee, and sing psalms unto thee: they shall sing forth thy name. Selah.
5  Come and see the works of God: he is terrible in [his] doings toward the children of men.
6  He turned the sea into dry [land]; they went through the river on foot: there did we rejoice in him.
7  He ruleth by his power for ever; his eyes observe the nations: let not the rebellious exalt themselves. Selah.
8  Bless our God, ye peoples, and make the voice of his praise to be heard;
9  Who hath set our soul in life, and suffereth not our feet to be moved.
10  For thou, O God, hast proved us: thou hast tried us, as silver is tried.
11  Thou broughtest us into a net, thou didst lay a heavy burden upon our loins;
12  Thou didst cause men to ride over our head; we went through fire and through water: but thou hast brought us out into abundance.
13  I will go into thy house with burnt-offerings; I will perform my vows to thee,
14  Which my lips have uttered, and my mouth hath spoken, when I was in trouble.
15  I will offer up unto thee burnt-offerings of fatted beasts, with the incense of rams; I will offer bullocks with goats. Selah.
16  Come, hear, all ye that fear God, and I will declare what he hath done for my soul.
17  I called unto him with my mouth, and he was extolled with my tongue.
18  Had I regarded iniquity in my heart, the Lord would not hear.
19  But God hath heard; he hath attended to the voice of my prayer.
20  Blessed be God, who hath not turned away my prayer, nor his loving-kindness from me!
{67}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. On stringed instruments. A Psalm: a Song.</i><br>God be gracious unto us, and bless us, [and] cause his face to shine upon us; Selah,
2  That thy way may be known upon earth, thy salvation among all nations.
3  Let the peoples praise thee, O God, let all the peoples praise thee.
4  Let the nations rejoice and sing for joy: for thou wilt judge the peoples equitably; and the nations upon earth, thou wilt guide them. Selah.
5  Let the peoples praise thee, O God; let all the peoples praise thee.
6  The earth will yield her increase; God, our God, will bless us:
7  God will bless us; and all the ends of the earth shall fear him.
{68}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. Of David. A Psalm: a Song.</i><br>Let God arise, let his enemies be scattered, and let them that hate him flee before him.
2  As smoke is driven, thou wilt drive them away; as wax melteth before the fire, the wicked shall perish at the presence of God.
3  But the righteous shall rejoice: they shall exult before God and be glad with joy.
4  Sing unto God, sing forth his name; cast up a way for him that rideth in the deserts: his name is Jah; and rejoice before him.
5  A father of the fatherless, and a judge of the widows, is God in his holy habitation.
6  God maketh the solitary into families; those that were bound he bringeth out into prosperity: but the rebellious dwell in a parched [land].
7  O God, when thou wentest forth before thy people, when thou didst march through the wilderness -- (Selah) -- 
8  The earth trembled, the heavens also dropped at the presence of God, yon Sinai, at the presence of God, the God of Israel.
9  Thou, O God, didst pour a plentiful rain upon thine inheritance, and when it was weary thou strengthenedst it.
10  Thy flock hath dwelt therein: thou hast prepared in thy goodness, for the afflicted, O God!
11  The Lord gives the word: great the host of the publishers.
12  Kings of armies flee; they flee, and she that tarrieth at home divideth the spoil.
13  Though ye have lain among the sheepfolds, [ye shall be as] wings of a dove covered with silver, and her feathers with green gold.
14  When the Almighty scattered kings in it, it became snow-white as Zalmon.
15  [As] mount Bashan is the mount of God, a many-peaked mountain, [as] mount Bashan.
16  Why do ye look with envy, ye many-peaked mountains, upon the mount that God hath desired for his abode? yea, Jehovah will dwell [there] for ever.
17  The chariots of God are twenty thousand, thousands upon thousands; the Lord is among them: it is a Sinai in holiness.
18  Thou hast ascended on high, thou hast led captivity captive: thou hast received gifts in Man, and even [for] the rebellious, for the dwelling [there] of Jah Elohim.
19  Blessed be the Lord: day by day doth he load us [with good], the +God who is our salvation. Selah.
20  Our +God is the +God of salvation; and with Jehovah, the Lord, are the goings forth [even] from death.
21  Verily God will smite the head of his enemies, the hairy scalp of him that goeth on still in his trespasses.
22  The Lord said, I will bring again from Bashan, I will bring [them] again from the depth of the sea;
23  That thou mayest dip thy foot in blood: the tongue of thy dogs has its portion from enemies.
24  They have seen thy goings, O God, the goings of my +God, my King, in the sanctuary.
25  The singers went before, the players on stringed instruments after, in the midst of maidens playing on tabrets.
26  In the congregations bless ye God, the Lord, -- [ye] from the fountain of Israel.
27  There is little Benjamin, their ruler; the princes of Judah, their company; the princes of Zebulun, the princes of Naphtali.
28  Thy God hath commanded thy strength: strengthen, O God, that which thou hast wrought for us.
29  Because of thy temple at Jerusalem shall kings bring presents unto thee.
30  Rebuke the beast of the reeds, the assembly of the strong, with the calves of the peoples: [every one] submitteth himself with pieces of silver. Scatter the peoples that delight in war.
31  Great ones shall come out of Egypt; Ethiopia shall quickly stretch out her hands unto God.
32  Ye kingdoms of the earth, sing unto God; sing psalms of the Lord, (Selah,)
33  Of him that rideth upon the heavens, the heavens which are of old: lo, he uttereth his voice, a mighty voice.
34  Ascribe ye strength unto God: his excellency is over Israel, and his strength is in the clouds.
35  Terrible art thou, O God, out of thy sanctuaries, -- the +God of Israel! He it is that giveth strength and might unto the people. Blessed be God!
{69}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. Upon Shoshannim. [A Psalm] of David.</i><br>Save me, O God; for the waters are come in unto [my] soul.
2  I sink in deep mire, where there is no standing; I am come into the depths of waters, and the flood overfloweth me.
3  I am weary with my crying, my throat is parched; mine eyes fail while I wait for my God.
4  They that hate me without a cause are more than the hairs of my head; they that would destroy me, being mine enemies wrongfully, are mighty: then I restored that which I took not away.
5  Thou, O God, knowest my foolishness, and my trespasses are not hidden from thee.
6  Let not them that wait on thee, Lord, Jehovah of hosts, be ashamed through me; let not those that seek thee be confounded through me, O God of Israel.
7  Because for thy sake I have borne reproach; confusion hath covered my face.
8  I am become a stranger unto my brethren, and an alien unto my mother's sons;
9  For the zeal of thy house hath devoured me, and the reproaches of them that reproach thee have fallen upon me.
10  And I wept, my soul was fasting: that also was to my reproach; -- 
11  And I made sackcloth my garment: then I became a proverb to them.
12  They that sit in the gate talk of me, and [I am] the song of the drunkards.
13  But as for me, my prayer is unto thee, Jehovah, in an acceptable time: O God, in the abundance of thy loving-kindness answer me, according to the truth of thy salvation:
14  Deliver me out of the mire, let me not sink; let me be delivered from them that hate me, and out of the depths of waters.
15  Let not the flood of waters overflow me, neither let the deep swallow me up; and let not the pit shut its mouth upon me.
16  Answer me, O Jehovah; for thy loving-kindness is good: according to the abundance of thy tender mercies, turn toward me;
17  And hide not thy face from thy servant, for I am in trouble: answer me speedily.
18  Draw nigh unto my soul, be its redeemer; ransom me because of mine enemies.
19  *Thou* knowest my reproach, and my shame, and my dishonour: mine adversaries are all before thee.
20  Reproach hath broken my heart, and I am overwhelmed: and I looked for sympathy, but there was none; and for comforters, but I found none.
21  Yea, they gave me gall for my food, and in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink.
22  Let their table become a snare before them, and their very welfare a trap;
23  Let their eyes be darkened, that they see not, and make their loins continually to shake.
24  Pour out thine indignation upon them, and let the fierceness of thine anger take hold of them.
25  Let their habitation be desolate; let there be no dweller in their tents.
26  For they persecute him whom *thou* hast smitten, and they talk for the sorrow of those whom thou hast wounded.
27  Add iniquity unto their iniquity, and let them not come into thy righteousness.
28  Let them be blotted out of the book of life, and not be written with the righteous.
29  But I am afflicted and sorrowful: let thy salvation, O God, set me secure on high.
30  I will praise the name of God with a song, and will magnify him with thanksgiving;
31  And it shall please Jehovah more than an ox, -- a bullock with horns and cloven hoofs.
32  The meek shall see it, they shall be glad; ye that seek God, your heart shall live.
33  For Jehovah heareth the needy, and despiseth not his prisoners.
34  Let heavens and earth praise him; the seas, and everything that moveth therein.
35  For God will save Zion, and will build the cities of Judah; and they shall dwell there, and possess it:
36  And the seed of his servants shall inherit it, and they that love his name shall dwell therein.
{70}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. [A Psalm] of David: to bring to remembrance.</i><br>Make haste, O God, to deliver me; Jehovah, [hasten] to my help.
2  Let them be ashamed and brought to confusion that seek after my soul; let them be turned backward and confounded that take pleasure in mine adversity;
3  Let them turn back because of their shame that say, Aha! Aha!
4  Let all those that seek thee be glad and rejoice in thee, and let such as love thy salvation say continually, Let God be magnified!
5  But I am afflicted and needy: make haste unto me, O God. Thou art my help and my deliverer: O Jehovah, make no delay.
{71}
1  In thee, Jehovah, do I trust: let me never be ashamed.
2  Deliver me in thy righteousness, and rescue me; incline thine ear unto me, and save me.
3  Be to me a rock of habitation, whereunto I may continually resort: thou hast given commandment to save me; for thou art my rock and my fortress.
4  My God, rescue me out of the hand of the wicked, out of the hand of the unrighteous and cruel man.
5  For thou art my hope, O Lord Jehovah, my confidence from my youth.
6  On thee have I been stayed from the womb; from the bowels of my mother thou didst draw me forth: my praise shall be continually of thee.
7  I have been as a wonder unto many; but thou art my strong refuge.
8  My mouth shall be filled with thy praise, with thy glory, all the day.
9  Cast me not off in the time of old age; forsake me not when my strength faileth.
10  For mine enemies speak against me, and they that watch for my soul consult together,
11  Saying, God hath forsaken him; pursue and seize him, for there is none to deliver.
12  O God, be not far from me; my God, hasten to my help.
13  Let them be ashamed, let them be consumed, that are adversaries to my soul; let them be covered with reproach and dishonour that seek my hurt.
14  But as for me, I will hope continually, and will praise thee yet more and more.
15  My mouth shall declare thy righteousness, [and] thy salvation all the day: for I know not the numbers [thereof].
16  I will go in the might of the Lord Jehovah; I will recall thy righteousness, thine alone.
17  O God, thou hast taught me from my youth, and hitherto have I proclaimed thy marvellous works:
18  Now also, when I am old and greyheaded, O God, forsake me not, until I have proclaimed thine arm unto [this] generation, thy might to every one that is to come.
19  And thy righteousness, O God, reacheth on high, thou who hast done great things: O God, who is like unto thee?
20  Thou, who hast shewn us many and sore troubles, wilt revive us again, and wilt bring us up again from the depths of the earth;
21  Thou wilt increase my greatness, and comfort me on every side.
22  I will also praise thee with the psaltery, even thy truth, my God; unto thee will I sing psalms with the harp, thou holy One of Israel.
23  My lips shall exult when I sing psalms unto thee; and my soul, which thou hast redeemed.
24  My tongue also shall talk of thy righteousness all the day; for they shall be ashamed, for they shall be brought to confusion, that seek my hurt.
{72}
1  <i>For Solomon.</i><br>O God, give the king thy judgments, and thy righteousness unto the king's son.
2  He will judge thy people with righteousness, and thine afflicted with judgment.
3  The mountains shall bring peace to the people, and the hills, by righteousness.
4  He will do justice to the afflicted of the people; he will save the children of the needy, and will break in pieces the oppressor.
5  They shall fear thee as long as sun and moon endure, from generation to generation.
6  He shall come down like rain on the mown grass, as showers that water the earth.
7  In his days shall the righteous flourish, and abundance of peace till the moon be no more.
8  And he shall have dominion from sea to sea, and from the river unto the ends of the earth.
9  The dwellers in the desert shall bow before him, and his enemies shall lick the dust.
10  The kings of Tarshish and of the isles shall render presents; the kings of Sheba and Seba shall offer tribute:
11  Yea, all kings shall bow down before him; all nations shall serve him.
12  For he will deliver the needy who crieth, and the afflicted, who hath no helper;
13  He will have compassion on the poor and needy, and will save the souls of the needy:
14  He will redeem their souls from oppression and violence, and precious shall their blood be in his sight.
15  And he shall live; and to him shall be given of the gold of Sheba; and prayer shall be made for him continually: all the day shall he be blessed.
16  There shall be abundance of corn in the earth, upon the top of the mountains; the fruit thereof shall shake like Lebanon; and they of the city shall bloom like the herb of the earth.
17  His name shall endure for ever; his name shall be continued as long as the sun: and [men] shall bless themselves in him; all nations shall call him blessed.
18  Blessed be Jehovah Elohim, the God of Israel, who alone doeth wondrous things!
19  And blessed be his glorious name for ever! and let the whole earth be filled with his glory! Amen, and Amen.
20  The prayers of David the son of Jesse are ended.
{73}
1  <i>A Psalm of Asaph.</i><br>Truly God is good to Israel, to such as are of a pure heart.
2  But as for me, my feet were almost gone, my steps had well nigh slipped;
3  For I was envious at the arrogant, seeing the prosperity of the wicked.
4  For they have no pangs in their death, and their body is well nourished;
5  They have not the hardships of mankind, neither are they plagued like [other] men:
6  Therefore pride encompasseth them as a neck-chain, violence covereth them [as] a garment;
7  Their eyes stand out from fatness, they exceed the imaginations of their heart:
8  They mock and speak wickedly of oppression, they speak loftily:
9  They set their mouth in the heavens, and their tongue walketh through the earth.
10  Therefore his people turn hither, and waters in fulness are wrung out to them.
11  And they say, How can +God know, and is there knowledge in the Most High?
12  Behold, these are the wicked, and they prosper in the world: they heap up riches.
13  Truly have I purified my heart in vain, and washed my hands in innocency:
14  For all the day have I been plagued, and chastened every morning.
15  If I said, I will speak thus, behold, I should be faithless to the generation of thy children.
16  When I thought to be able to know this, it was a grievous task in mine eyes;
17  Until I went into the sanctuaries of +God; [then] understood I their end.
18  Truly thou settest them in slippery places, thou castest them down in ruins.
19  How are they suddenly made desolate! they pass away, consumed with terrors.
20  As a dream, when one awaketh, wilt thou, Lord, on arising despise their image.
21  When my heart was in a ferment, and I was pricked in my reins,
22  Then I was brutish and knew nothing; I was [as] a beast with thee.
23  Nevertheless I am continually with thee: thou hast holden my right hand;
24  Thou wilt guide me by thy counsel, and after the glory, thou wilt receive me.
25  Whom have I in the heavens? and there is none upon earth I desire beside thee.
26  My flesh and my heart faileth: God is the rock of my heart and my portion for ever.
27  For behold, they that are far from thee shall perish; thou destroyest every one that goeth a whoring from thee.
28  But as for me, it is good for me to draw near to God: I have put my trust in the Lord Jehovah, that I may declare all thy works.
{74}
1  <i>An instruction: of Asaph.</i><br>Why, O God, hast thou cast off for ever? [why] doth thine anger smoke against the sheep of thy pasture?
2  Remember thine assembly, which thou hast purchased of old, which thou hast redeemed [to be] the portion of thine inheritance, this mount Zion, wherein thou hast dwelt.
3  Lift up thy steps unto the perpetual desolations: everything in the sanctuary hath the enemy destroyed.
4  Thine adversaries roar in the midst of thy place of assembly; they set up their signs [for] signs.
5  [A man] was known as he could lift up axes in the thicket of trees;
6  And now they break down its carved work altogether, with hatchets and hammers.
7  They have set on fire thy sanctuary, they have profaned the habitation of thy name to the ground.
8  They said in their heart, Let us destroy them together: they have burned up all +God's places of assembly in the land.
9  We see not our signs; there is no more any prophet, neither is there among us any that knoweth how long.
10  How long, O God, shall the adversary reproach? Shall the enemy contemn thy name for ever?
11  Why withdrawest thou thy hand, and thy right hand? [pluck it] out of thy bosom: consume [them].
12  But God is my king of old, accomplishing deliverances in the midst of the earth.
13  *Thou* didst divide the sea by thy strength; thou didst break the heads of the monsters on the waters:
14  *Thou* didst break in pieces the heads of leviathan, thou gavest him to be meat to those that people the desert.
15  *Thou* didst cleave fountain and torrent, *thou* driedst up ever-flowing rivers.
16  The day is thine, the night also is thine; *thou* hast prepared the moon and the sun:
17  *Thou* hast set all the borders of the earth; summer and winter -- *thou* didst form them.
18  Remember this, that an enemy hath reproached Jehovah, and a foolish people have contemned thy name.
19  Give not up the soul of thy turtle-dove unto the wild beast; forget not the troop of thine afflicted for ever.
20  Have respect unto the covenant; for the dark places of the earth are full of the dwellings of violence.
21  Oh let not the oppressed one return ashamed; let the afflicted and needy praise thy name.
22  Rise up, O God, plead thine own cause: remember how the foolish man reproacheth thee all the day;
23  Forget not the voice of thine adversaries: the tumult of those that rise up against thee ascendeth continually.
{75}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. 'Destroy not.' A Psalm of Asaph: a Song.</i><br>Unto thee we give thanks, O God, we give thanks; and thy name is near: thy marvellous works declare it.
2  When I shall receive the assembly, I will judge with equity.
3  The earth and all the inhabitants thereof are dissolved: I have established its pillars. Selah.
4  I said unto the boastful, Boast not; and to the wicked, Lift not up the horn:
5  Lift not up your horn on high; speak not arrogantly with a [stiff] neck.
6  For not from the east nor from the west, nor yet from the south doth exaltation [come]:
7  For God is the judge; he putteth down one and exalteth another.
8  For in the hand of Jehovah there is a cup, and it foameth with wine, it is full of mixture; and he poureth out of the same; yea, the dregs thereof shall all the wicked of the earth drain off, [and] drink.
9  But as for me, I will declare for ever; I will sing psalms to the God of Jacob.
10  And all the horns of the wicked will I cut off; [but] the horns of the righteous shall be exalted.
{76}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. On stringed instruments. A Psalm of Asaph: a Song.</i><br>In Judah is God known, his name is great in Israel;
2  And in Salem is his tent, and his dwelling-place in Zion.
3  There broke he the flashings of the bow, shield and sword and battle. Selah.
4  More glorious art thou, more excellent, than the mountains of prey.
5  The stout-hearted are made a spoil, they have slept their sleep; and none of the men of might have found their hands.
6  At thy rebuke, O God of Jacob, both chariot and horse are cast into a dead sleep.
7  Thou, thou art to be feared, and who can stand before thee when once thou art angry?
8  Thou didst cause judgment to be heard from the heavens; the earth feared, and was still,
9  When God rose up to judgment, to save all the meek of the earth. Selah.
10  For the fury of man shall praise thee; the remainder of fury wilt thou gird on thyself.
11  Vow and pay unto Jehovah your God: let all that are round about him bring presents unto him that is to be feared.
12  He cutteth off the spirit of princes; [he] is terrible to the kings of the earth.
{77}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. On Jeduthun. Of Asaph. A Psalm.</i><br>My voice is unto God, and I will cry; my voice is unto God, and he will give ear unto me.
2  In the day of my trouble, I sought the Lord: my hand was stretched out in the night, and slacked not; my soul refused to be comforted.
3  I remembered God, and I moaned; I complained, and my spirit was overwhelmed. Selah.
4  Thou holdest open mine eyelids; I am full of disquiet and cannot speak.
5  I consider the days of old, the years of ancient times.
6  I remember my song in the night; I muse in mine own heart, and my spirit maketh diligent search.
7  Will the Lord cast off for ever? and will he be favourable no more?
8  Hath his loving-kindness ceased for ever? hath [his] word come to an end from generation to generation?
9  Hath +God forgotten to be gracious? or hath he in anger shut up his tender mercies? Selah.
10  Then said I, This is my weakness: -- the years of the right hand of the Most High
11  Will I remember, -- the works of Jah; for I will remember thy wonders of old,
12  And I will meditate upon all thy work, and muse upon thy doings.
13  O God, thy way is in the sanctuary: who is so great a +god as God?
14  Thou art the +God that doest wonders; thou hast declared thy strength among the peoples.
15  Thou hast with [thine] arm redeemed thy people, the sons of Jacob and Joseph. Selah.
16  The waters saw thee, O God, the waters saw thee; they trembled, yea, the depths were troubled:
17  The thick clouds poured out water; the skies sent out a sound, yea, thine arrows went abroad:
18  The voice of thy thunder was in the whirlwind, lightnings lit up the world; the earth was troubled and it quaked.
19  Thy way is in the sea, and thy paths are in the great waters; and thy footsteps are not known.
20  Thou leddest thy people like a flock by the hand of Moses and Aaron.
{78}
1  <i>An instruction. Of Asaph.</i><br>Give ear, O my people, to my law; incline your ears to the words of my mouth.
2  I will open my mouth in a parable; I will utter riddles from of old,
3  Which we have heard and known, and our fathers have told us:
4  We will not hide [them] from their sons, shewing forth to the generation to come the praises of Jehovah, and his strength, and his marvellous works which he hath done.
5  For he established a testimony in Jacob, and appointed a law in Israel, which he commanded our fathers, that they should make them known to their children;
6  That the generation to come might know [them], the children that should be born; that they might rise up and tell [them] to their children,
7  And that they might set their hope in God, and not forget the works of +God, but observe his commandments;
8  And might not be as their fathers, a stubborn and rebellious generation, a generation that prepared not their heart, and whose spirit was not stedfast with +God.
9  The sons of Ephraim, armed bowmen, turned back in the day of battle.
10  They kept not the covenant of God, and refused to walk in his law;
11  And forgot his doings, and his marvellous works which he had shewn them.
12  In the sight of their fathers had he done wonders, in the land of Egypt, the field of Zoan.
13  He clave the sea, and caused them to pass through; and made the waters to stand as a heap;
14  And he led them with a cloud in the daytime, and all the night with the light of fire.
15  He clave rocks in the wilderness, and gave [them] drink as out of the depths, abundantly;
16  And he brought streams out of the rock, and caused waters to run down like rivers.
17  Yet they still went on sinning against him, provoking the Most High in the desert;
18  And they tempted +God in their heart, by asking meat for their lust;
19  And they spoke against God: they said, Is +God able to prepare a table in the wilderness?
20  Behold, he smote the rock, and waters gushed out, and streams overflowed; is he able to give bread also, or provide flesh for his people?
21  Therefore Jehovah heard, and was wroth; and fire was kindled against Jacob, and anger also went up against Israel:
22  Because they believed not in God, and confided not in his salvation;
23  Though he had commanded the clouds from above, and had opened the doors of the heavens,
24  And had rained down manna upon them to eat, and had given them the corn of the heavens.
25  Man did eat the bread of the mighty; he sent them provision to the full.
26  He caused the east wind to rise in the heavens, and by his strength he brought the south wind;
27  And he rained flesh upon them as dust, and feathered fowl as the sand of the seas,
28  And he let it fall in the midst of their camp, round about their habitations:
29  And they did eat, and were well filled; for that they lusted after, he brought to them.
30  They were not alienated from their lust, their meat was yet in their mouths,
31  When the anger of God went up against them; and he slew the fattest of them, and smote down the chosen men of Israel.
32  For all this, they sinned still, and believed not in his marvellous works;
33  And he consumed their days in vanity, and their years in terror.
34  When he slew them, then they sought him, and returned and sought early after +God;
35  And they remembered that God was their rock, and +God, the Most High, their redeemer.
36  But they flattered him with their mouth, and lied unto him with their tongue;
37  For their heart was not firm toward him, neither were they stedfast in his covenant.
38  But he was merciful: he forgave the iniquity, and destroyed [them] not; but many a time turned he his anger away, and did not stir up all his fury:
39  And he remembered that they were flesh, a breath that passeth away and cometh not again.
40  How oft did they provoke him in the wilderness, and grieve him in the desert!
41  And they turned again and tempted +God, and grieved the Holy One of Israel.
42  They remembered not his hand, the day when he delivered them from the oppressor,
43  How he set his signs in Egypt, and his miracles in the field of Zoan;
44  And turned their rivers into blood, and their streams, that they could not drink;
45  He sent dog-flies among them, which devoured them, and frogs, which destroyed them;
46  And he gave their increase unto the caterpillar, and their labour unto the locust;
47  He killed their vines with hail, and their sycamore trees with hail-stones;
48  And he delivered up their cattle to the hail, and their flocks to thunderbolts.
49  He cast upon them the fierceness of his anger, wrath, and indignation, and distress, -- a mission of angels of woes.
50  He made a way for his anger; he spared not their soul from death, but gave their life over to the pestilence;
51  And he smote all the firstborn in Egypt, the first-fruits of their vigour in the tents of Ham.
52  And he made his own people to go forth like sheep, and guided them in the wilderness like a flock;
53  And he led them safely, so that they were without fear; and the sea covered their enemies.
54  And he brought them to his holy border, this mountain, which his right hand purchased;
55  And he drove out the nations before them, and allotted them for an inheritance by line, and made the tribes of Israel to dwell in their tents.
56  But they tempted and provoked God, the Most High, and kept not his testimonies,
57  And they drew back and dealt treacherously like their fathers: they turned like a deceitful bow.
58  And they provoked him to anger with their high places, and moved him to jealousy with their graven images.
59  God heard, and was wroth, and greatly abhorred Israel:
60  And he forsook the tabernacle at Shiloh, the tent where he had dwelt among men,
61  And gave his strength into captivity, and his glory into the hand of the oppressor;
62  And delivered up his people unto the sword, and was very wroth with his inheritance:
63  The fire consumed their young men, and their maidens were not praised in [nuptial] song;
64  Their priests fell by the sword, and their widows made no lamentation.
65  Then the Lord awoke as one out of sleep, like a mighty man that shouteth aloud by reason of wine;
66  And he smote his adversaries in the hinder part, and put them to everlasting reproach.
67  And he rejected the tent of Joseph, and chose not the tribe of Ephraim,
68  But chose the tribe of Judah, the mount Zion which he loved;
69  And he built his sanctuary like the heights, like the earth which he hath founded for ever.
70  And he chose David his servant, and took him from the sheepfolds:
71  From following the suckling-ewes, he brought him to feed Jacob his people, and Israel his inheritance.
72  And he fed them according to the integrity of his heart, and led them by the skilfulness of his hands.
{79}
1  <i>A Psalm of Asaph.</i><br>O God, the nations are come into thine inheritance: thy holy temple have they defiled; they have laid Jerusalem in heaps.
2  The dead bodies of thy servants have they given to be meat unto the fowl of the heavens, the flesh of thy saints unto the beasts of the earth:
3  Their blood have they shed like water round about Jerusalem, and there was none to bury [them].
4  We are become a reproach to our neighbours, a mockery and a derision to them that are round about us.
5  How long, O Jehovah? wilt thou be angry for ever? Shall thy jealousy burn like fire?
6  Pour out thy fury upon the nations that have not known thee, and upon the kingdoms that call not upon thy name:
7  For they have devoured Jacob, and laid waste his habitation.
8  Remember not against us the iniquities of [our] forefathers; let thy tender mercies speedily come to meet us: for we are brought very low.
9  Help us, O God of our salvation, because of the glory of thy name; and deliver us, and forgive our sins, for thy name's sake.
10  Wherefore should the nations say, Where is their God? Let the avenging of the blood of thy servants that is shed be known among the nations in our sight.
11  Let the groaning of the prisoner come before thee; according to the greatness of thine arm, preserve those that are appointed to die;
12  And render unto our neighbours, sevenfold into their bosom, their reproach, wherewith they have reproached thee, O Lord.
13  And we, thy people and the sheep of thy pasture, will give thanks unto thee for ever; we will shew forth thy praise from generation to generation.
{80}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. On Shoshannim-Eduth. Of Asaph. A Psalm.</i><br>Give ear, O Shepherd of Israel, thou that leadest Joseph like a flock; thou that sittest [between] the cherubim, shine forth.
2  Before Ephraim and Benjamin and Manasseh, stir up thy strength, and come to our deliverance.
3  O God, restore us; and cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved.
4  Jehovah, God of hosts, how long will thine anger smoke against the prayer of thy people?
5  Thou hast fed them with the bread of tears, and given them tears to drink in large measure:
6  Thou hast made us a strife unto our neighbours, and our enemies mock among themselves.
7  Restore us, O God of hosts; and cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved.
8  Thou broughtest a vine out of Egypt; thou didst cast out the nations, and plant it:
9  Thou preparedst space before it, and it took deep root, and filled the land;
10  The mountains were covered with its shadow, and the branches thereof were [like] cedars of +God;
11  It sent out its boughs unto the sea, and its shoots unto the river.
12  Why hast thou broken down its fences, so that all who pass by the way do pluck it?
13  The boar out of the forest doth waste it, and the beast of the field doth feed off it.
14  O God of hosts, return, we beseech thee; look down from the heavens, and behold, and visit this vine;
15  Even the stock which thy right hand hath planted, and the young plant thou madest strong for thyself.
16  It is burned with fire, it is cut down; they perish at the rebuke of thy countenance.
17  Let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand, upon the son of man whom thou hast made strong for thyself.
18  So will we not go back from thee. Revive us, and we will call upon thy name.
19  Restore us, O Jehovah, God of hosts; cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved.
{81}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. Upon the Gittith. [A Psalm] of Asaph.</i><br>Sing ye joyously unto God our strength, shout aloud unto the God of Jacob;
2  Raise a song, and sound the tambour, the pleasant harp with the lute.
3  Blow the trumpet at the new moon, at the set time, on our feast day:
4  For this is a statute for Israel, an ordinance of the God of Jacob;
5  He ordained it in Joseph [for] a testimony, when he went forth over the land of Egypt, [where] I heard a language that I knew not.
6  I removed his shoulder from the burden; his hands were freed from the basket.
7  Thou calledst in trouble, and I delivered thee; I answered thee in the secret place of thunder; I proved thee at the waters of Meribah. Selah.
8  Hear, my people, and I will testify unto thee; O Israel, if thou wouldest hearken unto me!
9  There shall no strange +god be in thee, neither shalt thou worship any foreign +god.
10  I am Jehovah thy God, that brought thee up out of the land of Egypt: open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it.
11  But my people hearkened not to my voice, and Israel would none of me.
12  So I gave them up unto their own hearts' stubbornness: they walked after their own counsels.
13  Oh that my people had hearkened unto me, that Israel had walked in my ways!
14  I would soon have subdued their enemies, and turned my hand against their adversaries.
15  The haters of Jehovah would have come cringing unto him; but their time would have been for ever.
16  And he would have fed them with the finest of wheat; yea, with honey out of the rock would I have satisfied thee.
{82}
1  <i>A Psalm of Asaph.</i><br>God standeth in the assembly of +God, he judgeth among the gods.
2  How long will ye judge unrighteously, and accept the person of the wicked? Selah.
3  Judge the poor and the fatherless, do justice to the afflicted and the destitute;
4  Rescue the poor and needy, deliver them out of the hand of the wicked.
5  They know not, neither do they understand; they walk on in darkness: all the foundations of the earth are moved.
6  I have said, Ye are gods, and all of you are children of the Most High;
7  But ye shall die like men, and fall like one of the princes.
8  Arise, O God, judge the earth; for *thou* shalt inherit all the nations.
{83}
1  <i>A Song; a Psalm of Asaph.</i><br>O God, keep not silence; hold not thy peace, and be not still, O +God:
2  For behold, thine enemies make a tumult; and they that hate thee lift up the head.
3  They take crafty counsel against thy people, and consult against thy hidden ones:
4  They say, Come, and let us cut them off from being a nation, and let the name of Israel be mentioned no more.
5  For they have consulted together with one heart: they have made an alliance together against thee.
6  The tents of Edom and the Ishmaelites, Moab and the Hagarites;
7  Gebal, and Ammon, and Amalek; Philistia, with the inhabitants of Tyre;
8  Asshur also is joined with them: they are an arm to the sons of Lot. Selah.
9  Do unto them as to Midian; as to Sisera, as to Jabin, at the torrent of Kishon:
10  Who were destroyed at Endor; they became as dung for the ground.
11  Make their nobles as Oreb and as Zeeb; and all their chiefs as Zebah and as Zalmunna.
12  For they have said, Let us take to ourselves God's dwelling-places in possession.
13  O my God, make them like a whirling thing, like stubble before the wind.
14  As fire burneth a forest, and as the flame setteth the mountains on fire,
15  So pursue them with thy tempest, and terrify them with thy whirlwind.
16  Fill their faces with shame, that they may seek thy name, O Jehovah.
17  Let them be put to shame and be dismayed for ever, and let them be confounded and perish:
18  That they may know that thou alone, whose name is Jehovah, art the Most High over all the earth.
{84}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. Upon the Gittith. Of the sons of Korah. A Psalm.</i><br>How amiable are thy tabernacles, O Jehovah of hosts!
2  My soul longeth, yea, even fainteth for the courts of Jehovah; my heart and my flesh cry out for the living +God.
3  Yea, the sparrow hath found a house, and the swallow a nest for herself, where she layeth her young, thine altars, O Jehovah of hosts, my King and my God.
4  Blessed are they that dwell in thy house: they will be constantly praising thee. Selah.
5  Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee, -- they, in whose heart are the highways.
6  Passing through the valley of Baca, they make it a well-spring; yea, the early rain covereth it with blessings.
7  They go from strength to strength: [each one] will appear before God in Zion.
8  Jehovah, God of hosts, hear my prayer; give ear, O God of Jacob. Selah.
9  Behold, O God our shield, and look upon the face of thine anointed.
10  For a day in thy courts is better than a thousand. I had rather stand at the threshold of the house of my God, than dwell in the tents of wickedness.
11  For Jehovah Elohim is a sun and shield: Jehovah will give grace and glory; no good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly.
12  Jehovah of hosts, blessed is the man that confideth in thee!
{85}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. Of the sons of Korah. A Psalm.</i><br>Thou hast been favourable, Jehovah, unto thy land; thou hast turned the captivity of Jacob:
2  Thou hast forgiven the iniquity of thy people; thou hast covered all their sin. Selah.
3  Thou hast withdrawn all thy wrath; thou hast turned from the fierceness of thine anger.
4  Bring us back, O God of our salvation, and cause thine indignation toward us to cease.
5  Wilt thou be angry with us for ever? wilt thou draw out thine anger from generation to generation?
6  Wilt thou not revive us again, that thy people may rejoice in thee?
7  Shew us thy loving-kindness, O Jehovah, and grant us thy salvation.
8  I will hear what +God, Jehovah, will speak; for he will speak peace unto his people, and to his godly ones: but let them not turn again to folly.
9  Surely his salvation is nigh them that fear him, that glory may dwell in our land.
10  Loving-kindness and truth are met together; righteousness and peace have kissed each other:
11  Truth shall spring out of the earth, and righteousness shall look down from the heavens.
12  Jehovah also will give what is good, and our land shall yield its increase.
13  Righteousness shall go before him, and shall set his footsteps on the way.
{86}
1  <i>A Prayer of David.</i><br>Incline thine ear, Jehovah, answer me; for I am afflicted and needy.
2  Keep my soul, for I am godly; O thou my God, save thy servant who confideth in thee.
3  Be gracious unto me, O Lord; for unto thee do I call all the day.
4  Rejoice the soul of thy servant; for unto thee, Lord, do I lift up my soul.
5  For thou, Lord, art good, and ready to forgive, and art of great loving-kindness unto all that call upon thee.
6  Give ear, O Jehovah, unto my prayer, and attend to the voice of my supplications.
7  In the day of my distress I will call upon thee, for thou wilt answer me.
8  Among the gods there is none like unto thee, Lord, and there is nothing like unto thy works.
9  All nations whom thou hast made shall come and worship before thee, O Lord, and shall glorify thy name.
10  For thou art great, and doest wondrous things: thou art God, thou alone.
11  Teach me thy way, Jehovah; I will walk in thy truth: unite my heart to fear thy name.
12  I will praise thee, O Lord my God, with my whole heart; and I will glorify thy name for evermore.
13  For great is thy loving-kindness toward me, and thou hast delivered my soul from the lowest Sheol.
14  O God, the proud are risen against me, and the assembly of the violent seek after my soul, and they have not set thee before them.
15  But thou, Lord, art a +God merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in goodness and truth.
16  Turn toward me, and be gracious unto me; give thy strength unto thy servant, and save the son of thine handmaid.
17  Shew me a token for good, that they which hate me may see it, and be ashamed; for thou, Jehovah, hast helped me and comforted me.
{87}
1  <i>Of the sons of Korah. A Psalm. A Song.</i><br>His foundation is in the mountains of holiness.
2  Jehovah loveth the gates of Zion more than all the habitations of Jacob.
3  Glorious things are spoken of thee, O city of God. Selah.
4  I will make mention of Rahab and Babylon among them that know me; behold Philistia, and Tyre, with Ethiopia: this [man] was born there.
5  And of Zion it shall be said, This one and that one was born in her; and the Most High himself shall establish her.
6  Jehovah will count, when he inscribeth the peoples, This [man] was born there. Selah.
7  As well the singers as the dancers [shall say], All my springs are in thee.
{88}
1  <i>A Song, a Psalm for the sons of Korah. To the chief Musician. Upon Mahalath Leannoth. An instruction. Of Heman the Ezrahite.</i><br>Jehovah, God of my salvation, I have cried by day [and] in the night before thee.
2  Let my prayer come before thee; incline thine ear unto my cry.
3  For my soul is full of troubles, and my life draweth nigh to Sheol.
4  I am reckoned with them that go down into the pit; I am as a man that hath no strength:
5  Prostrate among the dead, like the slain that lie in the grave; whom thou rememberest no more, and who are cut off from thy hand.
6  Thou hast laid me in the lowest pit, in dark places, in the deeps.
7  Thy fury lieth hard upon me, and thou hast afflicted [me] with all thy waves. Selah.
8  Thou hast put my familiar friends far from me; thou hast made me an abomination unto them: I am shut up, and I cannot come forth.
9  Mine eye consumeth by reason of affliction. Upon thee, Jehovah, have I called every day; I have stretched out my hands unto thee.
10  Wilt thou do wonders to the dead? shall the shades arise and praise thee? Selah.
11  Shall thy loving-kindness be declared in the grave? thy faithfulness in Destruction?
12  Shall thy wonders be known in the dark? and thy righteousness in the land of forgetfulness?
13  But as for me, Jehovah, I cry unto thee, and in the morning my prayer cometh before thee.
14  Why, O Jehovah, castest thou off my soul? [why] hidest thou thy face from me?
15  I am afflicted and expiring from my youth up; I suffer thy terrors, [and] I am distracted.
16  Thy fierce anger hath gone over me; thy terrors have brought me to nought:
17  They have surrounded me all the day like water; they have compassed me about together.
18  Lover and associate hast thou put far from me: my familiar friends are darkness.
{89}
1  <i>An instruction. Of Ethan the Ezrahite.</i><br>I will sing of the loving-kindness of Jehovah for ever; with my mouth will I make known thy faithfulness from generation to generation.
2  For I said, Loving-kindness shall be built up for ever; in the very heavens wilt thou establish thy faithfulness.
3  I have made a covenant with mine elect, I have sworn unto David my servant:
4  Thy seed will I establish for ever, and build up thy throne from generation to generation. Selah.
5  And the heavens shall celebrate thy wonders, O Jehovah, and thy faithfulness in the congregation of the saints.
6  For who in the heaven can be compared to Jehovah? [who] among the sons of the mighty shall be likened to Jehovah?
7  +God is greatly to be feared in the council of the saints, and terrible for all that are round about him.
8  Jehovah, God of hosts, who is like unto thee, the strong Jah? And thy faithfulness is round about thee.
9  *Thou* rulest the pride of the sea: when its waves arise, *thou* stillest them.
10  Thou hast crushed Rahab as one that is slain; thou hast scattered thine enemies with the arm of thy strength.
11  Thine are the heavens, the earth also is thine; the world and its fulness, *thou* hast founded them.
12  The north and the south, *thou* hast created them: Tabor and Hermon triumph in thy name.
13  Thine is the arm of might: strong is thy hand, high is thy right hand.
14  Righteousness and judgment are the foundation of thy throne; loving-kindness and truth go before thy face.
15  Blessed is the people that know the shout of joy: they walk, O Jehovah, in the light of thy countenance.
16  In thy name are they joyful all the day, and in thy righteousness are they exalted.
17  For thou art the glory of their strength; and in thy favour our horn shall be exalted.
18  For Jehovah is our shield, and the Holy One of Israel, our king.
19  Then thou spakest in vision of thy Holy One, and saidst, I have laid help upon a mighty one; I have exalted one chosen out of the people.
20  I have found David my servant; with my holy oil have I anointed him:
21  With whom my hand shall be established; and mine arm shall strengthen him.
22  No enemy shall exact upon him, nor the son of wickedness afflict him;
23  But I will beat down his adversaries before his face, and will smite them that hate him.
24  And my faithfulness and my loving-kindness shall be with him, and by my name shall his horn be exalted.
25  And I will set his hand in the sea, and his right hand in the rivers.
26  *He* shall call unto me, Thou art my father, my +God, and the rock of my salvation;
27  And as to me, I will make him firstborn, the highest of the kings of the earth.
28  My loving-kindness will I keep for him for evermore, and my covenant shall stand fast with him;
29  And I will establish his seed for ever, and his throne as the days of heaven.
30  If his sons forsake my law, and walk not in mine ordinances;
31  If they profane my statutes, and keep not my commandments:
32  Then will I visit their transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes.
33  Nevertheless my loving-kindness will I not utterly take from him, nor belie my faithfulness;
34  My covenant will I not profane, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips.
35  Once have I sworn by my holiness; I will not lie unto David:
36  His seed shall endure for ever, and his throne as the sun before me;
37  It shall be established for ever as the moon, and the witness in the sky is firm. Selah.
38  But thou hast rejected and cast off; thou hast been very wroth with thine anointed:
39  Thou hast made void the covenant of thy servant; thou hast profaned his crown to the ground:
40  Thou hast broken down all his hedges; thou hast brought his strongholds to ruin.
41  All that pass by the way plunder him; he is become a reproach to his neighbours.
42  Thou hast exalted the right hand of his oppressors; thou hast made all his enemies to rejoice:
43  Yea, thou hast turned back the edge of his sword, and hast not made him stand in the battle.
44  Thou hast made his brightness to cease, and cast his throne down to the ground;
45  The days of his youth hast thou shortened; thou hast covered him with shame. Selah.
46  How long, Jehovah, wilt thou hide thyself for ever? shall thy fury burn like fire?
47  Remember, as regards me, what life is. Wherefore hast thou created all the children of men to be vanity?
48  What man liveth, and shall not see death? Shall he deliver his soul from the power of Sheol? Selah.
49  Where, Lord, are thy former loving-kindnesses, [which] thou swarest unto David in thy faithfulness?
50  Remember, Lord, the reproach of thy servants -- that I bear in my bosom [that of] all the mighty peoples -- 
51  Wherewith thine enemies, O Jehovah, have reproached, wherewith they have reproached the footsteps of thine anointed.
52  Blessed be Jehovah for evermore! Amen, and Amen.
{90}
1  <i>A Prayer of Moses, the man of God.</i><br>Lord, *thou* hast been our dwelling-place in all generations.
2  Before the mountains were brought forth, and thou hadst formed the earth and the world, even from eternity to eternity thou art +God.
3  Thou makest [mortal] man to return to dust, and sayest, Return, children of men.
4  For a thousand years, in thy sight, are as yesterday when it is past, and [as] a watch in the night.
5  Thou carriest them away as with a flood; they are [as] a sleep: in the morning they are like grass [that] groweth up:
6  In the morning it flourisheth and groweth up; in the evening it is cut down and withereth.
7  For we are consumed by thine anger, and by thy fury are we troubled.
8  Thou hast set our iniquities before thee, our secret [sins] in the light of thy countenance.
9  For all our days pass away in thy wrath: we spend our years as a [passing] thought.
10  The days of our years are threescore years and ten; and if, by reason of strength, they be fourscore years, yet their pride is labour and vanity, for it is soon cut off, and we fly away.
11  Who knoweth the power of thine anger? and thy wrath according to the fear of thee?
12  So teach [us] to number our days, that we may acquire a wise heart.
13  Return, Jehovah: how long? and let it repent thee concerning thy servants.
14  Satisfy us early with thy loving-kindness; that we may sing for joy and be glad all our days.
15  Make us glad according to the days [wherein] thou hast afflicted us, according to the years [wherein] we have seen evil.
16  Let thy work appear unto thy servants, and thy majesty unto their sons.
17  And let the beauty of Jehovah our God be upon us; and establish thou the work of our hands upon us: yea, the work of our hands, establish thou it.
{91}
1  He that dwelleth in the secret place of the Most High shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty.
2  I say of Jehovah, My refuge and my fortress; my God, I will confide in him.
3  Surely *he* shall deliver thee from the snare of the fowler, [and] from the destructive pestilence.
4  He shall cover thee with his feathers, and under his wings shalt thou find refuge: his truth is a shield and buckler.
5  Thou shalt not be afraid for the terror by night, for the arrow that flieth by day,
6  For the pestilence that walketh in darkness, for the destruction that wasteth at noonday.
7  A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand; [but] it shall not come nigh thee.
8  Only with thine eyes shalt thou behold, and see the reward of the wicked.
9  Because *thou* hast made Jehovah, my refuge, the Most High, thy dwelling-place,
10  There shall no evil befall thee, neither shall any plague come nigh thy tent.
11  For he shall give his angels charge concerning thee, to keep thee in all thy ways:
12  They shall bear thee up in [their] hands, lest thou dash thy foot against a stone.
13  Thou shalt tread upon the lion and the adder; the young lion and the dragon shalt thou trample under foot.
14  Because he hath set his love upon me, therefore will I deliver him; I will set him on high, because he hath known my name.
15  He shall call upon me, and I will answer him; I will be with him in trouble, I will deliver him and honour him.
16  With length of days will I satisfy him, and shew him my salvation.
{92}
1  <i>A Psalm, a Song, for the Sabbath day.</i><br>It is good to give thanks unto Jehovah, and to sing psalms unto thy name, O Most High;
2  To declare thy loving-kindness in the morning, and thy faithfulness in the nights,
3  Upon an instrument of ten strings and upon the lute; upon the Higgaion with the harp.
4  For thou, Jehovah, hast made me glad through thy work; I will triumph in the works of thy hands.
5  Jehovah, how great are thy works! Thy thoughts are very deep:
6  A brutish man knoweth not, neither doth a fool understand it.
7  When the wicked spring as the grass, and when all the workers of iniquity flourish, it is that they may be destroyed for ever.
8  And thou, Jehovah, art on high for evermore.
9  For lo, thine enemies, O Jehovah, for lo, thine enemies shall perish; all the workers of iniquity shall be scattered.
10  But my horn shalt thou exalt like a buffalo's: I shall be anointed with fresh oil.
11  And mine eye shall see [its desire] on mine enemies; mine ears shall hear [it] of the evil-doers that rise up against me.
12  The righteous shall shoot forth like a palm-tree; he shall grow like a cedar on Lebanon.
13  Those that are planted in the house of Jehovah shall flourish in the courts of our God:
14  They are still vigorous in old age, they are full of sap and green;
15  To shew that Jehovah is upright: [he is] my rock, and there is no unrighteousness in him.
{93}
1  Jehovah reigneth, he hath clothed himself with majesty: Jehovah hath clothed himself, he hath girded himself with strength; yea, the world is established, it shall not be moved.
2  Thy throne is established of old; thou art from eternity.
3  The floods lifted up, O Jehovah, the floods lifted up their voice; the floods lifted up their roaring waves.
4  Jehovah on high is mightier than the voices of many waters, than the mighty breakers of the sea.
5  Thy testimonies are very sure: holiness becometh thy house, O Jehovah, for ever.
{94}
1  O +God of vengeances, Jehovah, +God of vengeances, shine forth;
2  Lift up thyself, thou judge of the earth, render the reward to the proud.
3  How long shall the wicked, O Jehovah, how long shall the wicked triumph?
4  [How long] shall they utter [and] speak insolence -- all the workers of iniquity boast themselves?
5  They crush thy people, O Jehovah, and afflict thine inheritance;
6  They slay the widow and the stranger, and murder the fatherless,
7  And say, Jah will not see, neither will the God of Jacob regard [it].
8  Understand, ye brutish among the people; and ye fools, when will ye be wise?
9  He that planted the ear, shall he not hear? He that formed the eye, shall he not see?
10  He that instructeth the nations, shall not he correct -- he that teacheth man knowledge?
11  Jehovah knoweth the thoughts of man, that they are vanity.
12  Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, O Jah, and whom thou teachest out of thy law;
13  That thou mayest give him rest from the days of evil, until the pit be digged for the wicked.
14  For Jehovah will not cast off his people, neither will he forsake his inheritance;
15  For judgment shall return unto righteousness, and all the upright in heart shall follow it.
16  Who will rise up for me against the evil-doers? who will stand for me against the workers of iniquity?
17  If Jehovah had not been my help, my soul had almost dwelt in silence.
18  When I said, My foot slippeth, thy loving-kindness, O Jehovah, held me up.
19  In the multitude of my anxious thoughts within me thy comforts have delighted my soul.
20  Shall the throne of wickedness be united to thee, which frameth mischief into a law?
21  They band together against the soul of the righteous, and condemn innocent blood.
22  But Jehovah will be my high tower; and my God the rock of my refuge.
23  And he will bring upon them their iniquity, and will cut them off in their own evil: Jehovah our God will cut them off.
{95}
1  Come, let us sing aloud to Jehovah, let us shout for joy to the rock of our salvation;
2  Let us come before his face with thanksgiving; let us shout aloud unto him with psalms.
3  For Jehovah is a great +God, and a great king above all gods.
4  In his hand are the deep places of the earth; the heights of the mountains are his also:
5  The sea is his, and he made it, and his hands formed the dry [land].
6  Come, let us worship and bow down; let us kneel before Jehovah our Maker.
7  For he is our God; and we are the people of his pasture and the sheep of his hand. To-day if ye hear his voice,
8  Harden not your heart, as at Meribah, as [in] the day of Massah, in the wilderness;
9  When your fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my work.
10  Forty years was I grieved with the generation, and said, It is a people that do err in their heart, and they have not known my ways;
11  So that I swore in mine anger, that they should not enter into my rest.
{96}
1  Sing ye unto Jehovah a new song: sing unto Jehovah, all the earth.
2  Sing unto Jehovah, bless his name; publish his salvation from day to day.
3  Declare his glory among the nations, his wondrous works among all the peoples.
4  For Jehovah is great and exceedingly to be praised; he is terrible above all gods.
5  For all the gods of the peoples are idols; but Jehovah made the heavens.
6  Majesty and splendour are before him; strength and beauty are in his sanctuary.
7  Give unto Jehovah, ye families of peoples, give unto Jehovah glory and strength;
8  Give unto Jehovah the glory of his name; bring an oblation and come into his courts;
9  Worship Jehovah in holy splendour; tremble before him, all the earth.
10  Say among the nations, Jehovah reigneth! yea, the world is established, it shall not be moved; he will execute judgment upon the peoples with equity.
11  Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be glad; let the sea roar, and the fulness thereof;
12  Let the field exult and all that is therein. Then shall all the trees of the forest sing for joy,
13  Before Jehovah, for he cometh; for he cometh to judge the earth: he will judge the world with righteousness, and the peoples in his faithfulness.
{97}
1  Jehovah reigneth: let the earth be glad, let the many isles rejoice.
2  Clouds and darkness are round about him; righteousness and judgment are the foundation of his throne.
3  A fire goeth before him, and burneth up his adversaries round about.
4  His lightnings lightened the world: the earth saw, and trembled.
5  The mountains melted like wax at the presence of Jehovah, at the presence of the Lord of the whole earth.
6  The heavens declare his righteousness, and all the peoples see his glory.
7  Ashamed be all they that serve graven images, that boast themselves of idols. Worship him, all ye gods.
8  Zion heard, and rejoiced; and the daughters of Judah were glad, because of thy judgments, O Jehovah.
9  For thou, Jehovah, art the Most High above all the earth; thou art exalted exceedingly above all gods.
10  Ye that love Jehovah, hate evil: he preserveth the souls of his saints, he delivereth them out of the hand of the wicked.
11  Light is sown for the righteous, and joy for the upright in heart.
12  Rejoice in Jehovah, ye righteous; and give thanks in remembrance of his holiness.
{98}
1  <i>A Psalm.</i><br>Sing ye unto Jehovah a new song: for he hath done wondrous things; his right hand and his holy arm hath wrought salvation for him.
2  Jehovah hath made known his salvation: his righteousness hath he openly shewed in the sight of the nations.
3  He hath remembered his loving-kindness and his faithfulness toward the house of Israel: all the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our God.
4  Shout aloud unto Jehovah, all the earth; break forth and shout for joy, and sing psalms.
5  Sing psalms unto Jehovah with the harp: with the harp, and the voice of a song;
6  With trumpets and sound of cornet, make a joyful noise before the King, Jehovah.
7  Let the sea roar, and the fulness thereof; the world, and they that dwell therein;
8  Let the floods clap [their] hands; let the mountains sing for joy together,
9  Before Jehovah, for he cometh to judge the earth: he will judge the world with righteousness, and the peoples with equity.
{99}
1  Jehovah reigneth: let the peoples tremble. He sitteth [between the] cherubim: let the earth be moved.
2  Jehovah is great in Zion, and he is high above all the peoples.
3  They shall praise thy great and terrible name, -- it is holy! -- 
4  And the strength of the king that loveth justice. *Thou* hast established equity: it is thou that executest judgment and righteousness in Jacob.
5  Exalt Jehovah our God, and worship at his footstool. He is holy!
6  Moses and Aaron among his priests, and Samuel among them that call upon his name: they called unto Jehovah, and *he* answered them.
7  He spoke unto them in the pillar of cloud: they kept his testimonies, and the statute that he gave them.
8  Jehovah, our God, *thou* answeredst them: a forgiving +God wast thou unto them, though thou tookest vengeance of their doings.
9  Exalt Jehovah our God, and worship at the hill of his holiness; for holy is Jehovah our God.
{100}
1  <i>A Psalm of thanksgiving.</i><br>Shout aloud unto Jehovah, all the earth!
2  Serve Jehovah with joy: come before his presence with exultation.
3  Know that Jehovah is God: it is he that hath made us, and not we ourselves; [we are] his people, and the sheep of his pasture.
4  Enter into his gates with thanksgiving [and] into his courts with praise; give thanks unto him, bless his name:
5  For Jehovah is good; his loving-kindness [endureth] for ever; and his faithfulness from generation to generation.
{101}
1  <i>A Psalm of David.</i><br>I will sing of loving-kindness and judgment: unto thee, Jehovah, will I sing psalms.
2  I will behave myself wisely in a perfect way. When wilt thou come unto me? I will walk within my house in the integrity of my heart.
3  I will set no thing of Belial before mine eyes: I hate the work of them that turn aside; it shall not cleave to me.
4  A perverse heart shall depart from me; I will not know evil.
5  Whoso secretly slandereth his neighbour, him will I destroy; him that hath a high look and a proud heart will I not suffer.
6  Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the land, that they may dwell with me; he that walketh in a perfect way, he shall serve me.
7  He that practiseth deceit shall not dwell within my house; he that speaketh falsehoods shall not subsist in my sight.
8  Every morning will I destroy all the wicked of the land: to cut off all workers of iniquity from the city of Jehovah.
{102}
1  <i>A Prayer of the afflicted, when he is overwhelmed, and poureth out his complaint before Jehovah.</i><br>Jehovah, hear my prayer, and let my cry come unto thee.
2  Hide not thy face from me: in the day of my trouble, incline thine ear unto me; in the day I call, answer me speedily.
3  For my days are consumed like smoke, and my bones are burned as a firebrand.
4  My heart is smitten and withered like grass; yea, I have forgotten to eat my bread.
5  By reason of the voice of my groaning, my bones cleave to my flesh.
6  I am become like the pelican of the wilderness, I am as an owl in desolate places;
7  I watch, and am like a sparrow alone upon the housetop.
8  Mine enemies reproach me all the day; they that are mad against me swear by me.
9  For I have eaten ashes like bread, and mingled my drink with weeping,
10  Because of thine indignation and thy wrath; for thou hast lifted me up, and cast me down.
11  My days are like a lengthened-out shadow, and I, I am withered like grass.
12  But thou, Jehovah, abidest for ever, and thy memorial from generation to generation.
13  *Thou* wilt rise up, thou wilt have mercy upon Zion: for it is the time to be gracious to her, for the set time is come.
14  For thy servants take pleasure in her stones, and favour her dust.
15  And the nations shall fear the name of Jehovah, and all the kings of the earth thy glory.
16  When Jehovah shall build up Zion, he will appear in his glory.
17  He will regard the prayer of the destitute one, and not despise their prayer.
18  This shall be written for the generation to come; and a people that shall be created shall praise Jah:
19  For he hath looked down from the height of his sanctuary; from the heavens hath Jehovah beheld the earth,
20  To hear the groaning of the prisoner, to loose those that are appointed to die;
21  That the name of Jehovah may be declared in Zion, and his praise in Jerusalem,
22  When the peoples shall be gathered together, and the kingdoms, to serve Jehovah.
23  He weakened my strength in the way, he shortened my days.
24  I said, My +God, take me not away in the midst of my days! ...Thy years are from generation to generation.
25  Of old hast thou founded the earth, and the heavens are the work of thy hands:
26  *They* shall perish, but *thou* continuest; and all of them shall grow old as a garment: as a vesture shalt thou change them, and they shall be changed.
27  But thou art the Same, and thy years shall have no end.
28  The children of thy servants shall abide, and their seed shall be established before thee.
{103}
1  <i>[A Psalm] of David.</i><br>Bless Jehovah, O my soul; and all that is within me, [bless] his holy name!
2  Bless Jehovah, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits:
3  Who forgiveth all thine iniquities, who healeth all thy diseases;
4  Who redeemeth thy life from the pit, who crowneth thee with loving-kindness and tender mercies;
5  Who satisfieth thine old age with good [things]; thy youth is renewed like the eagle's.
6  Jehovah executeth righteousness and justice for all that are oppressed.
7  He made known his ways unto Moses, his acts unto the children of Israel.
8  Jehovah is merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in loving-kindness.
9  He will not always chide, neither will he keep [his anger] for ever.
10  He hath not dealt with us according to our sins, nor rewarded us according to our iniquities.
11  For as the heavens are high above the earth, so great is his loving-kindness toward them that fear him.
12  As far as the east is from the west, so far hath he removed our transgressions from us.
13  As a father pitieth [his] children, so Jehovah pitieth them that fear him.
14  For himself knoweth our frame; he remembereth that we are dust.
15  As for man, his days are as grass; as a flower of the field, so he flourisheth:
16  For the wind passeth over it, and it is gone, and the place thereof knoweth it no more.
17  But the loving-kindness of Jehovah is from everlasting and to everlasting, upon them that fear him, and his righteousness unto children's children,
18  To such as keep his covenant and to those that remember his precepts to do them.
19  Jehovah hath established his throne in the heavens, and his kingdom ruleth over all.
20  Bless Jehovah, ye his angels, mighty in strength, that execute his word, hearkening unto the voice of his word.
21  Bless Jehovah, all ye his hosts; ye ministers of his that do his will.
22  Bless Jehovah, all his works, in all places of his dominion. Bless Jehovah, O my soul!
{104}
1  Bless Jehovah, O my soul! Jehovah my God, thou art very great; thou art clothed with majesty and splendour;
2  Covering thyself with light as with a garment, stretching out the heavens like a tent-curtain; -- 
3  Who layeth the beams of his upper chambers in the waters, who maketh clouds his chariot, who walketh upon the wings of the wind;
4  Who maketh his angels spirits; his ministers a flame of fire.
5  He laid the earth upon its foundations: it shall not be removed for ever.
6  Thou hadst covered it with the deep, as with a vesture; the waters stood above the mountains:
7  At thy rebuke they fled, at the voice of thy thunder they hasted away; -- 
8  The mountains rose, the valleys sank, unto the place which thou hadst founded for them; -- 
9  Thou hast set a bound which they may not pass over, that they turn not again to cover the earth.
10  He sendeth the springs into the valleys: they run among the mountains;
11  They give drink to every beast of the field; the wild asses quench their thirst.
12  The birds of heaven dwell by them; they give forth their voice from among the branches.
13  He watereth the mountains from his upper-chambers: the earth is satisfied with the fruit of thy works.
14  He maketh the grass to grow for the cattle, and herb for the service of man; bringing forth bread out of the earth,
15  And wine which gladdeneth the heart of man; making [his] face shine with oil; and with bread he strengtheneth man's heart.
16  The trees of Jehovah are satisfied, the cedars of Lebanon, which he hath planted,
17  Where the birds make their nests; [as for] the stork, the fir trees are her house.
18  The high mountains are for the wild goats; the cliffs, a refuge for the rock-badgers.
19  He made the moon for seasons: the sun knoweth its going down.
20  Thou makest darkness, and it is night, wherein all the beasts of the forest creep forth:
21  The young lions roar after the prey, and to seek their food from +God.
22  The sun ariseth, they retreat, and lay them down in their dens.
23  Man goeth forth unto his work, and to his labour until the evening.
24  How manifold are thy works, O Jehovah! in wisdom hast thou made them all: the earth is full of thy riches.
25  Yonder is the great and wide sea: therein are moving things innumerable, living creatures small and great.
26  There go the ships; [there] that leviathan, which thou hast formed to play therein.
27  These all look unto thee, that thou mayest give their food in its season:
28  That thou givest unto them, they gather; thou openest thy hand, they are filled with good.
29  Thou hidest thy face, they are troubled; thou takest away their breath, they expire and return to their dust.
30  Thou sendest forth thy spirit, they are created, and thou renewest the face of the earth.
31  The glory of Jehovah will endure for ever; Jehovah will rejoice in his works.
32  He looketh on the earth, and it trembleth; he toucheth the mountains, and they smoke.
33  I will sing unto Jehovah as long as I live; I will sing psalms to my God while I have my being.
34  My meditation shall be pleasant unto him; I will rejoice in Jehovah.
35  Sinners shall be consumed out of the earth, and the wicked shall be no more. Bless Jehovah, O my soul. Hallelujah!
{105}
1  Give ye thanks unto Jehovah, call upon his name; make known his acts among the peoples.
2  Sing unto him, sing psalms unto him; meditate upon all his wondrous works.
3  Glory ye in his holy name: let the heart of them rejoice that seek Jehovah.
4  Seek Jehovah and his strength, seek his face continually;
5  Remember his wondrous works which he hath done, his miracles and the judgments of his mouth:
6  Ye seed of Abraham his servant, ye sons of Jacob, his chosen ones.
7  He, Jehovah, is our God; his judgments are in all the earth.
8  He is ever mindful of his covenant, -- the word which he commanded to a thousand generations, -- 
9  Which he made with Abraham, and of his oath unto Isaac;
10  And he confirmed it unto Jacob for a statute, unto Israel for an everlasting covenant,
11  Saying, Unto thee will I give the land of Canaan, the lot of your inheritance;
12  When they were a few men in number, of small account, and strangers in it.
13  And they went from nation to nation, from one kingdom to another people.
14  He suffered no man to oppress them, and reproved kings for their sakes,
15  [Saying,] Touch not mine anointed ones, and do my prophets no harm.
16  And he called for a famine upon the land; he broke the whole staff of bread.
17  He sent a man before them: Joseph was sold for a bondman.
18  They afflicted his feet with fetters; his soul came into irons;
19  Until the time when what he said came about: the word of Jehovah tried him.
20  The king sent and loosed him -- the ruler of peoples -- and let him go free.
21  He made him lord of his house, and ruler over all his possessions:
22  To bind his princes at his pleasure, and teach his elders wisdom.
23  And Israel came into Egypt, and Jacob sojourned in the land of Ham.
24  And he made his people exceeding fruitful, and made them mightier than their oppressors.
25  He turned their heart to hate his people, to deal subtilly with his servants.
26  He sent Moses his servant, [and] Aaron whom he had chosen:
27  They set his signs among them, and miracles in the land of Ham.
28  He sent darkness, and made it dark; and they rebelled not against his word.
29  He turned their waters into blood, and caused their fish to die.
30  Their land swarmed with frogs, -- in the chambers of their kings.
31  He spoke, and there came dog-flies, [and] gnats in all their borders.
32  He gave them hail for rain, [and] flaming fire in their land;
33  And he smote their vines and their fig-trees, and broke the trees of their borders.
34  He spoke, and the locust came, and the cankerworm, even without number;
35  And they devoured every herb in their land, and ate up the fruit of their ground.
36  And he smote every firstborn in their land, the firstfruits of all their vigour.
37  And he brought them forth with silver and gold; and there was not one feeble among their tribes.
38  Egypt rejoiced at their departure; for the fear of them had fallen upon them.
39  He spread a cloud for a covering, and fire to give light in the night.
40  They asked, and he brought quails, and satisfied them with the bread of heaven.
41  He opened the rock, and waters gushed forth; they ran in the dry places [like] a river.
42  For he remembered his holy word, [and] Abraham his servant;
43  And he brought forth his people with gladness, his chosen with rejoicing;
44  And he gave them the lands of the nations, and they took possession of the labour of the peoples:
45  That they might keep his statutes, and observe his laws. Hallelujah!
{106}
1  Hallelujah! Give ye thanks unto Jehovah; for he is good; for his loving-kindness [endureth] for ever.
2  Who can utter the mighty acts of Jehovah? [who] can shew forth all his praise?
3  Blessed are they that keep justice, [and] he that doeth righteousness at all times.
4  Remember me, O Jehovah, with [thy] favour toward thy people; visit me with thy salvation:
5  That I may see the prosperity of thy chosen ones, that I may rejoice in the joy of thy nation, that I may glory with thine inheritance.
6  We have sinned with our fathers, we have committed iniquity, we have done wickedly.
7  Our fathers in Egypt considered not thy wondrous works; they remembered not the multitude of thy loving-kindnesses; but they rebelled at the sea, at the Red Sea.
8  Yet he saved them for his name's sake, that he might make known his might.
9  And he rebuked the Red Sea, and it dried up; and he led them through the deeps as through a wilderness.
10  And he saved them from the hand of him that hated [them], and redeemed them from the hand of the enemy.
11  And the waters covered their oppressors: there was not one of them left.
12  Then believed they his words; they sang his praise.
13  They soon forgot his works; they waited not for his counsel:
14  And they lusted exceedingly in the wilderness, and tempted +God in the desert.
15  Then he gave them their request, but sent leanness into their soul.
16  And they envied Moses in the camp, [and] Aaron, the saint of Jehovah.
17  The earth opened and swallowed up Dathan, and covered the company of Abiram;
18  And fire was kindled in their company; a flame burned up the wicked.
19  They made a calf in Horeb, and did homage to a molten image;
20  And they changed their glory into the similitude of an ox that eateth grass.
21  They forgot +God their Saviour, who had done great things in Egypt,
22  Wondrous works in the land of Ham, terrible things by the Red Sea.
23  And he said that he would destroy them, had not Moses, his chosen, stood before him in the breach, to turn away his fury, lest he should destroy [them].
24  And they despised the pleasant land; they believed not his word,
25  But murmured in their tents: they hearkened not unto the voice of Jehovah.
26  And he lifted up his hand to them, that he would make them fall in the wilderness;
27  And that he would make their seed fall among the nations, and disperse them through the countries.
28  And they joined themselves unto Baal-Peor, and ate the sacrifices of the dead;
29  And they provoked [him] to anger with their doings; and a plague broke out among them.
30  Then stood up Phinehas and executed judgment, and the plague was stayed;
31  And that was reckoned unto him for righteousness, from generation to generation, for evermore.
32  And they moved him to wrath at the waters of Meribah, and it went ill with Moses on their account;
33  For they provoked his spirit, so that he spoke unadvisedly with his lips.
34  They did not destroy the peoples, as Jehovah commanded them;
35  But they mingled with the nations, and learned their works;
36  And they served their idols; and they were a snare unto them:
37  And they sacrificed their sons and their daughters unto demons,
38  And shed innocent blood, the blood of their sons and of their daughters, whom they sacrificed unto the idols of Canaan; and the land was polluted with blood.
39  And they were defiled with their works, and went a-whoring in their doings.
40  Then was the anger of Jehovah kindled against his people, and he abhorred his inheritance;
41  And he gave them into the hand of the nations; and they that hated them ruled over them:
42  And their enemies oppressed them, and they were brought into subjection under their hand.
43  Often did he deliver them; but as for them they provoked [him] by their counsel, and they were brought low by their iniquity.
44  But he regarded their distress, when he heard their cry;
45  And he remembered for them his covenant, and repented according to the multitude of his loving-kindnesses;
46  And he caused them to find compassion of all those that had carried them captives.
47  Save us, Jehovah our God, and gather us from among the nations, to give thanks unto thy holy name, [and] to triumph in thy praise.
48  Blessed be Jehovah the God of Israel, from eternity and to eternity! And let all the people say, Amen! Hallelujah!
{107}
1  Give ye thanks unto Jehovah; for he is good; for his loving-kindness [endureth] for ever.
2  Let the redeemed of Jehovah say so, whom he hath redeemed from the hand of the oppressor,
3  And gathered out of the countries, from the east and from the west, from the north and from the sea.
4  They wandered in the wilderness in a desert way, they found no city of habitation;
5  Hungry and thirsty, their soul fainted in them:
6  Then they cried unto Jehovah in their trouble, [and] he delivered them out of their distresses,
7  And he led them forth by a right way, that they might go to a city of habitation.
8  Let them give thanks unto Jehovah for his loving-kindness, and for his wondrous works to the children of men;
9  For he hath satisfied the longing soul and filled the hungry soul with good.
10  Such as inhabit darkness and the shadow of death, bound in affliction and iron,
11  Because they had rebelled against the words of +God, and had despised the counsel of the Most High; ...
12  And he bowed down their heart with labour; they stumbled, and there was none to help:
13  Then they cried unto Jehovah in their trouble, [and] he saved them out of their distresses;
14  He brought them out of darkness and the shadow of death, and broke their bands in sunder.
15  Let them give thanks unto Jehovah for his loving-kindness, and for his wondrous works to the children of men;
16  For he hath broken the gates of bronze, and cut asunder the bars of iron.
17  Fools, because of their way of transgression, and because of their iniquities, are afflicted;
18  Their soul abhorreth all manner of food, and they draw near unto the gates of death:
19  Then they cry unto Jehovah in their trouble, [and] he saveth them out of their distresses;
20  He sendeth his word, and healeth them, and delivereth them from their destructions.
21  Let them give thanks unto Jehovah for his loving-kindness, and for his wondrous works to the children of men,
22  And let them offer the sacrifices of thanksgiving, and declare his works in joyful song.
23  They that go down to the sea in ships, that do business in great waters,
24  These see the works of Jehovah, and his wonders in the deep.
25  For he speaketh, and raiseth the stormy wind, which lifteth up the waves thereof:
26  They mount up to the heavens, they go down to the depths; their soul is melted because of trouble;
27  They reel to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man, and they are at their wits' end:
28  Then they cry unto Jehovah in their trouble, and he bringeth them out of their distresses;
29  He maketh the storm a calm, and the waves thereof are still:
30  And they rejoice because they are quiet; and he bringeth them unto their desired haven.
31  Let them give thanks unto Jehovah for his loving-kindness, and for his wondrous works to the children of men;
32  Let them exalt him also in the congregation of the people, and praise him in the session of the elders.
33  He maketh rivers into a wilderness, and water-springs into dry ground;
34  A fruitful land into a plain of salt, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein.
35  He maketh the wilderness into a pool of water, and the dry land into water-springs;
36  And there he maketh the hungry to dwell, and they establish a city of habitation;
37  And sow fields, and plant vineyards, which yield fruits of increase;
38  And he blesseth them, so that they are multiplied greatly; and he suffereth not their cattle to decrease.
39  And they are diminished and brought low, through oppression, adversity, and sorrow:
40  He poureth contempt upon nobles, and causeth them to wander in a pathless waste;
41  But he secureth the needy one on high from affliction, and maketh [him] families like flocks.
42  The upright shall see it, and rejoice; and all unrighteousness shall stop its mouth.
43  Whoso is wise, let him observe these things, and let them understand the loving-kindnesses of Jehovah.
{108}
1  <i>A Song, a Psalm of David.</i><br>My heart is fixed, O God: I will sing, yea, I will sing psalms, even [with] my glory.
2  Awake, lute and harp: I will wake the dawn.
3  I will give thee thanks among the peoples, O Jehovah; of thee will I sing psalms among the nations:
4  For thy loving-kindness is great above the heavens, and thy truth is unto the clouds.
5  Be thou exalted above the heavens, O God, and thy glory above all the earth.
6  That thy beloved ones may be delivered: save with thy right hand, and answer me.
7  God hath spoken in his holiness: I will exult, I will divide Shechem, and mete out the valley of Succoth.
8  Gilead is mine, Manasseh is mine, and Ephraim is the strength of my head; Judah is my law-giver;
9  Moab is my wash-pot; upon Edom will I cast my sandal; over Philistia will I shout aloud.
10  Who will bring me into the strong city? who will lead me unto Edom?
11  [Wilt] not [thou], O God, who didst cast us off? and didst not go forth, O God, with our armies?
12  Give us help from trouble; for vain is man's deliverance.
13  Through God we shall do valiantly; and he it is that will tread down our adversaries.
{109}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. Of David. A Psalm.</i><br>O God of my praise, be not silent:
2  For the mouth of the wicked [man] and the mouth of deceit are opened against me: they have spoken against me with a lying tongue,
3  And with words of hatred have they encompassed me; and they fight against me without a cause.
4  For my love they are mine adversaries; but I [give myself unto] prayer.
5  And they have rewarded me evil for good, and hatred for my love.
6  Set a wicked [man] over him, and let [the] adversary stand at his right hand;
7  When he shall be judged, let him go out guilty, and let his prayer become sin;
8  Let his days be few, let another take his office;
9  Let his sons be fatherless, and his wife a widow;
10  Let his sons be vagabonds and beg, and let them seek [their bread] far from their desolate places;
11  Let the usurer cast the net over all that he hath, and let strangers despoil his labour;
12  Let there be none to extend kindness unto him, neither let there be any to favour his fatherless children;
13  Let his posterity be cut off; in the generation following let their name be blotted out:
14  Let the iniquity of his fathers be remembered with Jehovah, and let not the sin of his mother be blotted out;
15  Let them be before Jehovah continually, that he may cut off the memory of them from the earth:
16  Because he remembered not to shew kindness, but persecuted the afflicted and needy man, and the broken in heart, to slay him.
17  And he loved cursing; so let it come unto him. And he delighted not in blessing; and let it be far from him.
18  And he clothed himself with cursing like his vestment; so let it come into his bowels like water, and like oil into his bones;
19  Let it be unto him as a garment with which he covereth himself, and for a girdle wherewith he is constantly girded.
20  Let this be the reward of mine adversaries from Jehovah, and of them that speak evil against my soul.
21  But do *thou* for me, Jehovah, Lord, for thy name's sake; because thy loving-kindness is good, deliver me:
22  For I am afflicted and needy, and my heart is wounded within me.
23  I am gone like a shadow when it lengtheneth; I am tossed about like the locust;
24  My knees are failing through fasting, and my flesh hath lost its fatness;
25  And I am become a reproach unto them; [when] they look upon me they shake their heads.
26  Help me, Jehovah my God; save me according to thy loving-kindness:
27  That they may know that this is thy hand; that *thou*, Jehovah, hast done it.
28  Let *them* curse, but bless *thou*; when they rise up, let them be ashamed, and let thy servant rejoice.
29  Let mine adversaries be clothed with confusion, and let them cover themselves with their shame as with a mantle.
30  I will greatly celebrate Jehovah with my mouth; yea, I will praise him among the multitude.
31  For he standeth at the right hand of the needy, to save him from those that judge his soul.
{110}
1  <i>Psalm of David.</i><br>Jehovah said unto my Lord, Sit at my right hand, until I put thine enemies [as] footstool of thy feet.
2  Jehovah shall send the sceptre of thy might out of Zion: rule in the midst of thine enemies.
3  Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power, in holy splendour: from the womb of the morning [shall come] to thee the dew of thy youth.
4  Jehovah hath sworn, and will not repent, Thou art priest for ever after the order of Melchisedek.
5  The Lord at thy right hand will smite through kings in the day of his anger.
6  He shall judge among the nations; he shall fill [all places] with dead bodies; he shall smite through the head over a great country.
7  He shall drink of the brook in the way; therefore shall he lift up the head.
{111}
1  Hallelujah! I will celebrate Jehovah with [my] whole heart, in the council of the upright, and in the assembly.
2  Great are the works of Jehovah; sought out of all that delight in them.
3  His work is majesty and splendour, and his righteousness abideth for ever.
4  He hath made his wonders to be remembered: Jehovah is gracious and merciful.
5  He hath given meat unto them that fear him; he is ever mindful of his covenant.
6  He hath shewn his people the power of his works, to give them the heritage of the nations.
7  The works of his hands are truth and judgment; all his precepts are faithful:
8  Maintained for ever and ever, done in truth and uprightness.
9  He sent deliverance unto his people; he hath commanded his covenant for ever: holy and terrible is his name.
10  The fear of Jehovah is the beginning of wisdom; a good understanding have all they that do [his precepts]: his praise abideth for ever.
{112}
1  Hallelujah! Blessed is the man that feareth Jehovah, that delighteth greatly in his commandments.
2  His seed shall be mighty in the land; the generation of the upright shall be blessed.
3  Wealth and riches [shall be] in his house; and his righteousness abideth for ever.
4  Unto the upright there ariseth light in the darkness; he is gracious, and merciful, and righteous.
5  It is well with the man that is gracious and lendeth; he will sustain his cause in judgment.
6  For he shall not be moved for ever: the righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance.
7  He shall not be afraid of evil tidings; his heart is fixed confiding in Jehovah;
8  His heart is maintained, he is not afraid, until he see [his desire] upon his oppressors.
9  He scattereth abroad, he giveth to the needy; his righteousness abideth for ever: his horn shall be exalted with honour.
10  The wicked [man] shall see [it] and be vexed; he shall gnash with his teeth, and melt away: the desire of the wicked shall perish.
{113}
1  Hallelujah! Praise, ye servants of Jehovah, praise the name of Jehovah.
2  Blessed be the name of Jehovah, from this time forth and for evermore!
3  From the rising of the sun unto the going down of the same, let Jehovah's name be praised.
4  Jehovah is high above all nations, his glory above the heavens.
5  Who is like unto Jehovah our God, who hath placed his dwelling on high;
6  Who humbleth himself to look on the heavens and on the earth?
7  He raiseth up the poor out of the dust; from the dung-hill he lifteth up the needy,
8  To set [him] among nobles, among the nobles of his people.
9  He maketh the barren woman to keep house, [as] a joyful mother of sons. Hallelujah!
{114}
1  When Israel went out of Egypt, the house of Jacob from a people of strange language,
2  Judah was his sanctuary, Israel his dominion.
3  The sea saw it and fled, the Jordan turned back;
4  The mountains skipped like rams, the hills like lambs.
5  What ailed thee, thou sea, that thou fleddest? thou Jordan, that thou turnedst back?
6  Ye mountains, that ye skipped like rams? ye hills, like lambs?
7  Tremble, thou earth, at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the +God of Jacob,
8  Who turned the rock into a pool of water, the flint into a fountain of waters.
{115}
1  Not unto us, O Jehovah, not unto us, but unto thy name give glory, for thy loving-kindness and for thy truth's sake.
2  Wherefore should the nations say, Where then is their God?
3  But our God is in the heavens: he hath done whatsoever he pleased.
4  Their idols are silver and gold, the work of men's hands:
5  They have a mouth, and they speak not; eyes have they, and they see not;
6  They have ears, and they hear not; a nose have they, and they smell not;
7  They have hands, and they handle not; feet have they, and they walk not; they give no sound through their throat.
8  They that make them are like unto them, -- every one that confideth in them.
9  O Israel, confide thou in Jehovah: he is their help and their shield.
10  House of Aaron, confide in Jehovah: he is their help and their shield.
11  Ye that fear Jehovah, confide in Jehovah: he is their help and their shield.
12  Jehovah hath been mindful of us: he will bless, he will bless the house of Israel; he will bless the house of Aaron;
13  He will bless them that fear Jehovah, both the small and the great.
14  Jehovah will add unto you more, unto you and unto your children.
15  Ye are blessed of Jehovah, who made the heavens and the earth.
16  The heavens are the heavens of Jehovah, but the earth hath he given to the children of men.
17  The dead praise not Jah, neither any that go down into silence;
18  But *we* will bless Jah from this time forth and for evermore. Hallelujah!
{116}
1  I love Jehovah, for he hath heard my voice [and] my supplications;
2  For he hath inclined his ear unto me, and I will call upon him during [all] my days.
3  The bands of death encompassed me, and the anguish of Sheol took hold of me; I found trouble and sorrow:
4  Then called I upon the name of Jehovah: I beseech thee, Jehovah, deliver my soul.
5  Gracious is Jehovah and righteous; and our God is merciful.
6  Jehovah keepeth the simple: I was brought low, and he saved me.
7  Return unto thy rest, O my soul; for Jehovah hath dealt bountifully with thee.
8  For thou hast delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, my feet from falling.
9  I will walk before Jehovah in the land of the living.
10  I believed, therefore have I spoken. As for me, I was greatly afflicted.
11  I said in my haste, All men are liars.
12  What shall I render unto Jehovah, [for] all his benefits toward me?
13  I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of Jehovah.
14  I will perform my vows unto Jehovah, yea, before all his people.
15  Precious in the sight of Jehovah is the death of his saints.
16  Yea, Jehovah! for I am thy servant; I am thy servant, the son of thy handmaid: thou hast loosed my bonds.
17  I will offer to thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving, and will call upon the name of Jehovah.
18  I will perform my vows unto Jehovah, yea, before all his people,
19  In the courts of Jehovah's house, in the midst of thee, O Jerusalem. Hallelujah!
{117}
1  Praise Jehovah, all ye nations; laud him, all ye peoples;
2  For his loving-kindness is great toward us, and the truth of Jehovah [endureth] for ever. Hallelujah!
{118}
1  Give ye thanks unto Jehovah; for he is good; for his loving-kindness [endureth] for ever.
2  Oh let Israel say, that his loving-kindness [endureth] for ever.
3  Oh let the house of Aaron say, that his loving-kindness [endureth] for ever.
4  Oh let them that fear Jehovah say, that his loving-kindness [endureth] for ever.
5  I called upon Jah in distress; Jah answered me [and set me] in a large place.
6  Jehovah is for me, I will not fear; what can man do unto me?
7  Jehovah is for me among them that help me; and I shall see [my desire] upon them that hate me.
8  It is better to trust in Jehovah than to put confidence in man;
9  It is better to trust in Jehovah than to put confidence in nobles.
10  All nations encompassed me; but in the name of Jehovah have I destroyed them.
11  They encompassed me, yea, encompassed me; but in the name of Jehovah have I destroyed them.
12  They encompassed me like bees; they are quenched as the fire of thorns: for in the name of Jehovah have I destroyed them.
13  Thou hast thrust hard at me that I might fall; but Jehovah helped me.
14  My strength and song is Jah, and he is become my salvation.
15  The voice of triumph and salvation is in the tents of the righteous: the right hand of Jehovah doeth valiantly;
16  The right hand of Jehovah is exalted, the right hand of Jehovah doeth valiantly.
17  I shall not die, but live, and declare the works of Jah.
18  Jah hath chastened me sore; but he hath not given me over unto death.
19  Open to me the gates of righteousness: I will enter into them; Jah will I praise.
20  This is the gate of Jehovah: the righteous shall enter therein.
21  I will give thee thanks, for thou hast answered me, and art become my salvation.
22  [The] stone which the builders rejected hath become the head of the corner:
23  This is of Jehovah; it is wonderful in our eyes.
24  This is the day that Jehovah hath made; we will rejoice and be glad in it.
25  Oh save, Jehovah, I beseech thee; Jehovah, I beseech thee, oh send prosperity!
26  Blessed be he that cometh in the name of Jehovah. We have blessed you out of the house of Jehovah.
27  Jehovah is +God, and he hath given us light: bind the sacrifice with cords, -- up to the horns of the altar.
28  Thou art my +God, and I will give thee thanks; my God, I will exalt thee.
29  Give ye thanks unto Jehovah; for he is good; for his loving-kindness [endureth] for ever.
{119}
1  ALEPH. Blessed are the perfect in the way, who walk in the law of Jehovah.
2  Blessed are they that observe his testimonies, that seek him with the whole heart;
3  Who also do no unrighteousness: they walk in his ways.
4  Thou hast enjoined thy precepts, to be kept diligently.
5  Oh that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes!
6  Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect unto all thy commandments.
7  I will give thee thanks with uprightness of heart, when I shall have learned thy righteous judgments.
8  I will keep thy statutes: forsake me not utterly.
9  BETH. Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his path? by taking heed according to thy word.
10  With my whole heart have I sought thee: let me not wander from thy commandments.
11  Thy +word have I hid in my heart, that I might not sin against thee.
12  Blessed art thou, Jehovah! teach me thy statutes.
13  With my lips have I declared all the judgments of thy mouth.
14  I have rejoiced in the way of thy testimonies, as [much as] in all wealth.
15  I will meditate upon thy precepts, and have respect unto thy paths.
16  I delight myself in thy statutes; I will not forget thy word.
17  GIMEL. Deal bountifully with thy servant [and] I shall live; and I will keep thy word.
18  Open mine eyes, and I shall behold wondrous things out of thy law.
19  I am a stranger in the land; hide not thy commandments from me.
20  My soul breaketh for longing after thy judgments at all times.
21  Thou hast rebuked the proud [that are] cursed, who wander from thy commandments.
22  Roll off from me reproach and contempt; for I observe thy testimonies.
23  Princes also did sit [and] talk together against me: thy servant doth meditate in thy statutes.
24  Thy testimonies also are my delight [and] my counsellors.
25  DALETH. My soul cleaveth unto the dust: quicken me according to thy word.
26  I have declared my ways, and thou hast answered me: teach me thy statutes.
27  Make me to understand the way of thy precepts, and I will meditate upon thy wondrous works.
28  My soul melteth for sadness: strengthen me according to thy word.
29  Remove from me the way of falsehood, and graciously grant me thy law.
30  I have chosen the way of faithfulness; thy judgments have I set [before me].
31  I cleave unto thy testimonies; Jehovah, let me not be ashamed.
32  I will run the way of thy commandments when thou shalt enlarge my heart.
33  HE. Teach me, O Jehovah, the way of thy statutes, and I will observe it [unto] the end.
34  Give me understanding, and I will observe thy law; and I will keep it with [my] whole heart.
35  Make me to walk in the path of thy commandments; for therein do I delight.
36  Incline my heart unto thy testimonies, and not to gain.
37  Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity; quicken me in thy way.
38  Establish thy +word unto thy servant, who is [devoted] to thy fear.
39  Turn away my reproach which I fear; for thy judgments are good.
40  Behold, I have longed after thy precepts: quicken me in thy righteousness.
41  VAU. And let thy loving-kindness come unto me, O Jehovah, -- thy salvation according to thy +word.
42  So shall I have wherewith to answer him that reproacheth me; for I confide in thy word.
43  And take not the word of truth utterly out of my mouth; because I have hoped in thy judgments.
44  Then will I keep thy law continually, for ever and ever;
45  And I will walk at liberty, for I have sought thy precepts;
46  And I will speak of thy testimonies before kings, and will not be ashamed;
47  And I will delight myself in thy commandments, which I have loved;
48  And I will lift up my hands unto thy commandments, which I have loved, and I will meditate in thy statutes.
49  ZAIN. Remember the word for thy servant, upon which thou hast caused me to hope.
50  This is my comfort in mine affliction; for thy +word hath quickened me.
51  The proud have derided me beyond measure: I have not declined from thy law.
52  I remembered thy judgments of old, O Jehovah, and have comforted myself.
53  Burning indignation hath taken hold upon me because of the wicked who forsake thy law.
54  Thy statutes have been my songs in the house of my pilgrimage.
55  I have remembered thy name, O Jehovah, in the night, and have kept thy law.
56  This I have had, because I have observed thy precepts.
57  CHETH. My portion, O Jehovah, I have said, is to keep thy words.
58  I have sought thy favour with [my] whole heart: be gracious unto me according to thy +word.
59  I have thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies.
60  I have made haste, and not delayed, to keep thy commandments.
61  The bands of the wicked have wrapped me round: I have not forgotten thy law.
62  At midnight I rise up to give thanks unto thee, because of thy righteous judgments.
63  I am the companion of all that fear thee, and of them that keep thy precepts.
64  The earth, O Jehovah, is full of thy loving-kindness: teach me thy statutes.
65  TETH. Thou hast dealt well with thy servant, O Jehovah, according to thy word.
66  Teach me good discernment and knowledge; for I have believed in thy commandments.
67  Before I was afflicted I went astray, but now I keep thy +word.
68  Thou art good, and doest good; teach me thy statutes.
69  The proud have forged falsehood against me: I will observe thy precepts with [my] whole heart.
70  Their heart is as fat as grease: as for me, I delight in thy law.
71  It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes.
72  The law of thy mouth is better unto me than thousands of gold and silver.
73  YOD. Thy hands have made me and fashioned me: give me understanding, and I will learn thy commandments.
74  They that fear thee will see me, and rejoice; because I have hoped in thy word.
75  I know, Jehovah, that thy Judgments are righteousness, and that in faithfulness thou hast afflicted me.
76  Oh let thy loving-kindness be for my comfort, according to thy +word unto thy servant.
77  Let thy tender mercies come unto me, that I may live; for thy law is my delight.
78  Let the proud be ashamed; for they have acted perversely towards me with falsehood: as for me, I meditate in thy precepts.
79  Let those that fear thee turn unto me, and those that know thy testimonies.
80  Let my heart be perfect in thy statutes, that I be not ashamed.
81  CAPH. My soul fainteth for thy salvation; I hope in thy word.
82  Mine eyes fail for thy +word, saying, When wilt thou comfort me?
83  For I am become like a bottle in the smoke; I do not forget thy statutes.
84  How many shall be the days of thy servant? when wilt thou execute judgment on them that persecute me?
85  The proud have digged pits for me, which is not according to thy law.
86  All thy commandments are faithfulness. They persecute me wrongfully: help thou me.
87  They had almost consumed me upon the earth; but as for me, I forsook not thy precepts.
88  Quicken me according to thy loving-kindness, and I will keep the testimony of thy mouth.
89  LAMED. For ever, O Jehovah, thy word is settled in the heavens.
90  Thy faithfulness is from generation to generation: thou hast established the earth, and it standeth.
91  By thine ordinances they stand this day; for all things are thy servants.
92  Unless thy law had been my delight, I should then have perished in mine affliction.
93  I will never forget thy precepts; for by them thou hast quickened me.
94  I am thine, save me; for I have sought thy precepts.
95  The wicked have awaited me to destroy me; [but] I attend unto thy testimonies.
96  I have seen an end of all perfection: thy commandment is exceeding broad.
97  MEM. Oh how I love thy law! it is my meditation all the day.
98  Thy commandments make me wiser than mine enemies; for they are ever with me.
99  I have more understanding than all my teachers; for thy testimonies are my meditation.
100  I understand more than the aged, because I have observed thy precepts.
101  I have refrained my feet from every evil path, that I might keep thy word.
102  I have not departed from thy judgments; for it is thou that hast taught me.
103  How sweet are thy +words unto my taste! more than honey to my mouth!
104  From thy precepts I get understanding; therefore I hate every false path.
105  NUN. Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path.
106  I have sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous judgments.
107  I am afflicted very much; O Jehovah, quicken me according to thy word.
108  Accept, I beseech thee, Jehovah, the voluntary-offerings of my mouth, and teach me thy judgments.
109  My life is continually in my hand; but I do not forget thy law.
110  The wicked have laid a snare for me; but I have not wandered from thy precepts.
111  Thy testimonies have I taken as a heritage for ever; for they are the rejoicing of my heart.
112  I have inclined my heart to perform thy statutes for ever, unto the end.
113  SAMECH. The double-minded have I hated; but thy law do I love.
114  Thou art my hiding-place and my shield: I hope in thy word.
115  Depart from me, ye evil-doers; and I will observe the commandments of my God.
116  Uphold me according to thy +word, that I may live; and let me not be ashamed of my hope.
117  Hold thou me up, and I shall be safe; and I will have respect unto thy statutes continually.
118  Thou hast set at nought all them that wander from thy statutes; for their deceit is falsehood.
119  Thou puttest away all the wicked of the earth [like] dross; therefore I love thy testimonies.
120  My flesh shuddereth for fear of thee; and I am afraid of thy judgments.
121  AIN. I have done judgment and justice: leave me not to mine oppressors.
122  Be surety for thy servant for good; let not the proud oppress me.
123  Mine eyes fail for thy salvation, and for the +word of thy righteousness.
124  Deal with thy servant according to thy loving-kindness, and teach me thy statutes.
125  I am thy servant; give me understanding that I may know thy testimonies.
126  It is time for Jehovah to work: they have made void thy law.
127  Therefore I love thy commandments above gold, yea, above fine gold.
128  Therefore I regard all [thy] precepts concerning all things to be right: I hate every false path.
129  PE. Thy testimonies are wonderful; therefore doth my soul observe them.
130  The entrance of thy words giveth light, giving understanding unto the simple.
131  I opened my mouth wide and panted; for I longed for thy commandments.
132  Turn unto me, and be gracious unto me, as thou art wont to do unto those that love thy name.
133  Establish my steps in thy +word; and let not any iniquity have dominion over me.
134  Deliver me from the oppression of man; and I will keep thy precepts.
135  Make thy face to shine upon thy servant, and teach me thy statutes.
136  Mine eyes run down with streams of water, because they keep not thy law.
137  TZADE. Righteous art thou, Jehovah, and upright are thy judgments.
138  Thou hast commanded thy testimonies in righteousness and exceeding faithfulness.
139  My zeal destroyeth me, because mine oppressors have forgotten thy words.
140  Thy +word is exceeding pure, and thy servant loveth it.
141  I am little and despised: thy precepts have I not forgotten.
142  Thy righteousness is an everlasting righteousness, and thy law is truth.
143  Trouble and anguish have taken hold upon me: thy commandments are my delights.
144  The righteousness of thy testimonies is for ever: give me understanding, and I shall live.
145  KOPH. I have called with [my] whole heart; answer me, O Jehovah: I will observe thy statutes.
146  I call upon thee; save me, and I will keep thy testimonies.
147  I anticipate the morning-dawn and I cry: I hope in thy word.
148  Mine eyes anticipate the night-watches, that I may meditate in thy +word.
149  Hear my voice according to thy loving-kindness: O Jehovah, quicken me according to thy judgment.
150  They have drawn nigh that follow after mischief: they are far from thy law.
151  Thou, Jehovah, art near, and all thy commandments are truth.
152  From thy testimonies, I have known of old that thou hast founded them for ever.
153  RESH. See mine affliction, and deliver me; for I have not forgotten thy law.
154  Plead my cause, and redeem me: quicken me according to thy +word.
155  Salvation is far from the wicked; for they seek not thy statutes.
156  Many are thy tender mercies, O Jehovah; quicken me according to thy judgments.
157  Many are my persecutors and mine oppressors; I have not declined from thy testimonies.
158  I beheld them that deal treacherously, and was grieved; because they kept not thy +word.
159  See how I have loved thy precepts: quicken me, O Jehovah, according to thy loving-kindness.
160  The sum of thy word is truth, and every righteous judgment of thine is for ever.
161  SHIN. Princes have persecuted me without a cause; but my heart standeth in awe of thy word.
162  I have joy in thy +word, as one that findeth great spoil.
163  I hate and abhor falsehood; thy law do I love.
164  Seven times a day do I praise thee because of thy righteous judgments.
165  Great peace have they that love thy law, and nothing doth stumble them.
166  I have hoped for thy salvation, O Jehovah, and have done thy commandments.
167  My soul hath kept thy testimonies, and I love them exceedingly.
168  I have kept thy precepts and thy testimonies; for all my ways are before thee.
169  TAU. Let my cry come near before thee, Jehovah: give me understanding according to thy word.
170  Let my supplication come before thee: deliver me according to thy +word.
171  My lips shall pour forth praise when thou hast taught me thy statutes.
172  My tongue shall speak aloud of thy +word; for all thy commandments are righteousness.
173  Let thy hand be for my help; for I have chosen thy precepts.
174  I have longed for thy salvation, O Jehovah, and thy law is my delight.
175  Let my soul live, and it shall praise thee; and let thy judgments help me.
176  I have gone astray like a lost sheep: seek thy servant; for I have not forgotten thy commandments.
{120}
1  <i>A Song of degrees.</i><br>In my trouble I called unto Jehovah, and he answered me.
2  Jehovah, deliver my soul from the lying lip, from the deceitful tongue.
3  What shall be given unto thee, what shall be added unto thee, thou deceitful tongue?
4  Sharp arrows of a mighty one, with burning coals of broom-wood.
5  Woe is me, that I sojourn in Meshech, that I dwell among the tents of Kedar!
6  My soul hath long dwelt with them that hate peace.
7  I [am for] peace; but when I speak, *they* [are] for war.
{121}
1  <i>A Song of degrees.</i><br>I lift up mine eyes unto the mountains: whence shall my help come?
2  My help [cometh] from Jehovah, who made the heavens and the earth.
3  He will not suffer thy foot to be moved; he that keepeth thee will not slumber.
4  Behold, he that keepeth Israel will neither slumber nor sleep.
5  Jehovah is thy keeper, Jehovah is thy shade upon thy right hand;
6  The sun shall not smite thee by day, nor the moon by night.
7  Jehovah will keep thee from all evil; he will keep thy soul.
8  Jehovah will keep thy going out and thy coming in, from henceforth and for evermore.
{122}
1  <i>A Song of degrees. Of David.</i><br>I rejoiced when they said unto me, Let us go into the house of Jehovah.
2  Our feet shall stand within thy gates, O Jerusalem.
3  Jerusalem, which art built as a city that is compact together,
4  Whither the tribes go up, the tribes of Jah, a testimony to Israel, to give thanks unto the name of Jehovah.
5  For there are set thrones for judgment, the thrones of the house of David.
6  Pray for the peace of Jerusalem: they shall prosper that love thee.
7  Peace be within thy bulwarks, prosperity within thy palaces.
8  For my brethren and companions' sakes I will say, Peace be within thee!
9  Because of the house of Jehovah our God I will seek thy good.
{123}
1  <i>A Song of degrees.</i><br>Unto thee do I lift up mine eyes, O thou that dwellest in the heavens.
2  Behold, as the eyes of servants [look] unto the hand of their masters, as the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her mistress, so our eyes [are directed] to Jehovah our God, until he be gracious unto us.
3  Be gracious unto us, O Jehovah, be gracious unto us; for we are exceedingly filled with contempt.
4  Our soul is exceedingly filled with the scorning of those that are at ease, with the contempt of the proud.
{124}
1  <i>A Song of degrees. Of David.</i><br>If it had not been Jehovah who was for us -- oh let Israel say -- 
2  If it had not been Jehovah who was for us, when men rose up against us,
3  Then they had swallowed us up alive, when their anger was kindled against us;
4  Then the waters had overwhelmed us, a torrent had gone over our soul;
5  Then the proud waters had gone over our soul.
6  Blessed be Jehovah, who gave us not up a prey to their teeth!
7  Our soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the fowlers: the snare is broken, and we have escaped.
8  Our help is in the name of Jehovah, the maker of heavens and earth.
{125}
1  <i>A Song of degrees.</i><br>They that confide in Jehovah are as mount Zion, which cannot be moved; it abideth for ever.
2  Jerusalem! -- mountains are round about her, and Jehovah is round about his people, from henceforth and for evermore.
3  For the sceptre of wickedness shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous; lest the righteous put forth their hands unto iniquity.
4  Do good, O Jehovah, unto the good, and to them that are upright in their hearts.
5  But as for such as turn aside unto their crooked ways, Jehovah will lead them forth with the workers of iniquity. Peace be upon Israel!
{126}
1  <i>A Song of degrees.</i><br>When Jehovah turned the captivity of Zion, we were like them that dream.
2  Then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with rejoicing: then said they among the nations, Jehovah hath done great things for them.
3  Jehovah hath done great things for us; [and] we are joyful.
4  Turn our captivity, O Jehovah, as the streams in the south.
5  They that sow in tears shall reap with rejoicing:
6  He goeth forth and weepeth, bearing seed for scattering; he cometh again with rejoicing, bearing his sheaves.
{127}
1  <i>A Song of degrees. Of Solomon.</i><br>Unless Jehovah build the house, in vain do its builders labour in it; unless Jehovah keep the city, the keeper watcheth in vain:
2  It is vain for you to rise up early, to lie down late, to eat the bread of sorrows: so to his beloved one he giveth sleep.
3  Lo, children are an inheritance from Jehovah, [and] the fruit of the womb a reward.
4  As arrows in the hand of a mighty man, so are the children of youth.
5  Happy is the man that hath filled his quiver with them. They shall not be ashamed when they speak with enemies in the gate.
{128}
1  <i>A Song of degrees.</i><br>Blessed is every one that feareth Jehovah, that walketh in his ways.
2  For thou shalt eat the labour of thy hands; happy shalt thou be, and it shall be well with thee.
3  Thy wife shall be as a fruitful vine in the inner part of thy house; thy children like olive-plants round about thy table.
4  Behold, thus shall the man be blessed that feareth Jehovah.
5  Jehovah will bless thee out of Zion; and mayest thou see the good of Jerusalem all the days of thy life,
6  And see thy children's children. Peace be upon Israel!
{129}
1  <i>A Song of degrees.</i><br>Many a time have they afflicted me from my youth -- oh let Israel say -- 
2  Many a time have they afflicted me from my youth; yet they have not prevailed against me.
3  The ploughers ploughed upon my back; they made long their furrows.
4  Jehovah is righteous: he hath cut asunder the cords of the wicked.
5  Let them be ashamed and turned backward, all that hate Zion;
6  Let them be as the grass upon the house-tops, which withereth before it is plucked up,
7  Wherewith the mower filleth not his hand, nor he that bindeth sheaves his bosom;
8  Neither do the passers-by say, The blessing of Jehovah be upon you; we bless you in the name of Jehovah!
{130}
1  <i>A Song of degrees.</i><br>Out of the depths do I call upon thee, Jehovah.
2  Lord, hear my voice; let thine ears be attentive to the voice of my supplication.
3  If thou, Jah, shouldest mark iniquities, Lord, who shall stand?
4  But there is forgiveness with thee, that thou mayest be feared.
5  I wait for Jehovah; my soul doth wait, and in his word do I hope.
6  My soul [waiteth] for the Lord more than the watchers [wait] for the morning, [more than] the watchers for the morning.
7  Let Israel hope in Jehovah, because with Jehovah there is loving-kindness, and with him is plenteous redemption;
8  And he will redeem Israel from all his iniquities.
{131}
1  <i>A Song of degrees. Of David.</i><br>Jehovah, my heart is not haughty, nor mine eyes lofty; neither do I exercise myself in great matters, and in things too wonderful for me.
2  Surely I have restrained and composed my soul, like a weaned child with its mother: my soul within me is as a weaned child.
3  Let Israel hope in Jehovah, from henceforth and for evermore.
{132}
1  <i>A Song of degrees.</i><br>Jehovah, remember for David all his affliction;
2  How he swore unto Jehovah, vowed unto the Mighty One of Jacob:
3  I will not come into the tent of my house, I will not go up to the couch of my bed;
4  I will not give sleep to mine eyes, slumber to mine eyelids,
5  Until I find out a place for Jehovah, habitations for the Mighty One of Jacob. ...
6  Behold, we heard of it at Ephratah, we found it in the fields of the wood.
7  Let us go into his habitations, let us worship at his footstool.
8  Arise, Jehovah, into thy rest, thou and the ark of thy strength.
9  Let thy priests be clothed with righteousness, and let thy saints shout for joy.
10  For thy servant David's sake, turn not away the face of thine anointed.
11  Jehovah hath sworn [in] truth unto David; he will not turn from it: Of the fruit of thy body will I set upon thy throne;
12  If thy children keep my covenant, and my testimonies which I will teach them, their children also for evermore shall sit upon thy throne.
13  For Jehovah hath chosen Zion; he hath desired it for his dwelling:
14  This is my rest for ever; here will I dwell, for I have desired it.
15  I will abundantly bless her provision; I will satisfy her needy ones with bread;
16  And I will clothe her priests with salvation, and her saints shall shout aloud for joy.
17  There will I cause the horn of David to bud forth; I have ordained a lamp for mine anointed.
18  His enemies will I clothe with shame; but upon himself shall his crown flourish.
{133}
1  <i>A Song of degrees. Of David.</i><br>Behold, how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity!
2  Like the precious oil upon the head, that ran down upon the beard, upon Aaron's beard, that ran down to the hem of his garments;
3  As the dew of Hermon that descendeth on the mountains of Zion; for there hath Jehovah commanded the blessing, life for evermore.
{134}
1  <i>A Song of degrees.</i><br>Behold, bless Jehovah, all ye servants of Jehovah, who by night stand in the house of Jehovah.
2  Lift up your hands in the sanctuary, and bless Jehovah.
3  Jehovah, the maker of heavens and earth, bless thee out of Zion.
{135}
1  Hallelujah! Praise the name of Jehovah; praise, ye servants of Jehovah,
2  Ye that stand in the house of Jehovah, in the courts of the house of our God.
3  Praise ye Jah; for Jehovah is good: sing psalms unto his name; for it is pleasant.
4  For Jah hath chosen Jacob unto himself, Israel for his own possession.
5  For *I* know that Jehovah is great, and our Lord is above all gods.
6  Whatsoever Jehovah pleased, he hath done in the heavens and on the earth, in the seas and all deeps;
7  Who causeth the vapours to ascend from the ends of the earth; who maketh lightnings for the rain; who bringeth the wind out of his treasuries:
8  Who smote the firstborn of Egypt, both of man and beast;
9  Who sent signs and miracles into the midst of thee, O Egypt, upon Pharaoh and upon all his servants;
10  Who smote great nations, and slew mighty kings,
11  Sihon king of the Amorites, and Og king of Bashan, and all the kingdoms of Canaan;
12  And gave their land for an inheritance, an inheritance unto Israel his people.
13  Thy name, O Jehovah, is for ever; thy memorial, O Jehovah, from generation to generation.
14  For Jehovah will judge his people, and will repent in favour of his servants.
15  The idols of the nations are silver and gold, the work of men's hands:
16  They have a mouth, and they speak not; eyes have they, and they see not;
17  They have ears, and they hear not; neither is there any breath in their mouth.
18  They that make them are like unto them, -- every one that confideth in them.
19  House of Israel, bless ye Jehovah; house of Aaron, bless ye Jehovah;
20  House of Levi, bless ye Jehovah; ye that fear Jehovah, bless Jehovah.
21  Blessed be Jehovah out of Zion, who dwelleth at Jerusalem! Hallelujah!
{136}
1  Give ye thanks unto Jehovah, for he is good; for his loving-kindness [endureth] for ever:
2  Give thanks unto the God of gods, for his loving-kindness [endureth] for ever;
3  Give thanks unto the Lord of lords, for his loving-kindness [endureth] for ever.
4  To him who alone doeth great wonders, for his loving-kindness [endureth] for ever:
5  To him that by understanding made the heavens, for his loving-kindness [endureth] for ever;
6  To him that stretched out the earth above the waters, for his loving-kindness [endureth] for ever;
7  To him that made great lights, for his loving-kindness [endureth] for ever;
8  The sun for rule over the day, for his loving-kindness [endureth] for ever,
9  The moon and stars for rule over the night, for his loving-kindness [endureth] for ever:
10  To him that smote Egypt in their firstborn, for his loving-kindness [endureth] for ever,
11  And brought out Israel from among them, for his loving-kindness [endureth] for ever,
12  With a powerful hand and with a stretched-out arm, for his loving-kindness [endureth] for ever;
13  To him that divided the Red sea into parts, for his loving-kindness [endureth] for ever,
14  And made Israel to pass through the midst of it, for his loving-kindness [endureth] for ever,
15  And overturned Pharaoh and his host in the Red sea, for his loving-kindness [endureth] for ever;
16  To him that led his people through the wilderness, for his loving-kindness [endureth] for ever;
17  To him that smote great kings, for his loving-kindness [endureth] for ever,
18  And slew famous kings, for his loving-kindness [endureth] for ever;
19  Sihon king of the Amorites, for his loving-kindness [endureth] for ever,
20  And Og king of Bashan, for his loving-kindness [endureth] for ever;
21  And gave their land for an inheritance, for his loving-kindness [endureth] for ever,
22  An inheritance unto Israel his servant, for his loving-kindness [endureth] for ever:
23  Who hath remembered us in our low estate, for his loving-kindness [endureth] for ever;
24  And hath delivered us from our oppressors, for his loving-kindness [endureth] for ever:
25  Who giveth food to all flesh, for his loving-kindness [endureth] for ever.
26  Give ye thanks unto the +God of the heavens; for his loving-kindness [endureth] for ever.
{137}
1  By the rivers of Babylon, there we sat down; yea, we wept when we remembered Zion.
2  We hanged our harps upon the willows in the midst thereof.
3  For there they that carried us away captive required of us a song; and they that made us wail [required] mirth, [saying,] Sing us [one] of the songs of Zion.
4  How should we sing a song of Jehovah's upon a foreign soil?
5  If I forget thee, Jerusalem, let my right hand forget [its skill];
6  If I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to my palate: if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy.
7  Remember, O Jehovah, against the sons of Edom, the day of Jerusalem; who said, Lay [it] bare, Lay [it] bare, down to its foundation!
8  Daughter of Babylon, who art to be laid waste, happy he that rendereth unto thee that which thou hast meted out to us.
9  Happy he that taketh and dasheth thy little ones against the rock.
{138}
1  <i>[A Psalm] of David.</i><br>I will give thee thanks with my whole heart; before the gods will I sing psalms of thee.
2  I will bow down toward the temple of thy holiness, and celebrate thy name for thy loving-kindness and for thy truth; for thou hast magnified thy word above all thy name.
3  In the day when I called thou answeredst me; thou didst encourage me with strength in my soul.
4  All the kings of the earth shall celebrate thee, Jehovah, when they have heard the words of thy mouth;
5  And they shall sing in the ways of Jehovah, for great is the glory of Jehovah.
6  For Jehovah is high; but he looketh upon the lowly, and the proud he knoweth afar off.
7  Though I walk in the midst of trouble, thou wilt revive me: thou wilt stretch forth thy hand against the anger of mine enemies, and thy right hand shall save me.
8  Jehovah will perfect what concerneth me: thy loving-kindness, O Jehovah, [endureth] for ever; forsake not the works of thine own hands.
{139}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. A Psalm of David.</i><br>Jehovah, thou hast searched me, and known [me].
2  *Thou* knowest my down-sitting and mine uprising, thou understandest my thought afar off;
3  Thou searchest out my path and my lying down, and art acquainted with all my ways;
4  For there is not yet a word on my tongue, [but] lo, O Jehovah, thou knowest it altogether.
5  Thou hast beset me behind and before, and laid thy hand upon me.
6  O knowledge too wonderful for me! it is high, I cannot [attain] unto it.
7  Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? and whither flee from thy presence?
8  If I ascend up into the heavens thou art there; or if I make my bed in Sheol, behold, thou [art there];
9  [If] I take the wings of the dawn [and] dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea,
10  Even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me.
11  And if I say, Surely darkness shall cover me, and the light about me be night;
12  Even darkness hideth not from thee, and the night shineth as the day: the darkness is as the light.
13  For thou hast possessed my reins; thou didst cover me in my mother's womb.
14  I will praise thee, for I am fearfully, wonderfully made. Marvellous are thy works; and [that] my soul knoweth right well.
15  My bones were not hidden from thee when I was made in secret, curiously wrought in the lower parts of the earth.
16  Thine eyes did see my unformed substance, and in thy book all [my members] were written; [during many] days were they fashioned, when [as yet] there was none of them.
17  But how precious are thy thoughts unto me, O +God! how great is the sum of them!
18  [If] I would count them, they are more in number than the sand. When I awake, I am still with thee.
19  Oh that thou wouldest slay the wicked, O +God! And ye men of blood, depart from me.
20  For they speak of thee wickedly, they take [thy name] in vain, thine enemies.
21  Do not I hate them, O Jehovah, that hate thee? and do not I loathe them that rise up against thee?
22  I hate them with perfect hatred; I account them mine enemies.
23  Search me, O +God, and know my heart; prove me, and know my thoughts;
24  And see if there be any grievous way in me; and lead me in the way everlasting.
{140}
1  <i>To the chief Musician. A Psalm of David.</i><br>Free me, O Jehovah, from the evil man; preserve me from the violent man:
2  Who devise mischiefs in [their] heart; every day are they banded together for war.
3  They sharpen their tongues like a serpent; adders' poison is under their lips. Selah.
4  Keep me, O Jehovah, from the hands of the wicked [man], preserve me from the violent man, who devise to overthrow my steps.
5  The proud have hidden a snare for me, and cords; they have spread a net by the way-side; they have set traps for me. Selah.
6  I have said unto Jehovah, Thou art my +God: give ear, O Jehovah, to the voice of my supplications.
7  Jehovah, the Lord, is the strength of my salvation: thou hast covered my head in the day of battle.
8  Grant not, O Jehovah, the desire of the wicked; further not his device: they would exalt themselves. Selah.
9  [As for] the head of those that encompass me, let the mischief of their own lips cover them.
10  Let burning coals fall on them; let them be cast into the fire; into deep waters, that they rise not up again.
11  Let not the man of [evil] tongue be established in the earth: evil shall hunt the man of violence to [his] ruin.
12  I know that Jehovah will maintain the cause of the afflicted one, the right of the needy.
13  Yea, the righteous shall give thanks unto thy name; the upright shall dwell in thy presence.
{141}
1  <i>A Psalm of David.</i><br>Jehovah, I have called upon thee: make haste unto me; give ear unto my voice, when I call unto thee.
2  Let my prayer be set forth before thee as incense, the lifting up of my hands as the evening oblation.
3  Set a watch, O Jehovah, before my mouth; keep the door of my lips.
4  Incline not my heart to any evil thing, to practise deeds of wickedness with men that are workers of iniquity; and let me not eat of their dainties.
5  Let the righteous smite me, it is kindness; and let him reprove me, it is an excellent oil which my head shall not refuse: for yet my prayer also is [for them] in their calamities.
6  When their judges are thrown down from the rocks, they shall hear my words, for they are sweet.
7  Our bones are scattered at the mouth of Sheol, as when one cutteth and cleaveth [wood] upon the earth.
8  For unto thee, Jehovah, Lord, are mine eyes; in thee do I trust: leave not my soul destitute.
9  Keep me from the snare which they have laid for me, and from the traps of the workers of iniquity.
10  Let the wicked fall into their own nets, whilst that *I* withal pass over.
{142}
1  <i>An instruction of David; when he was in the cave: a prayer.</i><br>I cry unto Jehovah with my voice: with my voice unto Jehovah do I make supplication.
2  I pour out my plaint before him; I shew before him my trouble.
3  When my spirit was overwhelmed within me, then *thou* knewest my path. In the way wherein I walked have they hidden a snare for me.
4  Look on the right hand and see; there is no man that knoweth me: refuge hath failed me; no man careth for my soul.
5  I cried unto thee, Jehovah; I said, Thou art my refuge, my portion in the land of the living.
6  Attend unto my cry, for I am brought very low; deliver me from my persecutors, for they are stronger than I.
7  Bring my soul out of prison, that I may celebrate thy name. The righteous shall surround me, because thou dealest bountifully with me.
{143}
1  <i>A Psalm of David.</i><br>Jehovah, hear my prayer; give ear to my supplications: in thy faithfulness answer me, in thy righteousness.
2  And enter not into judgment with thy servant; for in thy sight no man living shall be justified.
3  For the enemy persecuteth my soul: he hath crushed my life down to the earth; he hath made me to dwell in dark places, as those that have been long dead.
4  And my spirit is overwhelmed within me; my heart within me is desolate.
5  I remember the days of old: I meditate on all thy doing; I muse on the work of thy hands.
6  I stretch forth my hands unto thee: my soul, as a parched land, [thirsteth] after thee. Selah.
7  Answer me speedily, O Jehovah; my spirit faileth: hide not thy face from me, or I shall be like unto them that go down into the pit.
8  Cause me to hear thy loving-kindness in the morning, for in thee do I confide; make me to know the way wherein I should walk, for unto thee do I lift up my soul.
9  Deliver me, O Jehovah, from mine enemies: unto thee do I flee for refuge.
10  Teach me to do thy will; for thou art my God: let thy good Spirit lead me in a plain country.
11  Revive me, O Jehovah, for thy name's sake; in thy righteousness bring my soul out of trouble;
12  And in thy loving-kindness cut off mine enemies, and destroy all them that oppress my soul: for I am thy servant.
{144}
1  <i>[A Psalm] of David.</i><br>Blessed be Jehovah my rock, who teacheth my hands to war, my fingers to fight;
2  My mercy and my fortress, my high tower and my deliverer, my shield and he in whom I trust, who subdueth my people under me!
3  Jehovah, what is man, that thou takest knowledge of him, the son of man, that thou takest thought of him?
4  Man is like to vanity; his days are as a shadow that passeth away.
5  Jehovah, bow thy heavens, and come down; touch the mountains, that they smoke;
6  Cast forth lightnings, and scatter them; send forth thine arrows, and discomfit them:
7  Stretch out thy hands from above; rescue me, and deliver me out of great waters, from the hand of aliens,
8  Whose mouth speaketh vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of falsehood.
9  O God, I will sing a new song unto thee; with the ten-stringed lute will I sing psalms unto thee:
10  Who givest salvation unto kings; who rescuest David thy servant from the hurtful sword.
11  Rescue me, and deliver me from the hand of aliens, whose mouth speaketh vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of falsehood.
12  That our sons may be as plants grown up in their youth; our daughters as corner-columns, sculptured after the fashion of a palace:
13  Our granaries full, affording all manner of store; our sheep bringing forth thousands, ten thousands in our pastures;
14  Our kine laden [with young]; no breaking in and no going forth, and no outcry in our streets.
15  Blessed the people that is in such a case! Blessed the people whose God is Jehovah!
{145}
1  <i>A Psalm of praise. Of David.</i><br>I will extol thee, my God, O King, and I will bless thy name for ever and ever.
2  Every day will I bless thee, and I will praise thy name for ever and ever.
3  Great is Jehovah, and exceedingly to be praised; and his greatness is unsearchable.
4  One generation shall laud thy works to another, and shall declare thy mighty acts.
5  I will speak of the glorious splendour of thy majesty, and of thy wondrous works.
6  And they shall tell of the might of thy terrible acts; and thy great deeds will I declare.
7  They shall abundantly utter the memory of thy great goodness, and shall sing aloud of thy righteousness.
8  Jehovah is gracious and merciful; slow to anger, and of great loving-kindness.
9  Jehovah is good to all; and his tender mercies are over all his works.
10  All thy works shall praise thee, Jehovah, and thy saints shall bless thee.
11  They shall tell of the glory of thy kingdom, and speak of thy power;
12  To make known to the children of men his mighty acts, and the glorious splendour of his kingdom.
13  Thy kingdom is a kingdom of all ages, and thy dominion is throughout all generations.
14  Jehovah upholdeth all that fall, and raiseth up all that are bowed down.
15  The eyes of all wait upon thee; and thou givest them their food in its season.
16  Thou openest thy hand, and satisfiest the desire of every living thing.
17  Jehovah is righteous in all his ways, and kind in all his works.
18  Jehovah is nigh unto all that call upon him, unto all that call upon him in truth.
19  He fulfilleth the desire of them that fear him; he heareth their cry, and saveth them.
20  Jehovah keepeth all that love him, and all the wicked will he destroy.
21  My mouth shall speak the praise of Jehovah; and let all flesh bless his holy name for ever and ever.
{146}
1  Hallelujah! Praise Jehovah, O my soul.
2  As long as I live will I praise Jehovah; I will sing psalms unto my God while I have my being.
3  Put not confidence in nobles, in a son of man, in whom there is no salvation.
4  His breath goeth forth, he returneth to his earth; in that very day his purposes perish.
5  Blessed is he who hath the +God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in Jehovah his God,
6  Who made the heavens and the earth, the sea and all that is therein; who keepeth truth for ever;
7  Who executeth judgment for the oppressed, who giveth bread to the hungry. Jehovah looseth the prisoners;
8  Jehovah openeth [the eyes of] the blind; Jehovah raiseth up them that are bowed down; Jehovah loveth the righteous;
9  Jehovah preserveth the strangers; he lifteth up the fatherless and the widow; but the way of the wicked doth he subvert.
10  Jehovah will reign for ever, [even] thy God, O Zion, from generation to generation. Hallelujah!
{147}
1  Praise ye Jah! for it is good. Sing psalms of our God; for it is pleasant: praise is comely.
2  Jehovah doth build up Jerusalem: he gathereth the outcasts of Israel.
3  He healeth the broken in heart, and bindeth up their wounds.
4  He counteth the number of the stars; he giveth names to them all.
5  Great is our Lord, and of great power: his understanding is infinite.
6  Jehovah lifteth up the meek; he abaseth the wicked to the earth.
7  Sing unto Jehovah with thanksgiving; sing psalms upon the harp unto our God:
8  Who covereth the heavens with clouds, who prepareth rain for the earth, who maketh grass to grow upon the mountains;
9  Who giveth to the cattle their food, to the young ravens which cry.
10  He delighteth not in the strength of the horse, he taketh not pleasure in the legs of a man;
11  Jehovah taketh pleasure in those that fear him, in those that hope in his loving-kindness.
12  Laud Jehovah, O Jerusalem; praise thy God, O Zion.
13  For he hath strengthened the bars of thy gates; he hath blessed thy children within thee;
14  He maketh peace in thy borders; he satisfieth thee with the finest of the wheat.
15  He sendeth forth his oracles to the earth: his word runneth very swiftly.
16  He giveth snow like wool, scattereth the hoar frost like ashes;
17  He casteth forth his ice like morsels: who can stand before his cold?
18  He sendeth his word, and melteth them; he causeth his wind to blow -- the waters flow.
19  He sheweth his word unto Jacob, his statutes and his judgments unto Israel.
20  He hath not dealt thus with any nation; and as for [his] judgments, they have not known them. Hallelujah!
{148}
1  Hallelujah! Praise Jehovah from the heavens; praise him in the heights.
2  Praise ye him, all his angels; praise ye him, all his hosts.
3  Praise him, sun and moon; praise him, all ye stars of light.
4  Praise him, ye heavens of heavens, and ye waters that are above the heavens.
5  Let them praise the name of Jehovah, for he it is that commanded, and they were created:
6  And he established them for ever and ever; he made [for them] a statute which shall not pass.
7  Praise Jehovah from the earth, ye sea-monsters, and all deeps;
8  Fire and hail, snow and vapour, stormy wind fulfilling his word;
9  Mountains and all hills, fruit-trees and all cedars;
10  Beasts and all cattle, creeping things and winged fowl;
11  Kings of the earth and all peoples, princes and all judges of the earth;
12  Both young men and maidens, old men with youths, -- 
13  Let them praise the name of Jehovah: for his name alone is exalted; his majesty is above the earth and the heavens.
14  And he hath lifted up the horn of his people, the praise of all his saints, [even] of the children of Israel, a people near unto him. Hallelujah!
{149}
1  Hallelujah! Sing unto Jehovah a new song; [sing] his praise in the congregation of the godly.
2  Let Israel rejoice in his Maker; let the sons of Zion be joyful in their King.
3  Let them praise his name in the dance; let them sing psalms unto him with the tambour and harp.
4  For Jehovah taketh pleasure in his people; he beautifieth the meek with salvation.
5  Let the godly exult in glory; let them shout for joy upon their beds.
6  Let the high praises of +God be in their mouth, and a two-edged sword in their hand:
7  To execute vengeance against the nations, [and] punishment among the peoples;
8  To bind their kings with chains, and their nobles with fetters of iron;
9  To execute upon them the judgment written. This honour have all his saints. Hallelujah!
{150}
1  Hallelujah! Praise +God in his sanctuary; praise him in the firmament of his power.
2  Praise him in his mighty acts; praise him according to the abundance of his greatness.
3  Praise him with the sound of the trumpet; praise him with lute and harp;
4  Praise him with the tambour and dance; praise him with stringed instruments and the pipe;
5  Praise him with loud cymbals; praise him with high sounding cymbals.
6  Let everything that hath breath praise Jah. Hallelujah!
