{1}
1  Proverbs of Solomon, son of David, king of Israel:
2  to know wisdom and instruction; to discern the words of understanding;
3  to receive the instruction of wisdom, righteousness and judgment, and equity;
4  to give prudence to the simple, to the young man knowledge and discretion.
5  He that is wise will hear, and will increase learning; and the intelligent will gain wise counsels:
6  to understand a proverb and an allegory, the words of the wise and their enigmas.
7  The fear of Jehovah is the beginning of knowledge: fools despise wisdom and instruction.
8  Hear, my son, the instruction of thy father, and forsake not the teaching of thy mother;
9  for they shall be a garland of grace unto thy head, and chains about thy neck.
10  My son, if sinners entice thee, consent not.
11  If they say, Come with us, let us lay wait for blood, let us lurk secretly for the innocent without cause;
12  let us swallow them up alive as Sheol, and whole, as those that go down into the pit;
13  we shall find all precious substance, we shall fill our houses with spoil:
14  cast in thy lot among us; we will all have one purse:
15  -- my son, walk not in the way with them, keep back thy foot from their path;
16  for their feet run to evil, and they make haste to shed blood.
17  For in vain the net is spread in the sight of anything which hath wings.
18  And these lay wait for their own blood; they lurk secretly for their own lives.
19  So are the paths of every one that is greedy of gain: it taketh away the life of its possessors.
20  Wisdom crieth without; she raiseth her voice in the broadways;
21  she calleth in the chief [place] of concourse, in the entry of the gates; in the city she uttereth her words:
22  How long, simple ones, will ye love simpleness, and scorners take pleasure in their scorning, and the foolish hate knowledge?
23  Turn you at my reproof: behold, I will pour forth my spirit unto you, I will make known to you my words.
24  Because I have called, and ye refused; I have stretched out my hand, and no one regarded;
25  and ye have rejected all my counsel, and would none of my reproof:
26  I also will laugh in your calamity, I will mock when your fear cometh;
27  when your fear cometh as sudden destruction, and your calamity cometh as a whirlwind; when distress and anguish come upon you:
28  -- then will they call upon me, but I will not answer; they will seek me early, and shall not find me.
29  Because they hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of Jehovah;
30  they would none of my counsel, they despised all my reproof:
31  therefore shall they eat of the fruit of their way, and be filled with their own devices.
32  For the turning away of the simple shall slay them, and the prosperity of the foolish shall cause them to perish.
33  But whoso hearkeneth unto me shall dwell safely, and shall be at rest from fear of evil.
{2}
1  My son, if thou receivest my words, and layest up my commandments with thee,
2  so that thou incline thine ear unto wisdom [and] thou apply thy heart to understanding;
3  yea, if thou criest after discernment [and] liftest up thy voice to understanding;
4  if thou seekest her as silver and searchest for her as for hidden treasures:
5  then shalt thou understand the fear of Jehovah, and find the knowledge of God.
6  For Jehovah giveth wisdom; out of his mouth [come] knowledge and understanding.
7  He layeth up sound wisdom for the upright; [he] is a shield to them that walk in integrity;
8  guarding the paths of just judgment and keeping the way of his godly ones.
9  Then shalt thou understand righteousness and judgment and equity: every good path.
10  When wisdom entereth into thy heart and knowledge is pleasant unto thy soul,
11  discretion shall keep thee, understanding shall preserve thee:
12  To deliver thee from the way of evil, from the man that speaketh froward things;
13  [from those] who leave the paths of uprightness, to walk in the ways of darkness;
14  who rejoice to do evil, [and] delight in the frowardness of evil;
15  whose paths are crooked, and who are perverted in their course:
16  To deliver thee from the strange woman, from the stranger who flattereth with her words;
17  who forsaketh the guide of her youth, and forgetteth the covenant of her God;
18  -- for her house inclineth unto death, and her paths unto the dead;
19  none that go unto her return again, neither do they attain to the paths of life:
20  -- that thou mayest walk in the way of the good, and keep the paths of the righteous.
21  For the upright shall dwell in the land, and the perfect shall remain in it;
22  but the wicked shall be cut off from the land, and the unfaithful shall be plucked up out of it.
{3}
1  My son, forget not my teaching, and let thy heart observe my commandments;
2  for length of days, and years of life, and peace shall they add to thee.
3  Let not loving-kindness and truth forsake thee; bind them about thy neck, write them upon the tablet of thy heart:
4  and thou shalt find favour and good understanding in the sight of God and man.
5  Confide in Jehovah with all thy heart, and lean not unto thine own intelligence;
6  in all thy ways acknowledge him, and he will make plain thy paths.
7  Be not wise in thine own eyes; fear Jehovah, and depart from evil:
8  it shall be health for thy navel, and moisture for thy bones.
9  Honour Jehovah with thy substance, and with the first-fruits of all thine increase;
10  so shall thy barns be filled with plenty, and thy vats shall overflow with new wine.
11  My son, despise not the instruction of Jehovah, neither be weary of his chastisement;
12  for whom Jehovah loveth he chasteneth, even as a father the son in whom he delighteth.
13  Blessed is the man that findeth wisdom, and the man that getteth understanding.
14  For the gain thereof is better than the gain of silver, and her revenue than fine gold.
15  She is more precious than rubies; and all the things thou canst desire are not equal unto her.
16  Length of days is in her right hand; in her left hand riches and honour.
17  Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace.
18  She is a tree of life to them that lay hold upon her; and happy is he that retaineth her.
19  Jehovah by wisdom founded the earth; by understanding he established the heavens.
20  By his knowledge the deeps were broken up, and the skies drop down the dew.
21  My son, let them not depart from thine eyes; keep sound wisdom and discretion:
22  so shall they be life unto thy soul, and grace unto thy neck.
23  Then shalt thou walk in thy way securely, and thy foot shall not stumble;
24  when thou liest down, thou shalt not be afraid, but thou shalt lie down and thy sleep shall be sweet.
25  Be not afraid of sudden fear, neither of the destruction of the wicked, when it cometh;
26  for Jehovah shall be thy confidence, and he will keep thy foot from being taken.
27  Withhold not good from them to whom it is due, when it is in the power of thy hand to do it.
28  Say not unto thy neighbour, Go, and come again, and to-morrow I will give, when thou hast it by thee.
29  Devise not evil against thy neighbour, seeing he dwelleth securely by thee.
30  Strive not with a man without cause, if he have done thee no harm.
31  Envy not the man of violence, and choose none of his ways.
32  For the perverse is an abomination to Jehovah; but his secret is with the upright.
33  The curse of Jehovah is in the house of the wicked; but he blesseth the habitation of the righteous.
34  He indeed scorneth the scorners; but he giveth grace unto the lowly.
35  The wise shall inherit glory; but shame shall be the promotion of the foolish.
{4}
1  Hear, ye children, the instruction of a father, and attend to know intelligence;
2  for I give you good doctrine: forsake ye not my law.
3  For I was a son unto my father, tender and an only one in the sight of my mother.
4  And he taught me, and said unto me, Let thy heart retain my words; keep my commandments and live.
5  Get wisdom, get intelligence: forget [it] not; neither decline from the words of my mouth.
6  Forsake her not, and she shall keep thee; love her, and she shall preserve thee.
7  The beginning of wisdom [is], Get wisdom; and with all thy getting get intelligence.
8  Exalt her, and she shall promote thee; she shall bring thee to honour when thou dost embrace her.
9  She shall give to thy head a garland of grace; a crown of glory will she bestow upon thee.
10  Hear, my son, and receive my sayings, and the years of thy life shall be multiplied.
11  I will teach thee in the way of wisdom, I will lead thee in paths of uprightness.
12  When thou goest, thy steps shall not be straitened; and when thou runnest, thou shalt not stumble.
13  Take fast hold of instruction, let [her] not go: keep her, for she is thy life.
14  Enter not into the path of the wicked, and go not in the way of evil [men]:
15  avoid it, pass not by it; turn from it, and pass away.
16  For they sleep not except they have done mischief, and their sleep is taken away unless they have caused [some] to fall.
17  For they eat the bread of wickedness, and drink the wine of violence.
18  But the path of the righteous is as the shining light, going on and brightening until the day be fully come.
19  The way of the wicked is as darkness: they know not at what they stumble.
20  My son, attend to my words; incline thine ear unto my sayings.
21  Let them not depart from thine eyes; keep them in the midst of thy heart.
22  For they are life unto those that find them, and health to all their flesh.
23  Keep thy heart more than anything that is guarded; for out of it are the issues of life.
24  Put away from thee perverseness of mouth, and corrupt lips put far from thee.
25  Let thine eyes look right on, and let thine eyelids look straight before thee.
26  Ponder the path of thy feet, and let all thy ways be well-ordered.
27  Turn not to the right hand nor to the left; remove thy foot from evil.
{5}
1  My son, attend unto my wisdom, incline thine ear to my understanding;
2  that thou mayest keep reflection, and that thy lips may preserve knowledge.
3  For the lips of the strange woman drop honey, and her mouth is smoother than oil;
4  but her end is bitter as wormwood, sharp as a two-edged sword.
5  Her feet go down to death; her steps take hold on Sheol.
6  Lest she should ponder the path of life, her ways wander, she knoweth not [whither].
7  And now, children, hearken unto me, and depart not from the words of my mouth.
8  Remove thy way far from her, and come not nigh the door of her house:
9  lest thou give thine honour unto others, and thy years unto the cruel;
10  lest strangers be filled with thy wealth, and the fruits of thy toil [come] into the house of a stranger;
11  and thou mourn in thine end, when thy flesh and thy body are consumed;
12  and thou say, How have I hated instruction, and my heart despised reproof!
13  and I have not hearkened unto the voice of my teachers, nor inclined mine ear to those that instructed me;
14  I was well nigh in all evil in the midst of the congregation and assembly.
15  Drink waters out of thine own cistern, and running waters out of thine own well.
16  Thy fountains shall be poured forth, as water-brooks in the broadways.
17  Let them be only thine own, and not strangers' with thee.
18  Let thy fountain be blessed; and have joy of the wife of thy youth.
19  As a lovely hind and a graceful roe, let her breasts satisfy thee at all times: be thou ravished continually with her love.
20  And why shouldest thou, my son, be ravished with a strange woman, and embrace the bosom of a stranger?
21  For the ways of man are before the eyes of Jehovah, and he pondereth all his paths.
22  His own iniquities shall take the wicked, and he shall be holden with the cords of his sin.
23  He shall die for want of discipline; and in the greatness of his folly he shall go astray.
{6}
1  My son, if thou hast become surety for thy friend, if thou hast stricken thy hand for a stranger,
2  thou art snared with the words of thy mouth, thou art taken with the words of thy mouth.
3  Do this now, my son, and deliver thyself, since thou hast come into the hand of thy friend: go, humble thyself, and be urgent with thy friend.
4  Give not sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eyelids:
5  deliver thyself as a gazelle from the hand [of the hunter], and as a bird from the hand of the fowler.
6  Go to the ant, thou sluggard; consider her ways and be wise:
7  which having no chief, overseer, or ruler,
8  provideth her bread in the summer, [and] gathereth her food in the harvest.
9  How long, sluggard, wilt thou lie down? When wilt thou arise out of thy sleep?
10  A little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to rest!
11  So shall thy poverty come as a roving plunderer, and thy penury as an armed man.
12  A man of Belial, a wicked person, is he that goeth about with a perverse mouth;
13  he winketh with his eyes, he speaketh with his feet, he teacheth with his fingers;
14  deceits are in his heart; he deviseth mischief at all times, he soweth discords.
15  Therefore shall his calamity come suddenly: in a moment shall he be broken, and without remedy.
16  These six [things] doth Jehovah hate, yea, seven are an abomination unto him:
17  haughty eyes, a lying tongue, and hands that shed innocent blood;
18  a heart that deviseth wicked imaginations; feet that are swift in running to mischief;
19  a false witness that uttereth lies, and he that soweth discords among brethren.
20  My son, observe thy father's commandment, and forsake not the teaching of thy mother;
21  bind them continually upon thy heart, tie them about thy neck:
22  when thou walkest, it shall lead thee; when thou sleepest, it shall keep thee; and [when] thou awakest, it shall talk with thee.
23  For the commandment is a lamp, and the teaching a light, and reproofs of instruction are the way of life:
24  to keep thee from the evil woman, from the flattery of the tongue of a strange woman.
25  Lust not after her beauty in thy heart, neither let her take thee with her eyelids;
26  for by means of a whorish woman [a man is brought] to a loaf of bread, and another's wife doth hunt for the precious soul.
27  Can a man take fire in his bosom, and his garments not be burned?
28  Can one go upon hot coals, and his feet not be scorched?
29  So he that goeth in to his neighbour's wife: whosoever toucheth her shall not be innocent.
30  They do not despise a thief, if he steal to satisfy his soul when he is hungry:
31  and if he be found, he shall restore sevenfold; he shall give all the substance of his house.
32  Whoso committeth adultery with a woman is void of understanding: he that doeth it destroyeth his own soul.
33  A wound and contempt shall he get; and his reproach shall not be wiped away.
34  For jealousy is the rage of a man, and he will not spare in the day of vengeance;
35  he will not regard any ransom, neither will he rest content though thou multipliest [thy] gifts.
{7}
1  My son, keep my words, and lay up my commandments with thee.
2  Keep my commandments, and live; and my teaching, as the apple of thine eye.
3  Bind them upon thy fingers, write them upon the tablet of thy heart.
4  Say unto wisdom, Thou art my sister, and call intelligence [thy] kinswoman:
5  that they may keep thee from the strange woman, from the stranger who flattereth with her words.
6  For at the window of my house, I looked forth through my lattice,
7  and I beheld among the simple ones, I discerned among the sons, a young man void of understanding,
8  passing through the street near her corner; and he went the way to her house,
9  in the twilight, in the evening of the day, in the blackness of night and the darkness.
10  And behold, there met him a woman in the attire of a harlot, and subtle of heart.
11  She is clamorous and unmanageable; her feet abide not in her house:
12  now without, now in the broadways, -- and she lieth in wait at every corner.
13  And she caught him and kissed him, and with an impudent face said unto him,
14  I have peace-offerings with me; this day have I paid my vows:
15  therefore came I forth to meet thee, to seek earnestly thy face, and I have found thee.
16  I have decked my bed with tapestry coverlets of variegated linen from Egypt;
17  I have perfumed my couch with myrrh, aloes, and cinnamon.
18  Come, let us revel in love until the morning, let us delight ourselves with loves.
19  For the husband is not at home, he is gone a long journey;
20  he hath taken the money-bag with him, he will come home on the day of the full moon.
21  With her much enticement she beguiled him; with the smoothness of her lips she constrained him.
22  He went after her straightway, as an ox goeth to the slaughter, and as stocks [serve] for the correction of the fool;
23  till an arrow strike through his liver: as a bird hasteth to the snare, and knoweth not that it is for its life.
24  And now, ye sons, hearken unto me, and attend to the words of my mouth.
25  Let not thy heart decline to her ways, go not astray in her paths:
26  for she hath cast down many wounded, and all slain by her were strong.
27  Her house is the way to Sheol, going down to the chambers of death.
{8}
1  Doth not wisdom cry? and understanding give forth her voice?
2  On the top of high places by the way, at the cross-paths she taketh her stand.
3  Beside the gates, at the entry of the city, at the coming in at the doors, she crieth aloud.
4  Unto you, men, I call, and my voice is to the sons of man:
5  O ye simple, understand prudence; and ye foolish, understand sense.
6  Hear, for I will speak excellent things, and the opening of my lips shall be right things.
7  For my palate shall meditate truth, and wickedness is an abomination to my lips.
8  All the words of my mouth are in righteousness; there is nothing tortuous or perverse in them.
9  They are all plain to him that understandeth, and right to them that find knowledge.
10  Receive my instruction, and not silver; and knowledge rather than choice gold:
11  for wisdom is better than rubies, and all the things that may be desired are not equal to it.
12  I wisdom dwell [with] prudence, and find the knowledge [which cometh] of reflection.
13  The fear of Jehovah is to hate evil; pride, and arrogancy, and the evil way, and the froward mouth do I hate.
14  Counsel is mine, and sound wisdom: I am intelligence; I have strength.
15  By me kings reign, and rulers make just decrees;
16  by me princes rule, and nobles, all the judges of the earth.
17  I love those that love me; and they that seek me early shall find me.
18  Riches and honour are with me; durable wealth and righteousness.
19  My fruit is better than fine gold, yea, than pure gold; and my revenue than choice silver.
20  I walk in the path of righteousness, in the midst of the paths of judgment:
21  that I may cause those that love me to inherit substance; and I will fill their treasuries.
22  Jehovah possessed me in the beginning of his way, before his works of old.
23  I was set up from eternity, from the beginning, before the earth was.
24  When there were no depths, I was brought forth, when there were no fountains abounding with water.
25  Before the mountains were settled, before the hills was I brought forth;
26  while as yet he had not made the earth, nor the fields, nor the beginning of the dust of the world.
27  When he prepared the heavens I was there; when he ordained the circle upon the face of the deep;
28  when he established the skies above, when the fountains of the deep became strong;
29  when he imposed on the sea his decree that the waters should not pass his commandment, when he appointed the foundations of the earth:
30  then I was by him [his] nursling, and I was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him;
31  rejoicing in the habitable part of his earth, and my delights [were] with the sons of men.
32  And now, sons, hearken unto me, and blessed are they that keep my ways:
33  hear instruction and be wise, and refuse it not.
34  Blessed is the man that heareth me, watching daily at my gates, waiting at the posts of my doors.
35  For whoso findeth me findeth life, and obtaineth favour of Jehovah;
36  but he that sinneth against me doeth violence to his own soul: all they that hate me love death.
{9}
1  Wisdom hath built her house, she hath hewn out her seven pillars;
2  she hath slaughtered her cattle, she hath mingled her wine, she hath also prepared her table;
3  she hath sent forth her maidens: she crieth upon the summits of the high places of the city,
4  Whoso is simple, let him turn in hither. To him that is void of understanding, she saith,
5  Come, eat ye of my bread, and drink of the wine that I have mingled.
6  Forsake follies and live, and go in the way of intelligence.
7  He that instructeth a scorner getteth to himself shame; and he that reproveth a wicked [man] [getteth] to himself a blot.
8  Reprove not a scorner, lest he hate thee; reprove a wise [man], and he will love thee.
9  Impart to a wise [man], and he will become yet wiser; teach a righteous [man], and he will increase learning.
10  The fear of Jehovah is the beginning of wisdom; and the knowledge of the Holy is intelligence.
11  For by me thy days shall be multiplied, and years of life shall be added to thee.
12  If thou art wise, thou shalt be wise for thyself; and if thou scornest, thou alone shalt bear it.
13  The foolish woman is clamorous; she is stupid, and knoweth nothing.
14  And she sitteth at the entry of her house, on a seat in the high places of the city,
15  to call passers-by who go right on their ways:
16  Whoso is simple, let him turn in hither. And to him that is void of understanding she saith,
17  Stolen waters are sweet, and the bread of secrecy is pleasant.
18  But he knoweth not that the dead are there; [that] her guests are in the depths of Sheol.
{10}
1  The Proverbs of Solomon. A wise son maketh a glad father; but a foolish son is the grief of his mother.
2  Treasures of wickedness profit nothing; but righteousness delivereth from death.
3  Jehovah suffereth not the soul of the righteous [man] to famish; but he repelleth the craving of the wicked.
4  He cometh to want that dealeth with a slack hand; but the hand of the diligent maketh rich.
5  He that gathereth in summer is a wise son; he that sleepeth in harvest is a son that causeth shame.
6  Blessings are upon the head of a righteous [man]; but the mouth of the wicked covereth violence.
7  The memory of the righteous [man] shall be blessed; but the name of the wicked shall rot.
8  The wise in heart receiveth commandments; but a prating fool shall fall.
9  He that walketh in integrity walketh securely; but he that perverteth his ways shall be known.
10  He that winketh with the eye causeth grief, and a prating fool shall fall.
11  The mouth of a righteous [man] is a fountain of life; but the mouth of the wicked covereth violence.
12  Hatred stirreth up strifes; but love covereth all transgressions.
13  In the lips of an intelligent [man] wisdom is found; but a rod is for the back of him that is void of understanding.
14  The wise lay up knowledge; but the mouth of the fool is near destruction.
15  The rich man's wealth is his strong city; the destruction of the poor is their poverty.
16  The labour of a righteous [man] [tendeth] to life; the revenue of a wicked [man], to sin.
17  Keeping instruction is the path to life; but he that forsaketh reproof goeth astray.
18  He that covereth hatred hath lying lips, and he that sendeth forth a slander is a fool.
19  In the multitude of words there wanteth not transgression; but he that restraineth his lips doeth wisely.
20  The tongue of the righteous [man] is [as] choice silver; the heart of the wicked is little worth.
21  The lips of a righteous [man] feed many; but fools die for want of understanding.
22  The blessing of Jehovah, it maketh rich, and he addeth no sorrow to it.
23  It is as sport to a foolish [man] to do wickedness; but a man of understanding hath wisdom.
24  The fear of a wicked [man], it shall come upon him; but the desire of the righteous shall be granted.
25  As a whirlwind passeth, so is the wicked no [more]; but the righteous is an everlasting foundation.
26  As vinegar to the teeth, and as smoke to the eyes, so is the sluggard to them that send him.
27  The fear of Jehovah prolongeth days; but the years of the wicked shall be shortened.
28  The hope of the righteous is joy; but the expectation of the wicked shall perish.
29  The way of Jehovah is strength to the perfect [man], but destruction to the workers of iniquity.
30  The righteous [man] shall never be moved; but the wicked shall not inhabit the land.
31  The mouth of a righteous [man] putteth forth wisdom; but the froward tongue shall be cut out.
32  The lips of a righteous [man] know what is acceptable; but the mouth of the wicked is frowardness.
{11}
1  A false balance is an abomination to Jehovah; but a just weight is his delight.
2  [When] pride cometh, then cometh shame; but with the lowly is wisdom.
3  The integrity of the upright guideth them; but the crookedness of the unfaithful destroyeth them.
4  Wealth profiteth not in the day of wrath; but righteousness delivereth from death.
5  The righteousness of the perfect maketh plain his way; but the wicked falleth by his own wickedness.
6  The righteousness of the upright delivereth them; but the treacherous are taken in their own craving.
7  When a wicked man dieth, [his] expectation shall perish; and the hope of evil [men] perisheth.
8  The righteous is delivered out of trouble, and the wicked cometh in his stead.
9  With his mouth a hypocrite destroyeth his neighbour; but through knowledge are the righteous delivered.
10  When it goeth well with the righteous, the city rejoiceth; and when the wicked perish, there is shouting.
11  By the blessing of the upright the city is exalted; but it is overthrown by the mouth of the wicked.
12  He that despiseth his neighbour is void of heart; but a man of understanding holdeth his peace.
13  He that goeth about talebearing revealeth secrets; but he that is of a faithful spirit concealeth the matter.
14  Where no advice is, the people fall; but in the multitude of counsellors there is safety.
15  It goeth ill with him that is surety for another; but he that hateth suretyship is secure.
16  A gracious woman retaineth honour; and the violent retain riches.
17  The merciful man doeth good to his own soul; but the cruel troubleth his own flesh.
18  The wicked worketh a deceitful work; but he that soweth righteousness hath a sure reward.
19  As righteousness [tendeth] to life, so he that pursueth evil [doeth it] to his own death.
20  The perverse in heart are abomination to Jehovah; but they that are perfect in [their] way are his delight.
21  Hand for hand! an evil [man] shall not be held innocent; but the seed of the righteous shall be delivered.
22  A fair woman who is without discretion, is [as] a gold ring in a swine's snout.
23  The desire of the righteous is only good; the expectation of the wicked is wrath.
24  There is that scattereth, and yet increaseth; and there is that withholdeth more than is right, but [it tendeth] only to want.
25  The liberal soul shall be made fat, and he that watereth shall be watered also himself.
26  He that withholdeth corn, the people curse him; but blessing shall be upon the head of him that selleth it.
27  He that is earnest after good seeketh favour; but he that searcheth for mischief, it shall come upon him.
28  He that trusteth in his riches shall fall; but the righteous shall flourish as a leaf.
29  He that troubleth his own house shall inherit wind; and the fool shall be servant to the wise of heart.
30  The fruit of the righteous is a tree of life; and the wise winneth souls.
31  Behold, the righteous shall be requited on the earth: how much more the wicked and the sinner.
{12}
1  Whoso loveth discipline loveth knowledge, but he that hateth reproof is brutish.
2  A good [man] obtaineth favour of Jehovah; but a man of mischievous devices will he condemn.
3  A man shall not be established by wickedness; but the root of the righteous shall not be moved.
4  A woman of worth is a crown to her husband; but she that maketh ashamed is as rottenness in his bones.
5  The thoughts of the righteous are right; the counsels of the wicked are deceit.
6  The words of the wicked are a lying-in-wait for blood; but the mouth of the upright shall deliver them.
7  Overthrow the wicked, and they are no [more]; but the house of the righteous shall stand.
8  A man is commended according to his wisdom; but he that is of a perverted heart shall be despised.
9  Better is he that is lightly esteemed, and hath a servant, than he that honoureth himself, and lacketh bread.
10  A righteous man is concerned for the life of his beast; but the tender mercies of the wicked are cruel.
11  He that tilleth his land shall be satisfied with bread; but he that followeth the worthless is void of understanding.
12  The wicked desireth the net of evil [men]; but the root of the righteous yieldeth [fruit].
13  In the transgression of the lips is an evil snare; but a righteous [man] shall go forth out of trouble.
14  A man is satisfied with good by the fruit of his mouth; and the recompense of a man's hands shall be rendered unto him.
15  The way of a fool is right in his own eyes; but he that is wise hearkeneth unto counsel.
16  The vexation of the fool is presently known; but a prudent [man] covereth shame.
17  He that uttereth truth sheweth forth righteousness; but a false witness deceit.
18  There is that babbleth like the piercings of a sword; but the tongue of the wise is health.
19  The lip of truth shall be established for ever; but a lying tongue is but for a moment.
20  Deceit is in the heart of them that devise evil; but to the counsellors of peace is joy.
21  There shall no evil happen to a righteous [man]; but the wicked shall be filled with mischief.
22  Lying lips are an abomination to Jehovah; but they that deal truly are his delight.
23  A prudent man concealeth knowledge; but the heart of the foolish proclaimeth folly.
24  The hand of the diligent shall bear rule; but the slothful [hand] shall be under tribute.
25  Heaviness in the heart of man maketh it stoop; but a good word maketh it glad.
26  The righteous guideth his neighbour; but the way of the wicked misleadeth them.
27  The slothful roasteth not what he took in hunting; but man's precious substance is to the diligent.
28  In the path of righteousness is life, and in the pathway thereof there is no death.
{13}
1  A wise son [heareth] his father's instruction; but a scorner heareth not rebuke.
2  A man shall eat good by the fruit of his mouth; but the soul of the treacherous, violence.
3  He that guardeth his mouth keepeth his soul; destruction shall be to him that openeth wide his lips.
4  A sluggard's soul desireth and hath nothing; but the soul of the diligent shall be made fat.
5  A righteous [man] hateth lying; but the wicked maketh himself odious and cometh to shame.
6  Righteousness preserveth him that is perfect in the way; but wickedness overthroweth the sinner.
7  There is that feigneth himself rich, and hath nothing; there is that maketh himself poor, and hath great wealth.
8  The ransom of a man's life is his riches; but the indigent heareth not rebuke.
9  The light of the righteous rejoiceth; but the lamp of the wicked shall be put out.
10  By pride there only cometh contention; but with the well-advised is wisdom.
11  Wealth [gotten] by vanity diminisheth; but he that gathereth by manual-labour shall increase [it].
12  Hope deferred maketh the heart sick; but the desire [that] cometh to pass is a tree of life.
13  Whoso despiseth the word shall be held by it; but he that feareth the commandment shall be rewarded.
14  The teaching of the wise [man] is a fountain of life, to turn away from the snares of death.
15  Good understanding procureth favour; but the way of the treacherous is hard.
16  Every prudent [man] acteth with knowledge; but the foolish layeth open [his] folly.
17  A wicked messenger falleth into evil; but a faithful ambassador is health.
18  Poverty and shame shall be [to] him that refuseth instruction; but he that regardeth reproof shall be honoured.
19  The desire accomplished is sweet to the soul; but it is abomination to the foolish to depart from evil.
20  He that walketh with wise [men] becometh wise; but a companion of the foolish will be depraved.
21  Evil pursueth sinners; but to the righteous good shall be repaid.
22  A good man leaveth an inheritance to his children's children; but the wealth of the sinner is laid up for the righteous [man].
23  Much food is in the tillage of the poor; but there is that is lost for want of judgment.
24  He that spareth his rod hateth his son; but he that loveth him chasteneth him betimes.
25  The righteous eateth to the satisfying of his soul; but the belly of the wicked shall want.
{14}
1  The wisdom of women buildeth their house; but folly plucketh it down with her hands.
2  He that walketh in his uprightness feareth Jehovah; but he that is perverted in his ways despiseth him.
3  In the fool's mouth is a rod of pride; but the lips of the wise shall preserve them.
4  Where no oxen are, the crib is clean; but much increase is by the strength of the ox.
5  A faithful witness will not lie; but a false witness uttereth lies.
6  A scorner seeketh wisdom, and there is none [for him]; but knowledge is easy unto the intelligent.
7  Go from the presence of a foolish man, in whom thou perceivest not the lips of knowledge.
8  The wisdom of the prudent is to discern his way; but the folly of the foolish is deceit.
9  Fools make a mock at trespass; but for the upright there is favour.
10  The heart knoweth its own bitterness, and a stranger doth not intermeddle with its joy.
11  The house of the wicked shall be overthrown; but the tent of the upright shall flourish.
12  There is a way that seemeth right unto a man, but the end thereof is the ways of death.
13  Even in laughter the heart is sorrowful, and the end of mirth is sadness.
14  The backslider in heart shall be filled with his own ways, and the good man from what is in himself.
15  The simple believeth every word; but the prudent [man] heedeth his going.
16  A wise [man] feareth and departeth from evil; but the foolish is overbearing and confident.
17  He that is soon angry dealeth foolishly, and a man of mischievous devices is hated.
18  The simple inherit folly; but the prudent are crowned with knowledge.
19  The evil bow before the good, and the wicked at the gates of the righteous [man].
20  He that is poor is hated even of his own neighbour; but the rich hath many friends.
21  He that despiseth his neighbour sinneth; but he that is gracious to the afflicted, happy is he.
22  Do they not err that devise evil? but loving-kindness and truth are for those that devise good.
23  In all labour there is profit; but the talk of the lips [tendeth] only to want.
24  The crown of the wise is their riches; the folly of the foolish is folly.
25  A true witness delivereth souls; but deceit uttereth lies.
26  In the fear of Jehovah is strong confidence, and his children shall have a place of refuge.
27  The fear of Jehovah is a fountain of life, to turn away from the snares of death.
28  In the multitude of people is the king's glory; but in the lack of people is the ruin of a prince.
29  He that is slow to anger is of great understanding; but he that is hasty of spirit exalteth folly.
30  A sound heart is the life of the flesh; but envy the rottenness of the bones.
31  He that oppresseth the poor reproacheth his Maker; but he that honoureth Him is gracious to the needy.
32  The wicked is driven away by his evil-doing; but the righteous trusteth, [even] in his death.
33  Wisdom resteth in the heart of the intelligent [man]; but that which is in the foolish maketh itself known.
34  Righteousness exalteth a nation; but sin is a reproach to peoples.
35  The king's favour is toward a wise servant; but his wrath is [against] him that causeth shame.
{15}
1  A soft answer turneth away fury; but a grievous word stirreth up anger.
2  The tongue of the wise useth knowledge aright; but the mouth of the foolish poureth out folly.
3  The eyes of Jehovah are in every place, beholding the evil and the good.
4  Gentleness of tongue is a tree of life; but crookedness therein is a breaking of the spirit.
5  A fool despiseth his father's instruction; but he that regardeth reproof becometh prudent.
6  In the house of a righteous [man] is much treasure; but in the revenue of a wicked [man] is disturbance.
7  The lips of the wise disperse knowledge, but not so the heart of the foolish.
8  The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to Jehovah; but the prayer of the upright is his delight.
9  The way of a wicked [man] is an abomination to Jehovah; but him that pursueth righteousness he loveth.
10  Grievous correction is for him that forsaketh the path; he that hateth reproof shall die.
11  Sheol and destruction are before Jehovah; how much more then the hearts of the children of men!
12  A scorner loveth not one that reproveth him; he will not go unto the wise.
13  A joyful heart maketh a cheerful countenance; but by sorrow of heart the spirit is broken.
14  The heart of an intelligent [man] seeketh knowledge; but the mouth of the foolish feedeth on folly.
15  All the days of the afflicted are evil; but a cheerful heart is a continual feast.
16  Better is little with the fear of Jehovah than great store and disquietude therewith.
17  Better is a meal of herbs where love is, than a fatted ox and hatred therewith.
18  A furious man stirreth up contention; but he that is slow to anger appeaseth strife.
19  The way of the sluggard is as a hedge of thorns; but the path of the upright is made plain.
20  A wise son maketh a glad father; but a foolish man despiseth his mother.
21  Folly is joy to him that is void of sense; but a man of understanding regulateth his walk.
22  Without counsel purposes are disappointed; but in the multitude of counsellors they are established.
23  A man hath joy by the answer of his mouth; and a word in its season, how good is it!
24  The path of life is upwards for the wise, that he may depart from Sheol beneath.
25  Jehovah plucketh up the house of the proud; but he establisheth the boundary of the widow.
26  The thoughts of the evil [man] are an abomination to Jehovah; but pure words are pleasant.
27  He that is greedy of gain troubleth his own house; but he that hateth gifts shall live.
28  The heart of a righteous [man] studieth to answer; but the mouth of the wicked poureth out evil things.
29  Jehovah is far from the wicked; but he heareth the prayer of the righteous.
30  That which enlighteneth the eyes rejoiceth the heart; good tidings make the bones fat.
31  The ear that heareth the reproof of life shall abide among the wise.
32  He that refuseth instruction despiseth his own soul; but he that heareth reproof getteth sense.
33  The fear of Jehovah is the discipline of wisdom, and before honour [goeth] humility.
{16}
1  The purposes of the heart are of man, but the answer of the tongue is from Jehovah.
2  All the ways of a man are clean in his own eyes; but Jehovah weigheth the spirits.
3  Commit thy works unto Jehovah, and thy thoughts shall be established.
4  Jehovah hath wrought everything on his own account, yea, even the wicked for the day of evil.
5  Every proud heart is an abomination to Jehovah: hand for hand, he shall not be held innocent.
6  By loving-kindness and truth iniquity is atoned for; and by the fear of Jehovah [men] depart from evil.
7  When a man's ways please Jehovah, he maketh even his enemies to be at peace with him.
8  Better is a little with righteousness, than great revenues without right.
9  The heart of man deviseth his way, but Jehovah directeth his steps.
10  An oracle is on the lips of the king: his mouth will not err in judgment.
11  The just balance and scales are Jehovah's; all the weights of the bag are his work.
12  It is an abomination to kings to commit wickedness; for the throne is established by righteousness.
13  Righteous lips are the delight of kings, and they love him that speaketh aright.
14  The fury of a king is [as] messengers of death; but a wise man will pacify it.
15  In the light of the king's countenance is life, and his favour is as a cloud of the latter rain.
16  How much better is it to get wisdom than fine gold, and the getting of intelligence to be preferred to silver!
17  The highway of the upright is to depart from evil: he that taketh heed to his way keepeth his soul.
18  Pride [goeth] before destruction, and a haughty spirit before a fall.
19  Better is it to be of a humble spirit with the meek, than to divide the spoil with the proud.
20  He that giveth heed to the word shall find good; and whoso confideth in Jehovah, happy is he.
21  The wise in heart is called intelligent, and the sweetness of the lips increaseth learning.
22  Wisdom is a fountain of life for him that hath it; but the instruction of fools is folly.
23  The heart of the wise maketh his mouth intelligent, and upon his lips increaseth learning.
24  Pleasant words are [as] a honeycomb, sweet to the soul, and health for the bones.
25  There is a way that seemeth right unto a man, but the end thereof is the ways of death.
26  The appetite of the labourer laboureth for him, for his mouth urgeth him on.
27  A man of Belial diggeth up evil, and on his lips there is as a scorching fire.
28  A false man soweth contention; and a talebearer separateth very friends.
29  A violent man enticeth his neighbour, and leadeth him into a way that is not good.
30  He that shutteth his eyes, [it is] to devise froward things; biting his lips, he bringeth evil to pass.
31  The hoary head is a crown of glory, [if] it is found in the way of righteousness.
32  He that is slow to anger is better than the mighty, and he that ruleth his spirit than he that taketh a city.
33  The lot is cast into the lap; but the whole decision is of Jehovah.
{17}
1  Better is a dry morsel, and quietness therewith, than a house full of feasting [with] strife.
2  A wise servant shall rule over a son that causeth shame, and shall have part in the inheritance among the brethren.
3  The fining-pot is for silver, and the furnace for gold; but Jehovah trieth the hearts.
4  The evil-doer giveth heed to iniquitous lips; the liar giveth ear to a mischievous tongue.
5  Whoso mocketh a poor [man] reproacheth his Maker; he that is glad at calamity shall not be held innocent.
6  Children's children are the crown of old men; and the glory of children are their fathers.
7  Excellent speech becometh not a vile [man]; how much less do lying lips a noble!
8  A gift is a precious stone in the eyes of the possessor: whithersoever it turneth it prospereth.
9  He that covereth transgression seeketh love; but he that bringeth a matter up again separateth very friends.
10  A reproof entereth more deeply into him that hath understanding than a hundred stripes into a fool.
11  An evil [man] seeketh only rebellion; but a cruel messenger shall be sent against him.
12  Let a bear robbed of her whelps meet a man rather than a fool in his folly.
13  Whoso rewardeth evil for good, evil shall not depart from his house.
14  The beginning of contention is [as] when one letteth out water; therefore leave off strife before it become vehement.
15  He that justifieth the wicked, and he that condemneth the righteous, even they both are abomination to Jehovah.
16  To what purpose is there a price in the hand of a fool to get wisdom, seeing [he] hath no sense?
17  The friend loveth at all times, and a brother is born for adversity.
18  A senseless man striketh hands, becoming surety for his neighbour.
19  He loveth transgression that loveth a quarrel; he that maketh high his gate seeketh destruction.
20  He that hath a perverse heart findeth no good; and he that shifteth about with his tongue falleth into evil.
21  He that begetteth a fool [doeth it] to his sorrow, and the father of a vile [man] hath no joy.
22  A joyful heart promoteth healing; but a broken spirit drieth up the bones.
23  A wicked [man] taketh a gift out of the bosom, to pervert the paths of judgment.
24  Wisdom is before him that hath understanding; but the eyes of a fool are in the ends of the earth.
25  A foolish son is a grief to his father, and bitterness to her that bore him.
26  To punish a righteous [man] is not good, nor to strike nobles because of [their] uprightness.
27  He that hath knowledge spareth his words; and a man of understanding is of a cool spirit.
28  Even a fool when he holdeth his peace is reckoned wise, [and] he that shutteth his lips, intelligent.
{18}
1  He that separateth himself seeketh [his] pleasure, he is vehement against all sound wisdom.
2  A fool hath no delight in understanding, but only that his heart may reveal itself.
3  When the wicked cometh, there cometh also contempt, and with ignominy reproach.
4  The words of a man's mouth are deep waters, [and] the fountain of wisdom is a gushing brook.
5  It is not good to accept the person of the wicked, to wrong the righteous in judgment.
6  A fool's lips enter into contention, and his mouth calleth for stripes.
7  A fool's mouth is destruction to him, and his lips are a snare to his soul.
8  The words of a talebearer are as dainty morsels, and they go down into the innermost parts of the belly.
9  He also who is indolent in his work is brother of the destroyer.
10  The name of Jehovah is a strong tower: the righteous runneth into it, and is safe.
11  The rich man's wealth is his strong city, and as a high wall in his own imagination.
12  Before destruction the heart of man is haughty; and before honour [goeth] humility.
13  He that giveth answer before he heareth, it is folly and shame unto him.
14  The spirit of a man sustaineth his infirmity; but a broken spirit who can bear?
15  The heart of an intelligent [man] getteth knowledge, and the ear of the wise seeketh knowledge.
16  A man's gift maketh room for him, and bringeth him before great men.
17  He that is first in his own cause [seemeth] just; but his neighbour cometh and searcheth him.
18  The lot causeth contentions to cease, and parteth between the mighty.
19  A brother offended is [harder to be won] than a strong city; and contentions are as the bars of a palace.
20  A man's belly is satisfied with the fruit of his mouth; with the increase of his lips is he satisfied.
21  Death and life are in the power of the tongue, and they that love it shall eat the fruit thereof.
22  Whoso hath found a wife hath found a good thing, and hath obtained favour from Jehovah.
23  He that is poor speaketh with supplications, but the rich answereth roughly.
24  A man of [many] friends will come to ruin but there is a friend [that] sticketh closer than a brother.
{19}
1  Better is a poor [man] that walketh in his integrity, than he that is perverse in his lips, and is a fool.
2  Also that a person be without knowledge is not good; and he that hasteth with his feet maketh false steps.
3  The folly of man distorteth his way, and his heart is irritated against Jehovah.
4  Wealth addeth many friends; but the poor is separated from his friend.
5  A false witness shall not be held innocent, and he that uttereth lies shall not escape.
6  Many court the favour of a noble; and every one is friend to a man that giveth.
7  All the brethren of a poor [man] hate him; how much more do his friends go far from him: he pursueth [them] with words, -- they are not [to be found].
8  He that getteth sense loveth his own soul; he that keepeth understanding shall find good.
9  A false witness shall not be held innocent, and he that uttereth lies shall perish.
10  Good living beseemeth not a fool; how much less for a servant to have rule over princes.
11  The discretion of a man maketh him slow to anger, and it is his glory to pass over a transgression.
12  The king's displeasure is as the roaring of a lion; but his favour is as dew upon the grass.
13  A foolish son is the calamity of his father; and the contentions of a wife are a continual dropping.
14  House and wealth are an inheritance from fathers; but a prudent wife is from Jehovah.
15  Slothfulness casteth into a deep sleep, and the idle soul shall suffer hunger.
16  He that keepeth the commandment keepeth his soul; he that is careless of his ways shall die.
17  He that is gracious to the poor lendeth unto Jehovah; and what he hath bestowed will he repay unto him.
18  Chasten thy son, seeing there is hope; but set not thy soul upon killing him.
19  A man of great wrath shall suffer punishment; for if thou deliver [him], yet thou must do it again.
20  Hear counsel, and receive instruction, that thou mayest be wise in thy latter end.
21  Many are the thoughts in a man's heart, but the counsel of Jehovah, that doth stand.
22  The charm of a man is his kindness; and a poor [man] is better than a liar.
23  The fear of Jehovah [tendeth] to life, and he [that hath it] shall rest satisfied without being visited with evil.
24  A sluggard burieth his hand in the dish, and will not even bring it to his mouth again.
25  Smite a scorner, and the simple will beware; reprove the intelligent, and he will understand knowledge.
26  He that ruineth [his] father and chaseth away [his] mother is a son that causeth shame and bringeth reproach.
27  Cease, my son, to hear the instruction which causeth to stray from the words of knowledge.
28  A witness of Belial scorneth judgment, and the mouth of the wicked swalloweth down iniquity.
29  Judgments are prepared for scorners, and stripes for the back of the foolish.
{20}
1  Wine is a scorner, strong drink is raging; and whoso erreth thereby is not wise.
2  The terror of a king is as the roaring of a lion: he that provoketh him to anger sinneth against his own soul.
3  It is an honour for a man to cease from strife; but every fool rusheth into it.
4  The sluggard will not plough by reason of the winter; he shall beg in harvest, and have nothing.
5  Counsel in the heart of man is deep water, and a man of understanding draweth it out.
6  Most men will proclaim every one his own kindness; but a faithful man who shall find?
7  The righteous walketh in his integrity: blessed are his children after him!
8  A king sitting on the throne of judgment scattereth away all evil with his eyes.
9  Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin?
10  Divers weights, divers measures, even both of them are abomination to Jehovah.
11  Even a child is known by his doings, whether his work be pure, and whether it be right.
12  The hearing ear, and the seeing eye, Jehovah hath made even both of them.
13  Love not sleep, lest thou come to poverty; open thine eyes, [and] thou shalt be satisfied with bread.
14  Bad! bad! saith the buyer; but when he is gone his way, then he boasteth.
15  There is gold, and a multitude of rubies; but the lips of knowledge are a precious Jewel.
16  Take his garment that is become surety [for] another, and hold him in pledge for strangers.
17  Bread of falsehood is sweet to a man, but afterwards his mouth shall be filled with gravel.
18  Plans are established by counsel; and with good advice make war.
19  He that goeth about talebearing revealeth secrets; therefore meddle not with him that openeth his lips.
20  Whoso curseth his father or his mother, his lamp shall be put out in the blackest darkness.
21  An inheritance obtained hastily at the beginning will not be blessed in the end.
22  Say not, I will recompense evil: wait on Jehovah, and he shall save thee.
23  Divers weights are an abomination unto Jehovah; and a false balance is not good.
24  The steps of a man are from Jehovah; and how can a man understand his own way?
25  It is a snare to a man rashly to say, It is hallowed, and after vows to make inquiry.
26  A wise king scattereth the wicked, and bringeth the wheel over them.
27  Man's spirit is the lamp of Jehovah, searching all the inner parts of the belly.
28  Mercy and truth preserve the king; and he upholdeth his throne by mercy.
29  The glory of young men is their strength; and the beauty of old men is the grey head.
30  Wounding stripes purge away evil, and strokes [purge] the inner parts of the belly.
{21}
1  The king's heart in the hand of Jehovah is [as] brooks of water: he turneth it whithersoever he will.
2  Every way of a man is right in his own eyes; but Jehovah weigheth the hearts.
3  To exercise justice and judgment is more acceptable to Jehovah than sacrifice.
4  Lofty eyes, and a proud heart, the lamp of the wicked, is sin.
5  The thoughts of the diligent [tend] only to plenteousness; but of every one that is hasty, only to want.
6  The getting of treasures by a lying tongue is a fleeting breath of them that seek death.
7  The devastation of the wicked sweepeth them away, because they refuse to do what is right.
8  Very crooked is the way of a guilty man; but as for the pure, his work is upright.
9  It is better to dwell in a corner of the housetop, than with a contentious woman, and a house in common.
10  The soul of the wicked desireth evil: his neighbour findeth no favour in his eyes.
11  When the scorner is punished, the simple becometh wise; and when the wise is instructed, he receiveth knowledge.
12  One that is righteous wisely considereth the house of the wicked: he overthroweth the wicked to [their] ruin.
13  Whoso stoppeth his ears at the cry of the poor, he also himself shall cry, and shall not be heard.
14  A gift in secret pacifieth anger; and a present in the bosom, vehement fury.
15  It is joy to a righteous [man] to do what is right; but it is ruin for the workers of iniquity.
16  The man that wandereth out of the way of wisdom shall abide in the congregation of the dead.
17  He that loveth mirth shall be a poor man; he that loveth wine and oil shall not be rich.
18  The wicked is a ransom for the righteous, and a treacherous [man] in the stead of the upright.
19  It is better to dwell in a desert land. than with a contentious and irritable woman.
20  There is costly store and oil in the dwelling of a wise [man]; but a foolish man swalloweth it up.
21  He that followeth after righteousness and mercy findeth life, righteousness, and honour.
22  A wise [man] scaleth the city of the mighty, and casteth down the strength of the confidence thereof.
23  Whoso keepeth his mouth and his tongue keepeth his soul from troubles.
24  Proud, arrogant, scorner is his name who dealeth in proud wrath.
25  The desire of the sluggard killeth him; for his hands refuse to work:
26  He coveteth greedily all the day long; but the righteous giveth and spareth not.
27  The sacrifice of the wicked is abomination: how much more when they bring it with a wicked purpose!
28  A lying witness shall perish; and a man that heareth shall speak constantly.
29  A wicked man hardeneth his face; but as for the upright, he establisheth his way.
30  There is no wisdom, nor understanding, nor counsel against Jehovah.
31  The horse is prepared for the day of battle; but safety is of Jehovah.
{22}
1  A [good] name is rather to be chosen than great riches; loving favour rather than silver and gold.
2  The rich and poor meet together; Jehovah is the maker of them all.
3  A prudent [man] seeth the evil, and hideth himself; but the simple pass on, and are punished.
4  The reward of humility [and] the fear of Jehovah is riches, and honour, and life.
5  Thorns [and] snares are in the way of the perverse: he that keepeth his soul holdeth himself far from them.
6  Train up the child according to the tenor of his way, and when he is old he will not depart from it.
7  The rich ruleth over the poor; and the borrower is servant to the lender.
8  He that soweth unrighteousness shall reap iniquity, and the rod of his wrath shall have an end.
9  He that hath a bountiful eye shall be blessed, for he giveth of his bread to the poor.
10  Cast out the scorner, and contention will depart, and strife and ignominy shall cease.
11  He that loveth pureness of heart, upon whose lips is grace, the king is his friend.
12  The eyes of Jehovah preserve knowledge; but he overthroweth the words of the unfaithful.
13  The sluggard saith, There is a lion without, I shall be killed in the streets!
14  The mouth of strange women is a deep ditch: he with whom Jehovah is displeased shall fall therein.
15  Folly is bound in the heart of a child; the rod of correction shall drive it far from him.
16  He that oppresseth the poor, it is to enrich him; he that giveth to the rich, [bringeth] only to want.
17  Incline thine ear, and hear the words of the wise, and apply thy heart unto my knowledge.
18  For it is a pleasant thing if thou keep them within thee: they shall be together fitted on thy lips.
19  That thy confidence may be in Jehovah, I have made [them] known to thee this day, even to thee.
20  Have not I written to thee excellent things, in counsels and knowledge,
21  that I might make thee know the certainty of the words of truth; that thou mightest carry back words of truth to them that send thee?
22  Rob not the poor, because he is poor, neither oppress the afflicted in the gate;
23  for Jehovah will plead their cause, and despoil the soul of those that despoil them.
24  Make no friendship with an angry man, and go not with a furious man;
25  lest thou learn his paths, and get a snare to thy soul.
26  Be not of them that strike hands, of them that are sureties for debts:
27  if thou hast nothing to pay, why should he take away thy bed from under thee?
28  Remove not the ancient landmark which thy fathers have set.
29  Hast thou seen a man diligent in his work? He shall stand before kings; he shall not stand before the mean.
{23}
1  When thou sittest to eat with a ruler, consider well who is before thee;
2  and put a knife to thy throat, if thou be a man given to appetite.
3  Be not desirous of his dainties; for they are deceitful food.
4  Weary not thyself to become rich; cease from thine own intelligence:
5  wilt thou set thine eyes upon it, it is gone; for indeed it maketh itself wings and it flieth away as an eagle towards the heavens.
6  Eat thou not the food of him that hath an evil eye, neither desire thou his dainties.
7  For as he thinketh in his soul, so is he. Eat and drink! will he say unto thee; but his heart is not with thee.
8  Thy morsel which thou hast eaten must thou vomit up, and thou wilt have wasted thy sweet words.
9  Speak not in the ears of a foolish [man], for he will despise the wisdom of thy words.
10  Remove not the ancient landmark; and enter not into the fields of the fatherless:
11  for their redeemer is mighty; he will plead their cause against thee.
12  Apply thy heart unto instruction, and thine ears to the words of knowledge.
13  Withhold not correction from the child; for [if] thou beatest him with the rod, he shall not die:
14  thou shalt beat him with the rod, and shalt deliver his soul from Sheol.
15  My son, if thy heart be wise, my heart shall rejoice, even mine;
16  and my reins shall exult, when thy lips speak right things.
17  Let not thy heart envy sinners, but [be thou] in the fear of Jehovah all the day;
18  for surely there is a result, and thine expectation shall not be cut off.
19  Thou, my son, hear and be wise, and direct thy heart in the way.
20  Be not among winebibbers, among riotous eaters of flesh.
21  For the drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty; and drowsiness clotheth with rags.
22  Hearken unto thy father that begat thee, and despise not thy mother when she is old.
23  Buy the truth, and sell it not; wisdom, and instruction, and intelligence.
24  The father of a righteous [man] shall greatly rejoice, and he that begetteth a wise [son] shall have joy of him:
25  let thy father and thy mother have joy, and let her that bore thee rejoice.
26  My son, give me thy heart, and let thine eyes observe my ways.
27  For a whore is a deep ditch; and a strange woman is a narrow pit.
28  She also lieth in wait as a robber, and increaseth the treacherous among men.
29  Who hath woe? Who hath sorrow? Who contentions? Who complaining? Who wounds without cause? Who redness of eyes?
30  -- They that tarry long at the wine; they that go to try mixed wine.
31  Look not upon the wine when it is red, when it sparkleth in the cup, and goeth down smoothly:
32  at the last it biteth like a serpent, and stingeth like an adder.
33  Thine eyes shall behold strange women, and thy heart shall speak froward things;
34  and thou shalt be as he that lieth down in the midst of the sea, and as he that lieth down upon the top of a mast:
35  -- ''They have smitten me, [and] I am not sore; they have beaten me, [and] I knew it not. When shall I awake? I will seek it yet again.''
{24}
1  Be not thou envious of evil men, neither desire to be with them;
2  for their heart studieth destruction, and their lips talk of mischief.
3  Through wisdom is a house built, and by understanding it is established;
4  and by knowledge are the chambers filled with all precious and pleasant substance.
5  A wise man is strong, and a man of knowledge increaseth strength.
6  For with good advice shalt thou make thy war; and in the multitude of counsellors there is safety.
7  Wisdom is too high for a fool: he will not open his mouth in the gate.
8  He that deviseth to do evil shall be called a master of intrigues.
9  The purpose of folly is sin, and the scorner is an abomination to men.
10  [If] thou losest courage in the day of trouble, thy strength is small.
11  Deliver them that are taken forth unto death, and withdraw not from them that stagger to slaughter.
12  If thou sayest, Behold, we knew it not, will not he that weigheth the hearts consider it? And he that preserveth thy soul, he knoweth it; and he rendereth to man according to his work.
13  Eat honey, my son, for it is good; and a honeycomb is sweet to thy taste:
14  so consider wisdom for thy soul; if thou hast found it, there shall be a result, and thine expectation shall not be cut off.
15  Lay not wait, O wicked [man], against the dwelling of the righteous; lay not waste his resting-place.
16  For the righteous falleth seven times, and riseth up again; but the wicked stumble into disaster.
17  Rejoice not when thine enemy falleth, and let not thy heart be glad when he stumbleth;
18  lest Jehovah see it, and it be evil in his sight, and he turn away his anger from him.
19  Fret not thyself because of evil-doers, [and] be not envious of the wicked:
20  for there shall be no future to the evil [man]; the lamp of the wicked shall be put out.
21  My son, fear Jehovah and the king: meddle not with them that are given to change.
22  For their calamity shall rise suddenly; and who knoweth the ruin of them both?
23  These things also come from the wise. It is not good to have respect of persons in judgment.
24  He that saith unto the wicked, Thou art righteous, peoples shall curse him, nations shall abhor him;
25  but to them that rebuke [him] shall be delight, and a good blessing cometh upon them.
26  He kisseth the lips who giveth a right answer.
27  Prepare thy work without, and put thy field in order, and afterwards build thy house.
28  Be not a witness against thy neighbour without cause; and wouldest thou deceive with thy lips?
29  Say not, I will do so to him as he hath done to me, I will render to the man according to his work.
30  I went by the field of a sluggard, and by the vineyard of a man void of understanding;
31  and lo, it was all grown over with thistles, and nettles had covered the face thereof, and its stone wall was broken down.
32  Then I looked, I took it to heart; I saw, I received instruction:
33  -- A little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to rest!
34  So shall thy poverty come [as] a roving plunderer, and thy penury as an armed man.
{25}
1  These are also proverbs of Solomon, which the men of Hezekiah king of Judah transcribed.
2  It is the glory of God to conceal a thing; but the glory of kings is to search out a thing.
3  The heavens for height, and the earth for depth, and the heart of kings is unsearchable.
4  Take away the dross from the silver, and there cometh forth a vessel for the refiner:
5  take away the wicked from before the king, and his throne shall be established in righteousness.
6  Put not thyself forward in the presence of the king, and stand not in the place of the great;
7  for better it is that it be said unto thee, Come up hither, than that thou shouldest be put lower in the presence of the prince whom thine eyes see.
8  Go not forth hastily to strive, lest [thou know not] what to do in the end thereof, when thy neighbour hath put thee to shame.
9  Debate thy cause with thy neighbour, but reveal not the secret of another;
10  lest he that heareth [it] disgrace thee, and thine evil report turn not away.
11  [As] apples of gold in pictures of silver, is a word spoken in season.
12  An ear-ring of gold, and an ornament of fine gold, is a wise reprover upon an attentive ear.
13  As the cold of snow in the time of harvest, [so] is a faithful messenger to them that send him: for he refresheth the soul of his masters.
14  Clouds and wind without rain, [so] is a man that boasteth himself of a false gift.
15  By long forbearing is a ruler persuaded, and a soft tongue breaketh the bone.
16  Hast thou found honey? Eat so much as is sufficient for thee, lest thou be surfeited therewith, and vomit it.
17  Let thy foot be seldom in thy neighbour's house; lest he be weary of thee and hate thee.
18  A maul, and a sword, and a sharp arrow, is a man that beareth false witness against his neighbour.
19  A broken tooth, and a tottering foot, is confidence in an unfaithful [man] in the day of trouble.
20  [As] he that taketh off a garment in cold weather, [and as] vinegar upon nitre, so is he that singeth songs to a sad heart.
21  If thine enemy be hungry, give him bread to eat; and if he be thirsty, give him water to drink:
22  for thou shalt heap coals of fire upon his head, and Jehovah shall reward thee.
23  The north wind bringeth forth rain, and the angry countenance a backbiting tongue.
24  It is better to dwell in a corner of the housetop, than with a contentious woman, and a house in common.
25  [As] cold waters to a thirsty soul, so is good news from a far country.
26  A troubled fountain, and a defiled well, is a righteous [man] that giveth way before the wicked.
27  It is not good to eat much honey; and to search into weighty matters is [itself] a weight.
28  He that hath no rule over his own spirit is [as] a city broken down, without walls.
{26}
1  As snow in summer, and as rain in harvest, so honour beseemeth not a fool.
2  As the sparrow for flitting about, as the swallow for flying, so a curse undeserved shall not come.
3  A whip for the horse, a bridle for the ass, and a rod for the back of fools.
4  Answer not a fool according to his folly, lest thou also be like unto him.
5  Answer a fool according to his folly, lest he be wise in his own eyes.
6  He that sendeth a message by the hand of a fool cutteth off [his own] feet, [and] drinketh damage.
7  The legs of the lame hang loose; so is a proverb in the mouth of fools.
8  As a bag of gems in a stoneheap, so is he that giveth honour to a fool.
9  [As] a thorn goeth up into the hand of a drunkard, so is a proverb in the mouth of fools.
10  A master roughly worketh every one: he both hireth the fool and hireth passers-by.
11  As a dog turneth back to its vomit, [so] a fool repeateth his folly.
12  Hast thou seen a man wise in his own eyes? There is more hope of a fool than of him.
13  The sluggard saith, There is a fierce lion in the way; a lion is in the midst of the streets!
14  [As] the door turneth upon its hinges, so the sluggard upon his bed.
15  The sluggard burieth his hand in the dish: it wearieth him to bring it again to his mouth.
16  A sluggard is wiser in his own eyes than seven [men] that answer discreetly.
17  He that passing by vexeth himself with strife belonging not to him, is [like] one that taketh a dog by the ears.
18  As a madman who casteth firebrands, arrows, and death,
19  so is a man that deceiveth his neighbour, and saith, Am I not in sport?
20  Where no wood is, the fire goeth out; and where there is no talebearer, the contention ceaseth.
21  [As] coals for hot coals, and wood for fire, so is a contentious man to inflame strife.
22  The words of a talebearer are as dainty morsels, and they go down into the innermost parts of the belly.
23  Ardent lips, and a wicked heart, are [as] an earthen vessel overlaid with silver dross.
24  He that hateth dissembleth with his lips, but he layeth up deceit within him:
25  when his voice is gracious, believe him not, for there are seven abominations in his heart.
26  Though [his] hatred is covered by dissimulation, his wickedness shall be made manifest in the congregation.
27  Whoso diggeth a pit shall fall therein; and he that rolleth a stone, it shall return upon him.
28  A lying tongue hateth those that are injured by it, and a flattering mouth worketh ruin.
{27}
1  Boast not thyself of to-morrow, for thou knowest not what a day will bring forth.
2  Let another praise thee, and not thine own mouth; a stranger, and not thine own lips.
3  A stone is heavy, and the sand weighty; but a fool's vexation is heavier than them both.
4  Fury is cruel, and anger is outrageous; but who is able to stand before jealousy?
5  Open rebuke is better than hidden love.
6  Faithful are the wounds of a friend; but the kisses of an enemy are profuse.
7  The full soul trampleth on a honeycomb; but to the hungry soul every bitter thing is sweet.
8  As a bird that wandereth from her nest, so is a man that wandereth from his place.
9  Ointment and perfume rejoice the heart; and the sweetness of one's friend is [the fruit] of hearty counsel.
10  Thine own friend, and thy father's friend, forsake not; and go not into thy brother's house in the day of thy calamity: better is a neighbour that is near than a brother far off.
11  Be wise, my son, and make my heart glad, that I may have wherewith to answer him that reproacheth me.
12  A prudent [man] seeth the evil, [and] hideth himself; the simple pass on, [and] are punished.
13  Take his garment that is become surety [for] another, and hold him in pledge for a strange woman.
14  He that blesseth his friend with a loud voice, rising early in the morning, it shall be reckoned a curse to him.
15  A continual dropping on a very rainy day and a contentious woman are alike:
16  whosoever will restrain her restraineth the wind, and his right hand encountereth oil.
17  Iron is sharpened by iron; so a man sharpeneth the countenance of his friend.
18  Whoso keepeth the fig-tree shall eat the fruit thereof; and he that guardeth his master shall be honoured.
19  As [in] water face [answereth] to face, so the heart of man to man.
20  Sheol and destruction are insatiable; so the eyes of man are never satisfied.
21  The fining-pot is for silver, and the furnace for gold; so let a man be to the mouth that praiseth him.
22  If thou shouldest bray a fool in a mortar among wheat with a pestle, yet will not his folly depart from him.
23  Be well acquainted with the appearance of thy flocks; look well to thy herds:
24  for wealth is not for ever; and doth the crown [endure] from generation to generation?
25  The hay is removed, and the tender grass sheweth itself, and herbs of the mountains are gathered in.
26  The lambs are for thy clothing, and the goats are the price of a field;
27  and there is goats' milk enough for thy food, for the food of thy household, and sustenance for thy maidens.
{28}
1  The wicked flee when no man pursueth; but the righteous are bold as a lion.
2  By the transgression of a land many are the princes thereof; but by a man of understanding [and] of knowledge, [its] stability is prolonged.
3  A poor man who oppresseth the helpless is a sweeping rain which leaveth no food.
4  They that forsake the law praise the wicked; but such as keep the law contend with them.
5  Evil men understand not judgment; but they that seek Jehovah understand everything.
6  Better is the poor that walketh in his integrity, than he that is perverse, double in ways, though he be rich.
7  Whoso observeth the law is a son that hath understanding; but he that is a companion of profligates bringeth shame to his father.
8  He that by usury and unjust gain increaseth his substance gathereth it for him that is gracious to the poor.
9  He that turneth away his ear from hearing the law, even his prayer is an abomination.
10  Whoso causeth the upright to go astray in an evil way, shall himself fall into his own pit; but the perfect shall inherit good.
11  A rich man is wise in his own eyes; but the poor that hath understanding searcheth him out.
12  When the righteous triumph, there is great glory; but when the wicked rise, men conceal themselves.
13  He that covereth his transgressions shall not prosper; but whoso confesseth and forsaketh [them] shall obtain mercy.
14  Happy is the man that feareth always; but he that hardeneth his heart shall fall into evil.
15  A roaring lion, and a ranging bear, is a wicked ruler over a poor people.
16  The prince void of intelligence is also a great oppressor: he that hateth covetousness shall prolong [his] days.
17  A man laden with the blood of [any] person, fleeth to the pit: let no man stay him.
18  Whoso walketh in integrity shall be saved; but he that is perverted in [his] double ways, shall fall in one [of them].
19  He that tilleth his land shall be satisfied with bread; but he that followeth the worthless shall have poverty enough.
20  A faithful man aboundeth with blessings; but he that maketh haste to be rich shall not be innocent.
21  To have respect of persons is not good; but for a piece of bread will a man transgress.
22  He that hath an evil eye hasteth after wealth, and knoweth not that poverty shall come upon him.
23  He that rebuketh a man shall afterwards find more favour than he that flattereth with the tongue.
24  Whoso robbeth his father and his mother, and saith, It is no transgression, the same is the companion of a destroyer.
25  He that is puffed up in soul exciteth contention; but he that relieth upon Jehovah shall be made fat.
26  He that confideth in his own heart is a fool; but whoso walketh wisely, he shall be delivered.
27  He that giveth unto the poor shall not lack; but he that withdraweth his eyes shall have many a curse.
28  When the wicked rise, men hide themselves; but when they perish, the righteous increase.
{29}
1  He that being often reproved hardeneth his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and without remedy.
2  When the righteous increase, the people rejoice; but when the wicked beareth rule, the people mourn.
3  Whoso loveth wisdom rejoiceth his father; but he that is a companion of harlots destroyeth [his] substance.
4  A king by just judgment establisheth the land; but he that taketh gifts overthroweth it.
5  A man that flattereth his neighbour spreadeth a net for his steps.
6  In the transgression of an evil man there is a snare; but the righteous shall sing and rejoice.
7  The righteous taketh knowledge of the cause of the poor; the wicked understandeth not knowledge.
8  Scornful men set the city in a flame; but the wise turn away anger.
9  If a wise man contendeth with a fool, whether he rage or laugh, [he] hath no rest.
10  The bloodthirsty hate the perfect, but the upright care for his soul.
11  A fool uttereth all his mind; but a wise [man] keepeth it back.
12  If a ruler hearken to lying words, all his servants are wicked.
13  The indigent and the oppressor meet together; Jehovah lighteneth the eyes of them both.
14  A king that faithfully judgeth the poor, his throne shall be established for ever.
15  The rod and reproof give wisdom; but a child left [to himself] bringeth his mother to shame.
16  When the wicked increase, transgression increaseth; but the righteous shall see their fall.
17  Chasten thy son, and he shall give thee rest, and shall give delight unto thy soul.
18  Where there is no vision the people cast off restraint; but happy is he that keepeth the law.
19  A servant is not corrected by words: he understandeth indeed, but he will not answer.
20  Hast thou seen a man hasty in his words? there is more hope of a fool than of him.
21  He that delicately bringeth up his servant from a child, shall in the end have him as a son.
22  An angry man exciteth contention; and a furious man aboundeth in transgression.
23  A man's pride bringeth him low; but the humble in spirit shall obtain honour.
24  Whoso shareth with a thief hateth his own soul: he heareth the adjuration, and declareth not.
25  The fear of man bringeth a snare; but whoso putteth his confidence in Jehovah is protected.
26  Many seek the ruler's face; but a man's right judgment is from Jehovah.
27  An unjust man is an abomination to the righteous; and he that is of upright way is an abomination to the wicked [man].
{30}
1  The words of Agur the son of Jakeh; the prophecy uttered by the man unto Ithiel, [even] unto Ithiel and Ucal:
2  Truly *I* am more stupid than any one; and I have not a man's intelligence.
3  I have neither learned wisdom, nor have I the knowledge of the Holy.
4  Who hath ascended up into the heavens, and descended? Who hath gathered the wind in his fists? Who hath bound the waters in a mantle? Who hath established all the ends of the earth? What is his name, and what is his son's name, if thou knowest?
5  Every word of +God is pure: he is a shield unto them that put their trust in him.
6  Add thou not unto his words, lest he reprove thee, and thou be found a liar.
7  Two things do I ask of thee; deny me [them] not before I die:
8  Remove far from me vanity and lies; give me neither poverty nor riches; feed me with the bread of my daily need:
9  lest I be full and deny [thee], and say, Who is Jehovah? or lest I be poor and steal, and outrage the name of my God.
10  Speak not too much about a servant to his master, lest he curse thee, and thou be held guilty.
11  There is a generation that curseth their father, and doth not bless their mother;
12  there is a generation that are pure in their own eyes, yet are not washed from their filthiness;
13  there is a generation, -- how lofty are their eyes, how their eyelids are lifted up!
14  -- a generation whose teeth are swords, and their jaw-teeth knives, to devour the afflicted from off the earth, and the needy from [among] men.
15  The leech hath two daughters: Give, give. There are three [things] never satisfied; four which say not, It is enough:
16  -- Sheol, and the barren womb; the earth which is not filled with water, and the fire which saith not, It is enough.
17  The eye that mocketh at a father, and despiseth to obey a mother, the ravens of the valley shall pick it out, and the young eagles shall eat it.
18  There are three [things] too wonderful for me, and four that I know not:
19  The way of an eagle in the heavens, the way of a serpent upon a rock, the way of a ship in the midst of the sea, and the way of a man with a maid.
20  Such is the way of an adulterous woman: she eateth, and wipeth her mouth, and saith, I have done no wickedness.
21  Under three [things] the earth is disquieted, and under four it cannot bear up:
22  Under a servant when he reigneth, and a churl when he is filled with meat;
23  under an odious [woman] when she is married, and a handmaid when she is heir to her mistress.
24  There are four [things] little upon the earth, and they are exceeding wise:
25  The ants, a people not strong, yet they provide their food in the summer;
26  the rock-badgers are but a feeble folk, yet they make their house in the cliff;
27  the locusts have no king, yet they go forth all of them by bands;
28  thou takest hold of the lizard with the hands, yet is she in kings' palaces.
29  There are three [things] which have a stately step, and four are comely in going:
30  The lion, mighty among beasts, which turneth not away for any;
31  a [horse] girt in the loins; or the he-goat; and a king, against whom none can rise up.
32  If thou hast done foolishly in lifting up thyself, or if thou hast thought evil, [lay] the hand upon thy mouth.
33  For the pressing of milk bringeth forth butter, and the pressing of the nose bringeth forth blood; and the pressing of anger bringeth forth strife.
{31}
1  The words of king Lemuel, the prophecy that his mother taught him:
2  What, my son? and what, O son of my womb? and what, O son of my vows?
3  Give not thy strength unto women, nor thy ways to them that destroy kings.
4  It is not for kings, Lemuel, it is not for kings to drink wine, nor for rulers [to say], Where is the strong drink?
5  -- lest they drink and forget the law, and pervert the judgment of any of the children of affliction.
6  Give strong drink unto him that is ready to perish, and wine unto the bitter of soul:
7  let him drink, and forget his poverty, and remember his misery no more.
8  Open thy mouth for the dumb, for the cause of all those that are left desolate.
9  Open thy mouth, judge righteously, and minister justice to the afflicted and needy.
10  Who can find a woman of worth? for her price is far above rubies.
11  The heart of her husband confideth in her, and he shall have no lack of spoil.
12  She doeth him good, and not evil, all the days of her life.
13  She seeketh wool and flax, and worketh willingly with her hands.
14  She is like the merchants' ships: she bringeth her food from afar;
15  And she riseth while it is yet night, and giveth meat to her household, and the day's work to her maidens.
16  She considereth a field, and acquireth it; of the fruit of her hands she planteth a vineyard.
17  She girdeth her loins with strength, and maketh strong her arms.
18  She perceiveth that her earning is good; her lamp goeth not out by night.
19  She putteth her hands to the distaff, and her hands hold the spindle.
20  She stretcheth out her hand to the afflicted, and she reacheth forth her hands to the needy.
21  She is not afraid of the snow for her household; for all her household are clothed with scarlet.
22  She maketh herself coverlets; her clothing is byssus and purple.
23  Her husband is known in the gates, when he sitteth among the elders of the land.
24  She maketh body linen and selleth it, and delivereth girdles unto the merchant.
25  Strength and dignity are her clothing, and she laugheth [at] the coming day.
26  She openeth her mouth with wisdom; and upon her tongue is the law of kindness.
27  She surveyeth the ways of her household, and eateth not the bread of idleness.
28  Her children rise up and call her blessed; her husband [also], and he praiseth her:
29  Many daughters have done worthily, but thou excellest them all.
30  Gracefulness is deceitful and beauty is vain; a woman [that] feareth Jehovah, she shall be praised.
31  Give her of the fruit of her hands, and let her own works praise her in the gates.
