{#Grace as Presented in David}
{1}
GRACE AS PRESENTED IN DAVID (1)
@1 Samuel 16
S.McC. One of the great distinctive features of the present dispensation is that it is the dispensation of grace. It stands out unique in that way, and David particularly, in the Old Testament, stands out in type in administration, and is illustrative of this great feature of grace. As we have more than once noted, it was an extraordinary thing in David's history that, having sinned as he did, he should have been forgiven. That is an outstanding thing in the Old Testament, because rightly speaking, his sin deserved death; but as we would take account of it with the help of the Spirit, we can see that God is throwing into relief, in David, this great feature of grace, because he peculiarly sets it out in the Old Testament. And too, we find not only the matter of having his sin forgiven; but also in regard to his actions and movements we find him breaking through certain bounds, as the Lord Himself said, "Have ye not read what David did when he was hungry ... How he entered into the house of God and ate the shewbread ... ", alluding to a certain occasion. These features in the type would help us to understand the greatness of grace as presented in David.
The brethren will also recall how, in the great administrative gospel of Matthew, the assembly gospel, the line of David is emphasised at the beginning, the Lord Jesus Christ coming in as Son of David; that taking precedence over the Abraham line of faith. David stressing the line of grace, grace as we may call it in a regal way. Because when we come to Romans, grace reigns. And in Luke, which deals with the
{2}
priestly side and the working out of the economy of local assemblies, the line of David is again stressed, as it says in relation to our Lord's incarnation, "And the Lord God shall give him the throne of David his father;" @Luke 1: 32. And then in @2 Timothy 2, the charter for the last days, Paul says, "Remember Jesus Christ raised from among the dead, of the seed of David, according to my glad tidings." Also, in the book of the Revelation, David is constantly referred to. He represents the best side of things, and the best side of things as linked with this glorious dispensation of grace. There is nothing to surpass it in either what has gone before or what may come after, the assembly coming into the dispensation as the great vessel of grace.
E.B. Do I understand that in regard to David, he is first of all seen as the recipient of grace and then as the exponent of it in a royal way?
S.McC. Both sides are seen in David. At times he is a type of Christ, as in the chapter before us; at other times he is a type of the believer. He sets forth both sides -- the administration of grace, and grace received and appreciated.
C.A.I. Is it significant that in the last words of the Revelation the Lord says, "I Jesus have sent mine angel to testify these things to you in the assemblies. I am the root and offspring of David, the bright and morning star."
S.McC. So that in all the localities there would be a movement of spiritual emotions in the presentation of Himself as the root and offspring of David, representing the best as David does, and the side linked with the administration of grace. God must have peculiar pleasure in this great thought of grace. It says, " ... that he might display in the coming ages the surpassing riches of his grace in kindness towards us in Christ Jesus." @Ephesians 2: 7. There must be something
{3}
so infinitely pleasurable to God about grace that He is going to display it in His kindness towards us.
W.J.B. Saul was both fleshly and legal; he had enjoined the people not to partake of honey. Jonathan had transgressed that injunction and he said, "My father has troubled the land." @1 Samuel 14: 29.
S.McC. Yes, he represents a side of things which is parallel with David's side of things in the beginning of David's ministry; David has to suffer in relation to it. Whilst he is anointed here in this chapter, he does not assume the throne immediately. He has to learn the element of suffering as persecuted by Saul.
A.J.C. In @Acts 13 we read, " ... he raised up to them David for king." It says He did this, "having removed Saul." Is it necessary for the one to be removed before the other can be established?
S.McC. I think so. What is established here is that God has rejected Saul, but we find that Saul continues for a good while; and the exercises that would follow in the following chapters and the rest of the book, would involve our having a right judgment of Saul, dissociating ourselves from all that is linked with the system of things built up in relation to him.
M.B. Does this period help to bring out the practical features of grace in David? On Wednesday evening, you helped us in regard to what is to be viewed abstractly; David never departed in his thoughts from the fact that Saul had been anointed king. He held to that thought and he acted consistently with it.
S.McC. Showing the greatness of David, that he would not assert his own rights or what really was true of him in the anointing. He would abide God's time in the matter, while having a right judgment as to what Saul represents.
E.B.McC. He comes before us in a feeling way --
{4}
he was feeding the sheep. And he is attractive, ruddy, and of a beautiful countenance.
S.McC. That would be a feature of grace; grace is on the line of supply, not the line of demand. The legal man, Saul, is on the line of demand but grace is on the line of supply. We often get a clue as to persons in their introduction. What marks Saul in his introduction is that he is looking for something which he cannot find; but David is feeding the sheep and carrying on an administration for Jesse.
F.G.S. As to the matter of feelings, are they suggested in the sacrifice that Samuel is to take?
S.McC. I think so. We do not want to be marked by the wrong kind of feelings, but by right feelings. We shall see that as we proceed in the subject of David. The question to Samuel was, "How long wilt thou mourn for Saul, seeing I have rejected him from reigning over Israel?" It is a question of what God has done, "I have rejected him from reigning over Israel." Think of a spiritual man like Samuel detained in this way!
E.B. The Saul features are related to the flesh.
S.McC. We have to learn how to judge these features. Samuel felt so much about Saul, that God had to come in with a word to him, "Fill thy horn with oil, and go, I will send thee to Jesse the Bethlehemite; for I have provided me a king among his sons."
C.W.M. God had another man in His mind. I was wondering if we see that in the address to Philadelphia in @Revelation 3. God definitely had David in mind -- "These things saith the holy, the true; he that has the key of David, he who opens and no one shall shut, and shuts and no one shall open."
S.McC. I think Philadelphia represents the best and the choicest features of the assembly, and therefore
{5}
you can see how suitably the reference to David fits in in that particular phase of church history.
C.S.K. Would you say that in this prophecy to Samuel, there is the dividing between the light of God and religious flesh, so that true leadership can come in.
S.McC. I think that is the teaching in regard to it. It is a very sad matter that a man like Samuel, a man of such prophetic ability, should be detained over this matter of Saul. God says, "How long wilt thou mourn for Saul, seeing I have rejected him." It is not what the people had rejected but what God had rejected.
F.G.S. It is what we can count on?
S.McC. How is this to be met? It cannot be met by a negative side of things, but it can be met by the introduction of David. The clear line of demarcation between the false, religious darkness in Saul, and the features of freshness and life in David is clearly seen.
E.H.B. You speak of the regal thought. Is grace typified as reigning in David -- where sin abounded, grace in David abounded over all that was found in Saul.
S.McC. I think David's history and regime sets out that thought; we shall see that more as we proceed, the regal thought in David, the way it comes into practical expression in himself. But then we see, as you remarked, God coming in Himself to provide David after the breakdown in Saul.
G.H. Would you say that Samuel is finally adjusted regarding Saul in the presence of David, when David is anointed? He is adjusted in the presence of the one who typified Christ.
S.McC. I think Samuel got help as he went along; the full result of it would be seen when David is brought in.
{6}
C.F.I. "I have provided me a king among his sons." Is that not a rich suggestion of grace, God coming in with the supply typified in David?
S.McC. That would bear out what has been said that over against all that had come in in Saul, grace is abounding, although it is not the dispensation of grace in the Old Testament, but the type is there. "I have provided me a king among his sons." It is what God is doing in relation to Himself.
C.F.I. And then it says, "Take a heifer with thee, and say, I am come to sacrifice to Jehovah." Is that a suggestion as to how things are to be wrought out in the saints?
S.McC. I think the heifer suggests that if David is to be brought in it must be in relation to a subjective state among the brethren.
A.I. The system of Saul is set aside in order that something may supersede it.
S.McC. I think what is to be noted in the first part of the chapter is the filling of the horn of oil, and the taking of the heifer, both representing two different features of the truth. The filling of the horn of oil would allude to spirituality in the prophetic ministry, which is to give a lead in this great matter, a lead in regard to the bringing in of David. Then the heifer is the side which bears on the saints themselves. The horn of oil stands linked with Samuel.
M.B. The apostle says to Titus, "For the grace of God which carries with it salvation for all men has appeared, teaching us that, having denied impiety ... we should live soberly ... ." Would that involve deliverance from the man of flesh?
S.McC. Exactly. The thought of grace is referred to in the epistles and in the gospels. Our minds need to be enriched in relation to it.
E.L.R. God does not take account of Samuel's fear. He does not seem to answer that.
{7}
S.McC. Samuel is a lesson for all of us here. He was mourning for Saul, though God had rejected him. In the previous chapter Samuel had said, "He hath also rejected thee from being king." But his feelings are operating against the light that has come into the position. A solemn thing that we should be acting against the light that governs the position.
F.R.G. Is that the reason why they trembled at the coming of Samuel? He had not got clear in his own soul before God.
S.McC. You can see how far this influence extended in chapter 14; it says that "the men of Israel were distressed that day" because of Saul's word. Think of the distress he occasioned in Israel! Jonathan was marked by faith. The matter extended, and here we have the elders of the city trembling as Samuel came to Bethlehem. But Samuel was coming to bring David in.
W.H.W. Would you say that if the prophetic ministry is to go forward, there must be a corresponding state amongst the saints?
S.McC. I think the Lord would suggest that He has in mind this great thought of adjustment among the brethren, so that there is a purified state as the heifer suggests, which would help the prophetic service and ministry.
E.B.McC. Samuel said to Saul, "Jehovah has rent the kingdom of Israel from thee today, and has given it to thy neighbour, who is better than thou." Are we not to take up this scripture, seeking to understand what God is doing at the moment?
S.McC. I think so, and in relation to what you are saying, how are we to meet the negative conditions of Saul and his regime, if it is not in the spiritual power of the ministry and a purified state among the brethren?
G.J.G. It says, "fill *thy* horn with oil;" it was
{8}
Samuel's personal understanding of the matter. But when it is amongst the brethren it is *the* horn of oil; Samuel would bring all the brethren into it livingly.
S.McC. Jehovah says, "How long ...?" That is, matters have to be gone forward with. It is not a question of being detained with Saul. God has provided a king among Jesse's sons.
C.S.K. What about his error in relation to Eliab? Do you think it would be that while Samuel accepted that Saul was rejected because of objectionable features, he had not really come to see the need of a different kind of administration?
S.McC. The introduction of David involves the full displacement of the man after the flesh.
C.F.I. Samuel recognised personal defects in Saul but did not see that God had rejected that kind of man.
S.McC. It is a question of what God has done -- "Seeing I have rejected him." It is not a question of personal likes, but what God is exposing. He would get to the root of a matter.
A.McK.H. Samuel's vision seems to be defective in this matter.
S.McC. The more one looks at this portion, the more one sees the help there is for us in it, in that Samuel was a remarkable personality. How is it that he could have been deflected? How is it that we are deflected at times? You say, we cannot understand it; but the point is that we should not be detained by what may have turned us aside. We should get adjusted by the word from God, and as adjusted be with God in what He is going on with.
M.B. "I have rejected him."
S.McC. It is God in the matter; it is not our personal matter or personal prejudices, but God is in this matter.
{9}
Rem. God would have us all take this matter to heart.
S.McC. I think that is the point, that everyone of us have to get help in regard to this matter of rejecting the man of sin and shame -- the legal man, the man who brings in nothing but shame and distress amongst the people of God. What is contained in the glad tidings would help us to get clear of that man.
F.G.S. God is referred to as "the hope of Israel."
S.McC. Yes, and in Luke the Lord comes in on that line.
H.W.B. Is it significant that the last feature of Saul's administration, which might appear to have been on the principle of grace, was his not facing up to an issue which was evil? I refer to his sparing Agag. It had the appearance of being on the principle of grace but it was not.
S.McC. It is important that we should see that grace does not mean licence in regard to evil. The more we apprehend grace, the more we shall reject evil, because "the grace of God which carries with it salvation for all men has appeared, teaching us that having denied impiety and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, and justly, and piously in the present course of things."
J.G.M. Why is the thought of sacrifice brought in here?
S.McC. I think it is the basis on which David is to be brought forward. It is something that the brethren are going to be brought into in this locality in regard to the introduction of David.
G.W.B. Christ brings before us the operation of God's power; legality will never do that.
S.McC. Legality produces trembling and distress, but David brings in conditions of restfulness and joy amongst the people of God.
{10}
E.B.McC. Do you think "Arise, anoint him; for this is he," is the same as the Lord being anointed at His baptism -- "This is my beloved Son in whom I have found my delight?"
S.McC. I think so. God has drawn attention to Christ just as He has drawn attention to David here; and it is important that we should see the two sides of the position in Samuel's horn of oil and the heifer. They are two features as to which divine Persons are especially helping us in the present conflict.
A.B.M. Is the taking of the heifer optional?
S.McC. God says, "Take a heifer with thee." Samuel is commanded to do it.
C.F.I. Samuel would always remember that feature in his ministry.
S.McC. Exactly, and we can see how Abigail is really the product of Samuel's ministry. I think she comes in from the standpoint of the heifer.
Rem. There is a substantial result to his ministry.
S.McC. His words had not fallen to the ground.
M.B. "If Saul hear it, he will kill me," Samuel said.
S.McC. It is important that we should see the need of a right state among the brethren. We may say, the leaders need adjusting; maybe they do, but the state of the saints needs adjusting too, if David is to be brought in.
F.G.S. Is it a right concern to say, "We will not sit at table till he come hither?"
S.McC. We want to see the great thought of what David is committed to in the anointing. The Lord Jesus was the anointed vessel in Luke's gospel, but He has gone on high, and the local assembly comes under our view as the anointed vessel, the vessel that God is committed to. This is illustrated to us here in the type.
R.G.C. Is state suggested in the thought of the
{11}
heifer, emphasised In the word that "Jehovah looketh upon the heart?"
S.McC. Exactly, and especially are we to be in line with what God is doing -- He is rejecting this great legal system of things suggested in Saul.
W.H.W. Would you say that the thought of the heifer would develop greatly with Samuel as he went along? He would see his own salvation in it, and then he would see the way in which the trembling of the people would be met too.
S.McC. I think so; the feature of the heifer would not only develop with him in this chapter, but right through we see how it works out in relation to David; "But all Israel loved David." We get the daughters coming out to meet him. It all suggests the effectiveness of Samuel's ministry being in the heifer.
E.H.B. Is the sacrifice of the heifer similar to the thought -- "obedient unto death?" I was wondering whether Samuel would be required to obey the word of the Lord, and all it involved.
S.McC. He was commanded to take a heifer. He says, "if Saul hear it, he will kill me." Samuel begins to think about himself. The fear of man is a terrible thing; it is part of the legal system. We are afraid to say something, but the truth is the truth, and if God is in the matter, He will be with us, so that faith needs to operate in these matters, as it did with Jonathan previously.
T.R. "I will tell thee what thou shalt do." We have to learn to consider for God in a matter.
S.McC. And when it comes to David's being brought in, we are greatly cast upon God. When Samuel was bringing Saul in, God apprised him of certain things; but He does not do that when David is being brought in. He does not tell Samuel until the moment that David appears; that is, when we come to the side of grace as we are thinking of it in
{12}
relation to David, we are tested as to how God will come into the matter. Immediately David appears, Jehovah says, "Arise, anoint him; for this is he."
A.McK.H. We often think we are right and yet we have to leave much with God. "Jehovah looketh upon the heart."
S.McC. Man cannot look upon the heart. It is Jehovah's province.
C.F.I. The Lord spoke of what He was in His heart "I am meek and lowly in heart."
S.McC. And the Psalms would unfold what was in the affections of Christ in His manhood; the Spirit of Christ in the Psalms would delineate the great matter of the heart. We shall come to that later in the readings; the feeding of the sheep would link with the matter of the heart.
P.B. Eliab proves later by his anger and criticism of David that he could not be the Lord's anointed. God looking upon the heart, can tell how man will behave himself. We know how Eliab acted in the next chapter. And Samuel said when he saw him, "Surely Jehovah's anointed is before him." But Jehovah said to Samuel, "Look not on his countenance, or on the height of his stature; because I have rejected him."
S.McC. Exactly; and this heart matter is very important because we are so prone to look upon display, so prone to look upon the parade of human strength and knowledge; whereas, when we come to David, it is what is linked with the heart, what comes under the eye of God.
F.R.G. The Lord said, "Take My yoke upon you and learn of Me."
S.McC. That is, that this kind of administration leads to rest of soul; an important thing, rest of soul. And we find the answer to that in David's ministry.
A.McK.H. So the administration of grace would
{13}
take account of what is said -- "For with the heart is believed to righteousness; and with the mouth confession made to salvation." @Romans 10: 10.
S.McC. Exactly, and the heart linked with that. The mouth is important.
A.McK.H. In verse 8 it says, "the word is near thee, in thy mouth and in thy heart."
S.McC. It is a question of what is said in @Romans 10 -- "The righteousness of faith speaks thus." In verse 5 it says, "For Moses lays down *in writing* ... ." But when it comes to the righteousness of faith, it says it "*speaks* thus."
R.H.L.G. Referring again to the heart, is that linked with the thought of the affections, our appreciation of God?
S.McC. It is connected with what is inward. David brings us to the inward side of things, though the outward side is referred to also. But man is so prone to look on what is outward in the way of show and appearance, something that is involved and pretentious. The flesh seems to gravitate towards it.
R.G.C. Some were pretentious in Galatia.
S.McC. Paul said they were nothing to him.
M.B. Paul was careful that there was nothing in his outward demeanour that could encourage them to attach themselves to man after the flesh.
S.McC. We should be concerned that our hearts are right, because the flesh is so subtle that even in confession of sin or wrong-doing the flesh might build up some line of aggrandisement. The mouth comes into operation in the expression of what is in the heart.
F.R.G. When the Lord said, "I am meek and lowly in heart," it is a challenge to all of us.
S.McC. It is very interesting that the following chapter immediately brings in David and his administration. The legal element was challenging the disciples
{14}
as to what they were doing, and the Lord, takes up their matter and defends them as to what they were doing.
R.G.N. God looks on the heart, and it says also in verse 12 that "he was ruddy, and besides of a lovely countenance and beautiful appearance." It is not the height of his stature. We are to note that in verse 7 it says, "Look not on his countenance, or on the height of his stature." It does not say, "Look not on *the* countenance." Eliab was the man who chided David when he was going to bring in deliverance to the people of God.
W.H.W. This matter of grace will develop with us. Would it correspond with what we have in @John 1, "grace upon grace?"
S.McC. We must get our eyes on Christ. Each one of us has to come to a thorough judgment of the man of sin and shame. In regard to Eliab and Abinadab it says, "Jehovah has not chosen these."
G.R.D. When David does come into his right place, there is a reference to them; they are spoken of as his brethren.
S.McC. It is an interesting touch in the chapter that he is referred to as anointed in the midst of his brethren, as if there is an environment now where all these other features are eliminated. Another view is given us here, his brethren; not now the features of the man of sin and shame but a suitable environment in which David can be anointed.
S.C. There is a suggestion here that they were all prepared to go on without David.
S.McC. I think that is very touching, that the brethren were all prepared to go on without David, but Samuel says, "We will not sit at table till he come hither." The man after the flesh must be rejected and the man of spirituality brought in.
R.E.H. A man of another kind altogether.
{15}
S.McC. We are very good perhaps, at seeing the flesh in other people, but the thing is that we are to come to a judgment of it in ourselves. One feels for oneself the painful lessons involved in reaching the end of that man. You say, I understand it from F.E.R.¬s ministry or J.B.S., but nevertheless, I must come to it in my own soul.
C.F.I. In regard to Samuel, he saw it quite clearly in Agag, but not so clearly with others.
S.McC. If a man like Samuel was deflected like that, it might explain a good deal why some of us are deflected at times, when we think we are doing what is right; but God has to bring us back to the anointed Man, the Man after His own heart.
R.A.H. In view of conditions which have prevailed amongst us, it is time we took stock? We have evidently been supporting the wrong man.
S.McC. The ministry would bring in David in all his attractiveness as a common uniting point amongst the saints. Who will unite the brethren? David will; not Saul, not Eliab, God says the same thing of Eliab as He says of Saul -- "I have rejected him."
E.B. "The Spirit is life." @Romans 8: 10. Is that the introduction to David? Having in mind what was referred to earlier, we need to take stock of the results which have accrued from following the wrong man.
S.McC. David brings in the line of vitality. He is of a beautiful appearance. Reference is made to what he was externally, working out of course, from what he was internally.
C.A.I. The whole of the meeting can be carried away if David is not there.
S.McC. The lesson is for everyone of us to see what is possible with our hearts if we do not thoroughly judge Saul, the man after the flesh.
{16}
M.B. It is a deep lesson. Abraham said, "O that Ishmael might live before Thee!"
S.McC. Exactly. So that the horn of oil is a very important constituent in this matter. In Galatians the Spirit of God is emphasised time and again; and we must make room for the Spirit first in ourselves, because that is what the filling of the horn of oil would mean -- the prophetic ministry carried forward in the power of the Spirit; and then in the anointing. It is the way Christ is honoured.
M.B. One of Saul's young men is mentioned -- he was intelligent about this matter.
S.McC. It is remarkable that one of the young men should have a right judgment; he knows where God is, he knows God's man. How far he apprehends it is another matter, but he knows that there is something about this man which is different from anybody else.
E.B.McC. Why does it say that David was skilled in playing?
S.McC. Music is a valuable feature; it is one of the great things which we shall ultimately see comes into David's regime; it does not come in under Moses. Singing does, but not music. David brings in the great thought of music and instruments; so that we must have David.
F.G.S. "Anoint him; for this is he."
S.McC. Exactly, and so it says in regard to the singing and the music in Colossians, "Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly, in all wisdom teaching and admonishing one another, in psalms, hymns, spiritual songs, singing with grace in your hearts to God." I think there is a correspondence somewhat in Colossians to this matter of the excellencies of Christ being enlarged before our view.
C.E.J. David is spoken of in the Acts -- "I foresaw
{17}
the Lord continually before me." David had that Man before him.
S.McC. Quite so. As you say, this matter of being skilled in playing is the first feature mentioned, because we want to bring out the best that is among the brethren, not the worst in the flesh. And then it says that he was a valiant man; the playing does not militate against his military prowess in conflict. The truth has to be stood for and maintained.
C.E.J. Is it maintained through righteousness?
S.McC. That is it, the valiant man and the man of war would represent the maintenance of the truth through conflict. And then it says, "skilled in speech, and of good presence, and Jehovah is with him."
T.R. "A skilful player on a harp." A harp is a very delicate instrument.
S.McC. The harp here seems to have an influence even on Saul, a remarkable thing.
M.B. "He shall play with his hand, and thou shalt be well." Would the principle be that we should help the brethren if they do not see a thing?
S.McC. Exactly. It is not a question of giving up the truth; the truth must be maintained and we are to help each other in relation to it, holding the ground but seeking to bring out the work of God.
R.G.C. Would the skilfulness mentioned in verse 18 be the result of Jehovah's being with him?
S.McC. I think that is the great point to see. Here is a young man, one of Saul's servants apparently, and he says, "Behold, I have seen a son of Jesse." Apparently his eyes were opened to see where God was and what He was doing. You might say he would make the most of Saul, but he is looking to where God is and linking on with that.
A.McK.H. Would you say a little as to "skilled in speech, and of good presence?"
S.McC. Skilled in speech represents the ministry.
{18}
While David is not formally alluded to as a prophet, yet he sets out in a remarkable way the matter of prophetic ministry, and in @2 Samuel 23 it says, "The Spirit of Jehovah spoke by me," that is, he was a man whose speech made room for the Spirit of God.
G.W.B. "Never man spake like this man."
S.McC. We are reminded of how like Jesus David was.
R.L.P. Would these features be seen beautifully in Paul as taking character from Christ?
S.McC. I think so, very much so. And in Acts, where Stephen is going over the Jewish position, it says that his countenance was like the face of an angel. He was skilled in speech and of good presence. He says, "Lord, lay not this sin to their charge."
A.B.M. Does it involve the new man coming in?
S.McC. It does, so that we are to be like Jesus in all our ways.
C.E.J. It seems as though Jehovah named David; they did not know who he was.
S.McC. I think the Spirit of God is calling attention to his name here immediately following his anointing. The name David brings in the thought of lovability. Do the saints love me? How the saints love Christ! Do they love me? I may by force and arbitrary power bring about certain things, but do the saints love me? That is what is involved in being like Christ, that the affections of the saints are drawn out.
C.A.I. Would you suggest that those who serve among the brethren should seek to be lovable?
S.McC. That is the great point. Think of how Paul was loved. We see it in @Acts 20. It is an important matter that we should draw out the affections of the saints.
M.B. All the more so when the saints are carnal.
S.McC. In Corinth they spoke very disparagingly of Paul even though he had begotten them through his ministry.
{19}
GRACE AS PRESENTED IN DAVID (2)
@1 Samuel 25
S.McC. The chapter before us this afternoon shows us in the type, in Abigail, the great place that the assembly has in the subject of the administration of grace. The assembly as it comes into the dispensation is a marvellous vessel under the divine eye, because it is the great vessel of grace. The book of the Acts clearly shows that, especially in regard to the Jewish position when the hatred of man found its expression at the cross; the answer to that in the Acts, is the administration of grace in the coming of the Spirit -- the first feature of divine administration, Christ being glorified. The assembly is set up and it becomes the great vessel of grace, the great city of refuge, the great sphere of divine protection and salvation here on earth.
In the type, Abigail shows us how David is held up in regard to his movements with the sword. The present time is the time when the sword is put into its sheath. It is a wonderful dispensation. David is going on to the throne, and just as Abigail held up David, so the assembly as it were, is standing related to the administration of grace. The sword will be resumed after the translation; literal warfare will again take place; but in the meantime, we have this wonderful interim, this great period when this vessel is formed, in which the ministry of grace is maintained.
I thought we might see in Abigail, an answer in the saints to David himself. Her intelligence and discernment bring out the great qualities of the assembly at the present time when conflict is on, because it is a time of conflict. What is to be noted
{20}
with Abigail is that she has a thorough judgment of Saul and of Nabal. She is a unique type of the assembly at the present time.
E.B. Would you make a distinction between its being a time of conflict but not a time for the use of the sword?
S.McC. "The arms of our warfare are not fleshly." In our period of time the warfare is spiritual.
J.W. Is this the product of Samuel's ministry? Are we challenged as to the effect the ministry over the past fifty years has had upon us?
S.McC. That is exactly the position we are in. Samuel was a great minister of God, one of the greatest prophets, and his ministry was a marvellous ministry honoured of God. But he dies here, and the result of the ministry comes to light in one who is the practical exponent of it. Samuel's ministry brings in David, God's anointed, and Abigail is the subjective answer to that through the prophetic service.
A.J.C. David's young men and also Abigail's and Nabal's young men are mentioned.
S.McC. They all come into the position in the chapter as serving in some way. We can thank God for the element of youth amongst us. There are many here. The testimony requires youth for its continuance.
C.A.I. How do you regard Abigail as standing in responsible relationship to Nabal in the marriage tie?
S.McC. It points to our position as linked with what there is in the public position, yet in the goodness of God having a moral judgment as to it and a moral clearance coming in in relation to it.
G.G.G. Is there a correspondence between David and Abigail? We were noticing this morning that David was ruddy and of a lovely countenance, and of Abigail it says that she was a woman "of good understanding, and of a beautiful countenance."
{21}
S.McC. She is the answer through the prophetic ministry to what is in David. The ministry would produce a correspondence to Christ which would be seen in the saints. We have had a tremendous volume of ministry, and I think the Lord is testing us these last three years or so, as to whether we are substantially living exponents of the ministry, or whether it is just in books.
M.B. Abigail judged the matter and separated from it.
S.McC. It would be on the line of "Save yourselves from this untoward generation."
C.F.I. Verse 3 calls attention to features of moral correspondence in Abigail.
S.McC. It does, and I think it is important that we should see on the eve of translation that the Lord is looking for an answer substantially in the saints to all the worth and distinctiveness of the ministry we have sat under.
E.C.K. Does a crisis bring to light what we are substantially?
S.McC. It does, and it is of all moment that we should be practical exponents of the ministry. Some of the older ones will recall the outstanding address of F.E.R.¬s at Quemerford, that the maintenance of the truth does not lie in the power of mentality that can set it out in its terms, but it lies in being living exponents of it through the help of the Spirit.
C.S.K. Paul says we all have knowledge, but this is something different.
S.McC. It is of paramount importance that we should see the character of intelligence which belongs to the assembly period and what it is to Divine Persons to see this intelligent understanding marking the assembly. Paul, even in dealing with things at Corinth, while there was much which was contrary to the truth in a concrete way among them, yet abstractly, he
{22}
holds them in the light of this. He says, "I speak as to intelligent persons: do ye judge what I say." @1 Corinthians 10 -- 15.
T.C.H. Substantiality in the assembly is essential.
S.McC. It is a question of maintaining the spirit and grace of the dispensation, and the assembly is found in type in Abigail. Not only is her language right, but it is what she is substantially, because David says, "See, I have hearkened to thy voice, and have accepted thy person;" @1 Samuel 25: 35, meaning what she was substantially.
A.L.F. Would the position in which Abigail found herself in Nabal's house produce exercise which led her to a judgment as to both Nabal and David, and in that position; I was wondering if the thought of suffering would link very much with the inward formation of the truth?
S.McC. I think it does. It is a question of where we are in these matters. David is rejected. It is not a time of glory; it is a time of suffering. And Abigail comes into the chapter here as an intelligent woman who is able to see through all the difficulties and perceive that David is God's anointed. It was not easy to see that, because Saul was on the throne.
G.R.D. Would you say a word as to the bearing of David's appeal? David furnishes a background for the coming forward of Abigail.
S.McC. I think it shows how the bearing of the glad tidings is towards all. Nabal is not excluded. David says, "long life to thee!" We should remember the glory of the dispensation from this viewpoint. Later, David assumes the sword but Abigail holds him back.
E.H.B. "Glory and ... peace ... both to Jew first and to Greek." @Romans 2: 10.
C.E.J. So it is a good day. We come in a good day in verse 8.
{23}
S.McC. That is what characterises the day we are in. It is a day of salvation.
A.McK.H. Would you regard the 18th Matthew as displaying features of grace in the assembly, one after another, until they culminate in the assembly itself?
S.McC. The assembly is the final court of appeal; not that we would eliminate the judicial thought from our minds in speaking of the vessel of grace; Abigail represents the assembly in her clear perception and discernment in regard to the need of the moment.
P.B. In @1 Timothy 2, we read, "I exhort therefore, first of all, that supplications ... be made for all men ... for this is good and acceptable before our Saviour God."
S.McC. Our outlook should be right; it should be one of blessing. It is not one of judgment. Blessing, we may say, is the order of the day in our dispensation. As we move through the Acts and see the unique ministry of the twelve, we see how grace is presented and how the assembly becomes the great vessel of salvation and divine protection.
C.A.I. Could we regard Abigail as the moral interpretation of the heifer thought in intelligent response to David and his anointing?
S.McC. As we remarked this morning, the heifer would, in its full thought, work out along this line. Abigail representing the assembly as corresponding to Christ in a feminine way.
W.H.W. "Upon me, my Lord, upon me let the iniquity be."
S.McC. The chapter opens with the background of Samuel's death. Then we have David brought in, and Nabal. And finally, Abigail comes into it. Then comes the message of Nabal to David, and the operational side of things commences. And it is on the operational side that difficulties come up as we know. We may be clear as to the basic outlines of
{24}
the truth, as to the prophetic ministry, as to David and as to Nabal, representing the public profession and as to the assembly in Abigail in an objective way, but when we come to operations, then difficulties come in. We need to see how the operations proceed in this chapter.
E.B.McC. Does Samuel's death suggest that we are left to our own exercises in such conditions?
S.McC. What we find here in the type is the product of Samuel's ministry, and that is to find expression in all the operations in a practical way.
A.S.P. "And now know and consider what thou wilt do."
S.McC. It is the operations which test us. We can sit in meeting after meeting and speak about the assembly and about Christ and about the profession and the glad tidings, and then, when it comes to the operations, we are all awry. This is the test -- "know and consider what thou wilt do."
C.F.I. Does Luke's gospel present to us the operations of grace?
S.McC. It does, and also it stresses the importance of accuracy. ' ... it has seemed good to me also, accurately acquainted from the origin with all things, to write to thee with method ... that thou mightest know the certainty of those things." It is important that there should be accuracy when it comes to the operation of things.
G.H. Accuracy as to divine principles and then as to facts to which those principles are to be applied?
E.B. So we are to know the certainty of any matter, or matters generally, or the truth.
S.McC. Luke's gospel is a wonderful gospel to read in relation to the glory of the glad tidings. It is the great evangelical gospel to instruct us in the great matter of the glad tidings, and that we are to know the certainty of things.
{25}
W.J.B. What would you say as to the characteristics of these two men Nabal and David? Nabal was shearing sheep.
S.McC. Nabal is wholly out of accord with the general teaching of the chapter as to David and Abigail. He represents what is around us on every hand, and what we need to judge thoroughly in every way. Nabal is not concerned about feeding the sheep here, but shearing them; that is, he is operating in view of his own personal gain and personal prestige, as he says, "Shall I take my bread, and my water, and my flesh which I have killed for my shearers ...?" His operations only took into account what he himself was. Abigail's operations took into account the moral worth of David and his official glory.
J.W. Nabal is marked by assurance is he not -- "Who is David? and who is the son of Jesse?"
S.McC. And he is very daring; one of the young men who spoke to Abigail said, "David sent messengers out of the wilderness to bless our master, and he has insulted them."
W.J.B. Abigail was marked by great concern about Nabal and David.
S.McC. She has a thorough judgment as to Nabal and as to Saul, a remarkable thing. David emerges from a sphere of obscurity, coming all at once on to our view as feeding the sheep in chapter 16. And Abigail also emerges from a sphere of comparative obscurity, and she is a person of moral worth just as David was.
E.B.McC. It is remarkable the supply she brings in here to meet the situation; the, abundant range of food.
S.McC. It is, and also what she says is remarkable. What she is substantially comes to light. I think perhaps we have been more concerned about light in procedure in operations than we have been about where
{26}
we have been substantially; not that we do not need light, but it is an important thing that we should be substantial exponents of the spirit and grace of the dispensation.
C.F.I. Paul refers to the arms of our warfare. He commences chapter 10 by saying, "I ... entreat you by the meekness and gentleness of the Christ." That is seen here.
S.McC. Exactly, in the way Abigail takes up her position before David and the feeling way in which she speaks about the whole matter.
W.J.B. Was David provoked? He had sent a message of peace.
S.McC. We have to view the chapter dispensationally in the way in which we are looking at the type now. There may be other ways in which it is applied, but looking at it dispensationally, the Lord would have a right to exercise the sword under ordinary circumstances, as He will immediately the dispensation is completed; but we see here how the Lord Jesus in type in David is held up in the use of the sword through the assembly's position in type in Abigail as the vessel of grace.
M.B. These young men come into things at the right time in regard to this crisis. I was wondering if we could have a word for the young men here.
S.McC. It is interesting how these elements come to light in these difficult positions; these persons are prepared to stand for the truth. We were speaking the other night about the man who comes into the body of chapter 18 of 2 Samuel. He takes issue with Joab, who was a General and great publicly, but the man takes issue with him. He says, "Yet would I not put forth my hand against the king's son, for in our hearing the king charged thee." This young man of Nabal's was a man like that.
{27}
E.B. It is the young men who overcome the wicked one.
S.McC. It is a feature to be noted that they have overcome the wicked one. The word of God abides in them. The young women would be involved in it too, and I think the young men and women should take account of that expression. "I have written to you, young men, because ye are strong, and the word of God abides in you, and ye have overcome the wicked one."
G.J.G. So that this young man recognises that there is capacity with Abigail. It says that Abigail made haste.
S.McC. In verse 14 we read that one of Nabal's young men told Abigail saying, "Behold, David sent messengers." He knows who David is apparently. "David sent messengers out of the wilderness to bless our master." That is touching in itself, the way he alludes to the matter. And he goes on to say, "And the men were very good to us, and we were not hurt, neither missed we anything, as long as we companied with them, when we were in the fields." He is a very observant young man.
G.W.B. There was no young man like this to be found at Corinth; the apostle says, "Thus there is not a wise person among you? not even one ... " -- a testing scripture for us.
M.B. This young man places the information where it can be dealt with.
S.McC. We have often heard the importance of placing information in the right hands. This young man did not go to Nabal, he went to Abigail, or the assembly in type. The information was placed in the hands where it would do most good, not where it would do the most damage. The enemy would help us to put information where it would do the most
{28}
damage; but we want to see it is placed where it will do the most good.
T.C.H. Is there an appeal to Abigail to take up intercessory service?
S.McC. The young man seems to understand the greatness of Abigail, that she is a woman who is able to operate and do things according to her understanding.
W.H.W. He says, "He is such a son of Belial, that one cannot speak to him." They could not address him directly.
S.McC. That is right, but apparently they were free to speak to Abigail at any time.
R.G.C. Normally there is capacity found in the assembly to meet every exigency that might arise. The young man recognises that capacity with Abigail.
G.W.B. Regarding the matter of placing information where it is best used, it says that Abigail did not tell her husband Nabal anything.
S.McC. She waited an opportunity -- "And it came to pass in the morning, when the wine was gone out of Nabal, that his wife told him these things." There is skill in her operations, and the assembly is marked by skill in her operations. @Matthew 18 is a chapter which involves skill in operations.
A.McK.H. The young man spoke respectfully. Do we need to take account of the necessity of speaking respectfully to one another in the assembly?
S.McC. Indeed, how careful we should be in our language that we do not allow our tongues to get out of control, especially as forming part of the dignified vessel of grace in this dispensation.
F.R.G. In principle Nabal insulted the Spirit of grace.
S.McC. I suppose in principle he did. His end, I think, would bear that out.
P.L.B. Abigail meets this position with food for
{29}
the young men. Is that the way the situation is met -- to bring about strength in a difficult position?
S.McC. We must have something positive; we cannot meet what is negative by what is negative. We have to meet it with positive features of the truth. There is positive substance in what Abigail brings forward.
C.S.K. This young man appreciated the grace and care of what had been expended upon them.
S.McC. It is an important thing that the young people should understand the position they are in as surrounded by David and his men, by the Lord Jesus Christ and His own; that while He is rejected, we, are in a position where we are in safe keeping, where we are protected from all the evil influences around.
R.H.L.G. The young man says, "Know and consider what thou wilt do."
S.McC. He sees that it is a good time now for her to act. It is the assembly that is before us now in this matter of operating, and we are to see the greatness of what is linked with the assembly in type from this view point. It reminds us of @Ephesians 3, "the administration of the grace of God which has been given to me," what the working out of that involves among the saints; all that would enter into the operation side.
F.R.G. Would you say a word as to the lowliness of mind which marked Abigail at the various junctures in the chapter?
S.McC. I think it is important to see the way that she bows herself to the ground and fell before David on her face, "Upon me, my lord, upon me let the iniquity be; but let thy handmaid, I pray thee, speak in thine ears, and hear the words of thy handmaid." Think of what the saints must be to Christ in the midst of all that Nabal represents. We were speaking about the Lord Jesus in @Matthew 11 saying He was
{30}
meek and lowly in heart. Think of the corresponding features in Abigail, the lowliness that marked her and her capacity to take on the matter on hand.
C.A.I. Simon in @Luke 7 was the Nabal of that day; but the woman ministered to the Lord.
S.McC. In principle I suppose that would be so. I suppose we would see the full result in the way she honours Christ. "Seest thou this woman?" as if he had delight in drawing attention to her.
M.A.H. We often lack in wisdom in dealing with matters.
S.McC. I think the test is where we are substantially. I think that all our bent of mind sometimes is to get as much knowledge as we can, but we should be concerned as to communion with the Holy Spirit and making room for Him that we might be formed substantially in the features of the dispensation.
P.L.B. Abigail knew what David had been through.
S.McC. Yes, and I do not think that knowledge came into her mind suddenly. And if we follow up the truth, we shall be helped. The difficulty is that we fix our minds on one particular feature of the truth and get out of balance, and therefore get into confusion in the manner of operation.
M.B. There is variety in the food Abigail brings.
S.McC. It is an interesting list. There is what is rare and what is special; wine is in it. Abigail was not a prohibitionist. It is worthy of note that in the books of Samuel all the persons of moral worth have got flasks and bottles of wine -- Hannah has; the man going up to Bethel has; Jesse has, and Abigail has. Saul only had a cruse of water. The wine would be typical of what would spiritually affect the saints and stimulate them.
R.E.H. In @Revelation 6 we read, "do not injure the oil and the wine."
S.McC. I suppose it would be a feature of importance
{31}
in whatever circumstances it appears, especially here where David and his men might have been jaded and weary with what the conflict involved.
E.H.B. Do you think there is a thought of buoyancy in it?
S.McC. And stimulation -- a great element to bring in when there are difficulties, because the saints get so depressed. But Luke would help us as to the matter of maintaining buoyancy. He speaks much of joy.
A.I. The assembly is to be marked by discernment.
S.McC. It helps to see how this thought of discernment works out in Abigail. What does the discernment refer to? It refers to the movements of David. She says, "evil has not been found in thee in all thy days." She discerns that he is a person of moral worth by what he was and by what he did in contrast to Saul.
R.G.C. She is amazingly generous in her outlook towards him. David had put on his sword, but she said in effect, that he was saved from that because of what was within himself.
S.McC. It is remarkable what she says in that connection, how far-reaching her thoughts are. Verse 30 says, "And it shall come to pass, when Jehovah ... shall appoint thee ruler over Israel."
G.C.G. The young man said evil was determined against his master. He accepted the situation.
L.Jo. There are two important features brought forward in relation to the shedding of blood and avenging himself.
S.McC. I think that bears on what we have been saying as to the early chapters of the Acts, the grace of the dispensation is to be maintained. There is a time for the sword as we know; later, it will be resumed. But the present time is the time when the
{32}
sword is put into its sheath as the Lord said. It is not the time for wielding it in blood shedding.
F.R.G. Naturally we would have said that David had every right to avenge himself because of the treatment he had received; but the way in which Abigail handles the matter, really indicates the infinite grace of the dispensation.
S.McC. And we should be concerned in ourselves as to any thought of avenging ourselves in any matter.
M.B. Abigail sets forth features of the woman of worth in @Proverbs 31, "She openeth her mouth with wisdom; and upon her tongue is the law of kindness."
S.McC. Exactly.
G.W.B. The thief on the Cross had discernment when he said, "this man has done nothing amiss." @Luke 23: 41.
C.W.M. Abigail says, "And when Jehovah shall deal well with my lord, then remember thy handmaid."
S.McC. She speaks in a much fuller way, of course, but there would be the fullness of what we have in principle in the words of the thief.
G.H. Was Abigail's concern not so much for Nabal as for David, that he would be preserved in keeping with the spirit of the dispensation?
S.McC. That is the whole point; she has a definite judgment as to Nabal, in fact she says in verse 26, "let thine enemies, and they that seek evil to my lord, be as Nabal." What did she mean by that? It shows that on account of her faith, the position was completely settled for her even as far as Nabal was concerned. It is important what faith can do, and if we had greater faith in regard to the truth in matters of conflict, the ground would be better held. In the last chapter of Ephesians, after Paul had been speaking of conflict, he says, "Peace to the brethren, and love with faith, from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ." A remarkable expression, because Ephesians refers to
{33}
the assembly in her heavenly glory, and it is essential that the faith side of things should be prominent.
F.L.B. @Ephesians 3 says, "that the Christ may dwell, through faith, in your hearts, being rooted and founded in love;" that is, we are still down here but we are intelligent as to our heavenly position.
S.McC. This element of faith is a very important thing. In chapter 14 Jonathan says, "perhaps Jehovah will work for us; for there is no restraint to Jehovah to save by many or by few." Now that is very fine, to see how faith is supported. To Jonathan, the thing was as good as done; and that is what we want to see substantially amongst the saints -- in their links with divine Persons, things are as good as done. The enemies have no power because they are uncircumcised. "Cease ye from man, whose breath is in his nostrils."
R.E.H. Abigail said, "the soul of my lord shall be bound in the bundle of the living."
S.McC. In regard to that reference, it is important to notice certain features that marked Abigail substantially; first, there is the wealth she has as mentioned in verse 18, then in verse 23, what she is substantially in her actions. And then what she is substantially in her apprehension of Christ; the moral glory of David affects her as the moral glory of Christ affects the assembly.
G.R.D. You were saying Abigail represents the assembly administratively in grace. How would it be worked out practically by the assembly when she takes upon herself the iniquity of Nabal, and she asks forgiveness for the transgression against David's young men. "Upon me, my lord, upon me let the iniquity be;" Is that a feature of grace?
S.McC. We are to understand the bearing of it in regard to the whole public position; we feel the iniquity, taking upon ourselves what has come into the public body -- dishonouring to Christ and dishonouring
{34}
to God. In the assembly the whole position is felt, and in principle, the sin offering is eaten.
F.R.G. Her appreciation of the moral glory of David helps in relation to this matter of coming down. She rode an ass and came down.
S.McC. That is interesting.
R.E.H. I was thinking of @Philippians 2, "let this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus."
S.McC. Philippians is the answer to Ephesians in a practical way. It gives us the personnel of the assembly marked by features of correspondence to Christ.
G.W.B. Would you say a little more as to this matter of discernment? It says Nabal's heart died within him. It was only what Abigail could see that she could discern.
S.McC. The young man says, "He is such a son of Belial, that one cannot speak to him." That is what marked him in his approach to persons. No one could speak to him. And then Abigail says of Nabal, "and the souls of thine enemies, them shall he sling out from the hollow of the sling." She also says to David, "Because my lord fights the battles of Jehovah, and evil has not been found in thee all thy days." That would be an allusion to David's ways and to his uprightness. Then she goes on to say, "And if a man is risen up to pursue thee and to seek thy life." She has a judgment as to Saul. She has a judgment as to Saul and as to Nabal, and as to David, according to what marked them.
P.B. The 26th verse brings in discernment -- "seeing Jehovah has restrained thee from coming with bloodshed." Abigail had a sense that David had heard her, that David was moved in relation to her.
C.E.J. Did you have something more in mind when you referred to what marked these persons?
{35}
S.McC. I did. We are to have a judgment of every person by what they are and by what they say.
C.S.K. By what a man's course is.
S.McC. Exactly. That is what she is drawing attention to. She says, "if a man is risen up"; not "if a man has been raised up." A very important difference. David was raised up according to @2 Samuel 23. But she says, "If a man is risen up." She has a judgment of Saul because of the course he is pursuing.
A.McK.H. Could you tell us how Abigail could make haste without making mistakes?
S.McC. I think it is because of her understanding and her discernment. It all enters into the matter of our haste and ability to do things. We are to see the greatness of the assembly; normally the assembly does not make mistakes.
J.G.M. Would the clarity of the evidence of the young man bear upon that?
S.McC. I think that would form a basis for supporting what is right.
G.W.B. Is it important that this vessel so formed in all these beautiful features, comes into prominence under adverse circumstances?
S.McC. We might say that if we were in America or Great Britain, we would do very differently. But the point is, it is a question of where we all are substantially, and that is important in this chapter. We might finish with just a word as to Abigail in the last part of the chapter, what she is substantially in her movements in following the messengers of David. It would represent the place that the ministry has. It says in verse 39, "And the servants of David came to Abigail to Carmel, and spoke to her, saying, 'David has sent us to thee, to take thee as his wife.'" She does not reason out the matter or argue; but "She arose and bowed herself on her face to the earth, and said, 'Behold, let thy handmaid be a bondwoman
{36}
to wash the feet of the servants of my lord."' She not only appreciates David and respects him, but she respects his servants.
W.J.B. She was very different from Jonathan who said to David, "Thou shalt be king over Israel, and I shall be next to thee"; Abigail takes the lowly place.
S.McC. What room there is for lowliness amongst us! The great administrative chapter -- @Matthew 18, begins with the thought of the little child. The trouble is we often assume largeness in our own eyes.
W.H.W. Abigail uses an ass. How would that work out in our day?
S.McC. I think she knows what to do and how to make use of things that are best suited for the movements required to make the journey. We cannot put too much into the types. She uses what is at hand to carry out the movements required.
M.B. Would it link in any way with the ministry you referred to earlier? She would be one who was moving in relation to the precious ministry that had come to her.
S.McC. She communes with the servants. It is a question of subjection to the ministry. I think that ministry brings out where we are substantially.
A.J.C. So that whether it is on the descending line or the upward line, we still have ministry to help us.
S.McC. While on the one hand we see Abigail as the product of Samuel's ministry, on the other hand she is amenable to what David would put before her through his servants.
J.R. It says she went after the messengers.
S.McC. That is important. These young men are the servants of David and she follows them; they represent David.
M.B. It says she became his wife.
S.McC. It is a very fine ending. And then we are told that David had also taken Ahinoam of Jizreel.
{37}
and that Saul had given Michal to Phalti, the son of Laish. That is, we are reminded of other possessions -- that David has; but the whole chapter is throwing into relief what Abigail was. And I think that is the great feature of the dispensation, that whatever links the Lord Jesus may have with Israel, or publicly in the profession, what we have to see is the glory of the assembly from the viewpoint of Abigail.
P.B. Abigail had five damsels who followed her.
S.McC. Just as David has the young men supporting the position on his side, so Abigail has five damsels supporting the position on her side, and they went after the messengers of David. Abigail is in subjection to leadership in the ministry. I think, the great thing that the chapter should leave with us in the way of an impression, is what we are substantially in regard to the great features of the dispensation. The ministry has been drawn attention to, but the assembly is to be the vessel in which the thing is seen substantially.
W.H.W. She became his wife; she was trustworthy.
S.McC. We are to be trustworthy in matters. It is a good word to finish with.
{38}
GRACE AS PRESENTED IN DAVID (3)
@2 Samuel 1: 17 -- 27; @2 Samuel 22: 20 -- 32; @2 Samuel 23: 1 -- 5
S.McC. These sections of the scripture that we have read in this 2nd Book of Samuel are remarkable sections. Brethren will notice that they are all in poetic form, meaning that something more than the ordinary is entering into them. They are filled with holy feelings, and I am sure the brethren will agree that we need to be enriched with the kind of feelings that come to light in David, in the passages that we have read. It is remarkable that in a book that generally is filled with such declension and such evident features of lawlessness, that we should get these poetic utterances of David throwing into relief as they do the kind of man that he was; the sweet psalmist of Israel, as he is referred to in the last passage. That would allude to a place that he had acquired, not a place divinely given exactly, as in the anointing, but a place that he had acquired in relation to his poetic compositions among the people of God. And it is thought that we should see first the way he looks upon Saul and Jonathan, especially his references to Jonathan at the end. In all these passages David takes an abstract view of Jonathan, and an abstract view of himself in the 22nd chapter. It is a remarkable thing that, as we have read, despite the fact that he had sinned as is recorded in the book, he is able in the liberty of his knowledge of God and his relations with God at the end, to take account of himself in an abstract way, as we have been taught, apart from the failure and breakdown. A very important thing with all of us, we should be able to take account of ourselves in an abstract way in relation to the work of God in
{39}
us, apart from all that is so mixed, all that to which failure and breakdown may attach to in us naturally, in the flesh. And then we have his references to himself and the administration, the king and the rule of the king. It is a remarkable touch as to the way that he brings in the great thought of divine administration over against all the difficulties that had obtained in the experiences of this book. He is able to view things, while having the true judgment of what marked certain things, what marked certain persons, yet be is able to take account of them abstractly in relation to their links with God.
Ques. Would that be seen in the apostle Paul when he says, "By the grace of God, I am what I am?" He identifies himself with the work of God in his soul.
S.McC. Yes, exactly. @Romans 7 would help us as to it too, and would show us the way that Paul arrived at it in an experimental way, in his soul. He did not pretend to be anything else than he was. He was, by God's grace, what he was, and that is a great feature for everyone of us to lay hold of, that we do not pretend to be something that we are not.
Rem. "Thy condescending gentleness hath made me great," David's word.
S.McC. It shows how he appreciated grace, we might say, in its operation towards him, which would be in mind in that verse.
C.F.I. Would the teaching of the children of Judah, in the use of the bow, bear upon this matter of the abstract view?
S.McC. Well, it does, because Judah is particularly linked with the abstract side. You will remember that in one of the Psalms reference is made to Judah as God's sanctuary. "When Israel went out of Egypt ... Judah was His sanctuary, Israel His dominion." @Psalm 114: 1 -- 2. A remarkable reference to Judah, and what
{40}
Judah was, for David would no doubt be in mind, and the children of Judah coming in here is interesting in that way.
Rem. The book of Jasher too, would be written from that point of view, would it not?
S.McC. Yes, the book of the upright. The books in scripture are interesting in that way, specially this one of the upright. Uprightness is a great thing; David alludes to it in the 22nd chapter of this book, that we should be upright, upright in heart, upright in our relations with God, and in our relations with one another.
G.J.G. It refers in @Psalm 25, "Good and upright is Jehovah; therefore will He instruct sinners in the way." Remarkable that uprightness is involved; it bears upon that, does it not?
S.McC. So that it would involve that we are like God. There is a correspondence in moral likeness when we are marked by, uprightness, as the book of the upright, the book of Jasher, would have in mind, upright ones.
Ques. Is the view of Saul, the way David thinks of Saul and Jonathan in his lamentation, a matter of uprightness really?
S.McC. Well, it is. That is the point, that this is to be incorporated in this great book. It must be a remarkable book, it must have been extant amongst the people of God. We are not told everything that is in it, but this is one of the things that is in it. We want to give heed to what is extant, in the way of writings amongst the saints. It might not be out of place to refer to the importance of the younger ones following up the ministry in their early days, and looking into what has been before, and what is extant amongst us, in the way of help as to the truth; the great ministry of J.N.D., of F.E.R., and J.B.S., up to the great ministry of our time and day. It is
{41}
important that we should value what is extant among the people of God.
Ques. Is it because of the need of that, that some have felt the necessity of reprinting J.N.D.¬s Collected Writings?
S.McC. Well, exactly. They enter into the foundations of the revival, the church revival in our time, and how important that they should be rightly valued, and they should be looked into. There is no time like the time of youth, when the mind is clear, the renewed mind helped particularly, and there is not the same incapacity as comes in later on in life. It is a great thing that we should give ourselves to the reading of the Scriptures, and the reading of what is extant in the way of help as to the truth.
M.B. We have had much of late in regard to the thought of Manhood. Do the circumstances bring into activity the spiritual feelings and affections of David?
S.McC. Well, they do. David could have taken the advantage that the position afforded him, but he would not. I think what shines in David here, is the grace of the anointing, that he would not take any unfair advantage.
Rem. You were speaking about the spiritual character of these poetic utterances of David. The song of the bow, would that be the outcome of his experiences? I was thinking of the reference in Genesis, that God brings clouds over the earth, and the bow shall be seen in the cloud. Is that the outcome of his experiences of the faithfulness of God?
S.McC. It would involve victory in his soul, as we think of all the experiences in the latter part of the book, the Psalms affording much light as to what David went through in his soul, in his relations with God in them, the song of the bow would particularly point to that.
C.F.I. We seem to need much help on this line, as
{42}
to the constancy of respect for one another. Would the abstract line come into mind in the thought of the saints as born of God, for instance? You have a certain character attaching to them, and you always hold them in your affections in that way.
S.McC. That is it exactly; that the new birth in its operation lays a basis in our souls, and has in mind the status that we have in the family of God; and the work of God in us is a remarkable thing from that standpoint. And it is one of the great things that is needed. It is an advantage in serving one another, when we are able to hold one another rightly in relation to the work of God.
C.F.I. So if I do not just see eye to eye with my brother on a matter of the truth, I in no way allow my affections or respect for him to become beclouded.
S.McC. That is an important thing, because love must be active, must be operative, if in any crisis or difficulty here, things are going to be carried through. It is not that David has not got a judgment as to Saul and Jonathan; he refers to the shield of Saul as not anointed with oil; and Saul and Jonathan beloved and pleasant in their lives, even in their death were not divided. He does not forget what marked them, but surmounting all that, is his appreciation of them as for instance in what he says of Jonathan, "I am distressed for thee, my brother Jonathan: very pleasant wast thou unto me, thy love to me was wonderful, passing women's love." How David's soul was moved in this matter, remembering Jonathan in relation to the bright features that had marked him, his attachment to David.
Rem. Is there a difference between David's lamentation, and Samuel's mourning for Saul?
S.McC. Quite a difference. It is important to see that Samuel is thinking of himself and is affected by his own personal feelings. David in his lamentation
{43}
is, as it were, giving expression to divine feelings in regard to this great matter that such as Saul and Jonathan should fall as they did under the hand of the Philistines.
E.B.McC. It says, "The beauty of Israel is slain upon thy high places: how are the mighty fallen."
S.McC. Well, exactly here. So that he is viewing the thing abstractly, "The beauty of Israel," -- abstract thoughts are in his mind. We sometimes think of leadership in matters involving the truth, which is very important in its place, and is a great help in difficult circumstances, but it is a great thing to get a lead in right feelings. You will remember how it says in the 3rd chapter, verse 31, in connection with Abner; Abner was a great general, and a terrible state of things existed, and Abner is slain by Joab. And it says in verse 31, "And David said to Joab, and to all the people that were with him. Rend your garments and gird yourselves with sackcloth, and mourn before Abner. And King David followed the bier. And they buried Abner in Hebron; and the king lifted up his voice and wept at the grave of Abner; and all the people wept. And the king lamented over Abner, and said Should Abner die as a fool death? Thy hands were not bound, nor thy feet put into fetters; as a man falleth before wicked men, fellest thou!" He has a judgment you see, as to what had transpired, as to what entered into this calamity; but he is giving a right lead, he is showing the people that he is not with this cruel and wicked act that had been perpetrated. And he follows the bier, and he lifted up his voice and wept, giving a right lead. How needful it is when we think of all that has entered into the public position, the breakdown in Christendom, and all the features of breakdown that may be taken account of. How essential it is that we should be marked by right feelings.
{44}
Rem. And all the people followed, and it says the people "wept again."
S.McC. How important a right lead is, and what is so striking about David is that while he may at different times come under certain things that are calamities, he always rises as adjusted in his relations with God, and manifests an ability to give a good lead among the saints.
E.B.McC. He is giving a good lead here, is he not, that is, he says, "Tell it not in Gath, carry not the tidings in the streets of Ashkelon, lest the daughters of the Philistines rejoice." We would not make a public matter of it, would we?
S.McC. Indeed, there should be holy regard for the things of God, that they are not treated as common, and talked over in a common way, but with a sober regard for what God's rights are, as involved in the matter.
Rem. Would you be free to say a word as to our right attitude towards those who may have missed their way, and perhaps have been withdrawn from, and even die out of fellowship? I was thinking of the word of Mr. Darby in regard to Mr. Kelly, when he said, "I trust the brethren will not be too hard on Mr. Kelly."
S.McC. Yes, very interesting. What a great servant J.N.D. was! We think of him and his feelings in regard to matters. It is said of him that at Plymouth he went home when he saw what was obtaining in Plymouth, and the awful influence of wrong teaching in Plymouth, and he threw himself on a couch and wept. Great men of God are marked by feelings; the men of God in scripture were all marked by feelings, and we should not be behind in the matter of these feelings; and when it comes to those that are outside, there should be concern about them, and the priest would be concerned about them in the light
{45}
of Leviticus. It is important that we should see that the priest has to do with these matters.
Rem. It says that the Philistines stripped the slain, and the Amalekite too took the crown and the bracelet from Saul. It does not say he put them back on again does it?
S.McC. No.
M.B. So you think there are the two sides then, "Tell it not in Gath," that would be in a public sense; then in the inside, does the apostle's word apply, "Not rejoice at iniquity."
S.McC. Reference was recently made to the burial of a sister who had been withdrawn from. It was felt that it should not be from the room, because of that. If we are claiming the body as belonging to the saints and to the testimony why should the room not be used if it was thought best?
W.J.B. If it is one who has been withdrawn from, but who we are assured had definite links with God, would it be wrong to speak of him in the burial service as brother?
S.McC. Not that I know of, why would we not? I mean the fact that we have withdrawn from him does not break the family link. @Matthew 18 alludes to our attitude, "Let him be unto thee *as*!" it doesn't say "*a* heathen man or a publican," but "*as*," does it not? Let us read it to make sure that we are saying what is right. It says in verse 17 of @Matthew 18, "And if also he will not listen to the assembly, let him be to thee *as* one of the nations." *As* one of the nations," the *as* is a great governing word in that passage. It is our attitude towards a person, but withdrawal does not sever their link in the family of God; they still belong to the family of God.
W.H.W. I was wondering if in the setting of this chapter, the removal of the Amalekite does not set
{46}
free all the right feelings of the Spirit in relation to many different things.
S.McC. That is very interesting, because what is to be noted is that David is very severe in his judgment of the Amalekite, as if that is an element that there is war with from generation to generation, because as you will remember in the early chapters of Exodus, it says "The hand is upon the throne of Jah" in connection with Amalek. And David marked by the richest and tenderest feelings in his lament of Saul and Jonathan, especially Jonathan, is unsparing in regard to this element of Amalek, that is against the throne of God.
Rem. Amalek comes to light does he not, when the people of God typically have received the Spirit?
S.McC. Exactly.
Rem. So that he would be opposed, would he not, to all these spiritual feelings as marked David here?
S.McC. I think it is interesting to see how the Amalekite is severely dealt with, and we get the choice spontaneous outbreak of David in regard to Saul and Jonathan; as if the anointing, and all that the Spirit would be in type to us, would help us in expressing right feelings in regard of such.
Rem. Amalek is referred to in his attitude towards the hindermost, the weak amongst the saints.
S.McC. Well exactly; that is, he is not marked by fairness. He is marked by unfairness in his operations. It was seen then, it is seen here; this young man is taking an unfair advantage and David sees through it immediately. And he will not have it, and I should think that is a word for all of us, that we do not seize an unfair advantage to make the most of our own ends, in any given matter. There is a good deal, of course, that comes out in this book, in a negative way, that is very humbling, but we want to see the spiritual feelings in David that rise above personal
{47}
advantages to give expression in a godly way to the exercise of the moment. That is what it is. It was a humbling thing that the shield of Saul should be cast away as not anointed with oil. It says, "For there the shield of the mighty was vilely cast away, the shield of Saul was not anointed with oil." How important it is that in matters of conflict for the truth that we should hold to the truth of the anointing, that all our activities, all our words, all that we do and say, should be marked by the anointing -- that we should not allow our shields to be vilely cast away.
W.H.W. Does that bear on our inability to operate the truth in difficulties?
S.McC. Well, that is the point. It speaks in Isaiah of the drunkards of Ephraim. Mr. Darby said that divine principles in the hands of unspiritual men, or something to that effect, are like a sword in the hands of a drunkard. He does not know where he is striking, or which way the sword is going, it is just a question of striking, and it is a great matter that the truth should be held and used, as in the power of the Spirit. It says in the matter of the conflict in Ephesians, "The sword of the Spirit, which is God's word."
Rem. It says that David was delivered from the hands of his enemies and out of the hands of Saul. He does not regard Saul as an enemy.
S.McC. He is not fully delivered yet. Wait for the 22nd chapter; there is a lot that David has to go through. The 22nd chapter gives us the day he is delivered out of the hands of Saul and all his enemies. Saul has died, yes, but there still is the house of Saul to contend with. There is a system that is still opposed, not now in the hand of Saul himself, but in the agencies linked with it. David is above the features of the flesh as we would speak of it, in regard to ourselves, in operating in relation to the truth.
Rem. Would you help us again with regard to
{48}
your reference to holding things abstractly? You refer to holding the truth abstractly, and holding our thoughts of one another in an abstract way. We need to gather that up fully to get the gain of just what you are referring to in a general way. Would you make it a little clearer?
S.McC. Well I think it is important to see it, because I do not think we can serve one another rightly, unless we learn how to appreciate one another in an abstract way. We do not ignore sin, we do not ignore lawlessness. God's holiness and the rights of His throne require that all that should be taken into account; but if we are going to serve one another rightly, as to helping one another as to where we are wrong, it is important that we should hold to this side, the side linked with our position in the family of God.
Ques. Would the exercises of @Romans 7 help as to this?
S.McC. That is what we were referring to earlier, what Paul came to experimentally; he analysed things, and in the analysis, he is able to take account of himself apart from what the flesh was in him, and sin operating through the flesh in him.
W.L.J. And so the 2nd book starts with David abiding two days in Ziklag; would that link on with what you have just been saying as to the book of Romans?
S.McC. Very good, I think it does. It shows as it were, that he is getting the full meaning of Ziklag into his soul; the overflowing of a fountain; grace freely flowing at Ziklag -- David drinking into it in the full, and those that were with him; and so when the Amalekite comes up and presents this unfair advantage, David would not avail himself of it, he would not take it on; he rejects it, and deals with that element thoroughly.
{49}
Rem. David had many advantages suggested to him that he did not take account of, or take advantage of. If we are taking advantage of these suggestions, is it always at the expense of Christ?
S.McC. Well, we may, at the expense of the rights of Christ, in regard to the saints, because the anointing implies the rights of God, and we must always have regard to the anointing. If a believer has the Spirit and is set up in relation to the Spirit, we would always have regard for that. If features are coming out concretely that belie the anointing, we meet it as holding to the abstract idea of the anointing.
W.J.B. So that one of the nations and a publican would not necessarily be passed in the street without recognition. When a brother has been withdrawn from, it is not necessary to ignore him in the street. It would be in order to give him some kind of recognition, in the way of a nod or something, would it not?
S.McC. Well, I never do otherwise. -- In those that we have had to do with in that way I would always recognise them in the street. It is right that we should; even ask them how they are getting on; see if they are getting any help. Not that we are engaging with them socially -- the line must be drawn -- but in a priestly way concerned about them and their recovery, that we might serve them in some possible way.
G.W.B. Is there any point or time when they actually cease to be a brother or a sister, following your earlier remark?
S.McC. Well, what do you say?
G.W.B. I cannot see that they ever cease to be that.
S.McC. Did anyone ever say it?
G.W.B. What I have in my mind, speaking plainly, is in the presentation of a matter before the assembly; I have more than once known the person involved to
{50}
be referred to as one "called a brother," or one "called a sister." I just wondered how far this is justified.
S.McC. Well, there has to be care entering into these matters. We are not to hold things too loosely, and terms too loosely; it says, "Let him be unto thee as a heathen man or one of the nations;" "as one of the nations and a tax-gatherer." "Let him be to thee as one of the nations and a tax-gatherer." It is quite evident that you would not be speaking about him as a *beloved* brother, or a *dear* brother when he has gone astray, or anything like that; it would be entirely contrary to what is on hand. We are judging sin. It is quite evident that when we are dealing with sin in an individual, we are not using lavish expressions like "our dear brother" or "our dear sister." We are dealing with sin; but abstractly in our minds, we hold the fact that they belong to the family of God, and if excision takes place, it is in view of their recovery, their restoration.
Rem. "As one of the nations" would help us to have the attitude of grace in our hearts towards such an one all the time?
S.McC. Well, exactly. We should always have in mind the recovery of such.
Ques. Paul refers to one "called brother" in @1 Corinthians 5.
S.McC. Let us read it. It is a good thing to have the Scriptures just exactly as they are. It says in @1 Corinthians 5: 11, "But now I have written to you, if any one *called brother*." See the skill of the apostle as he approaches this matter, in regard to dealing with this person. And then at the end of the chapter, the 13th verse, he says, "remove the *wicked* person from amongst yourselves."
W.J.B. That does not necessarily mean that he is no longer a brother?
S.McC. No, because withdrawing from a person
{51}
does not have to do with the family of God on the basic side. It has to do with practical communion, fellowship.
G.R.D. That would be entering into the side of the testimony, would it?
S.McC. Entering into the side of the testimony? Say something more.
G.R.D. I was just thinking of the testimonial side; the family side would ever be in mind in our links with one another, wherever a person was, but our relations with one another publicly would bear upon where they are relative to the claims of the Lord and the rights of the Lord.
S.McC. Therefore the importance of that in regard to burials. We do not go to burials that are conducted by those in systems around us; that is against the truth, to do such a thing as that. The truth regulates us, because we must be governed by the truth in these matters. While persons may be Christians and belong to the family of God, and they may be related to us in this way, the truth comes in to regulate us in regard to our links with them.
Rem. So it would not be in accord with the fellowship to go to such burials would it? Is it not a question as to where the fellowship lies in such matters?
S.McC. Well, exactly. What our brother is referring to is what is in the Lord, the rights of the Lord connected with the position; that is, we would be really sinning against the fellowship if we should do that.
F.G.S. But a person that we knew to be a Christian in these systems, there would be nothing wrong in our referring to such as "brother," would there?
S.McC. Well, it depends on how you use the term. If you were referring to him as a "dear brother" or a "beloved brother," as if there was nothing wrong with the position, well, that would be wrong. But if
{52}
you were referring to him as a brother in the light of his position in the family of God, that is another matter.
F.G.S. You think of the term as belonging to a Christian?
S.McC. Yes, as belonging to the family of God.
M.B. Was it to preserve the saints from severity that the apostle, speaking of those who were walking disorderly in Thessalonica, he says not to disregard him as a brother? Though you are to shrink from him, yet you are to regard him as a brother?
S.McC. Yes, because that one is still in fellowship, but he is not going on right.
Rem. Would it be seen in Joseph, why he had to speak roughly to them, make himself strange to them? He never forgot that they were his brethren.
S.McC. Well, exactly, and we never forget in the public position of the testimony that our brethren are all around us, engulfed in the lawless systems around us, and we regard them and hold them as our brethren; we hold the ground for them in the light of the assembly. They are not available to us, but they belong to the family of God, they are our brethren, but they are not available to us; and we work out the truth of the assembly with those of our brethren that are available to us.
Rem. Who would be in our minds in the loaf on the Lord's Day morning? The body of Christ -- would it be all believers having the spirit?
S.McC. Certainly. While it may have a concrete and practical reference to those we are with in a locality, as to our appropriating one another and enjoying one another immediately, yet abstractly all the saints are in our hearts, and in our thoughts.
Rem. It has been suggested that it would only rightly refer to those who are in the light of the assembly position.
{53}
S.McC. I do not think the Lord gave Himself exclusively for those who are in the light of the assembly position. He gave himself for the assembly.
Rem. It would embrace, would it not, those who are here this day, and those who are not here this day?
S.McC. Well, it is the difference between what is concrete and what is abstract. Our brethren are not concretely with us in the breaking of bread, but we hold them abstractly in our minds as belonging to the assembly.
W.J.B. So that Paul, in the very chapter where he gives the light as to how to conduct ourselves in a broken day, says in regard to such, "The Lord knows those that are his."
S.McC. Yes, exactly.
C.S.K. Would you say that what Paul says to the Colossians and also to the Ephesians as to their faith in Christ Jesus, and the love which they had for all the saints, we would still hold on to that, although the breakdown has come in publicly?
S.McC. In that chapter we have the great outlook of the minister of the assembly. He said he laboured to present every man perfect in Christ. That does not allude to the saints in the assembly only. That includes every man; a remarkable view. We need to be enlarged in our view in regard to the gospel -- God's thoughts for men in it.
Rem. Have we therefore a responsibility towards every Christian, every believer?
S.McC. We have, but, of course, if they are not available to us, what can we do? If they elect to remain out of the truth, what can we do? If we meet them, we can serve them, but if they elect to remain where they are, we do not go there to help them out.
Rem. We need some help on our attitude.
{54}
S.McC. Yes, and readiness to serve any of our brethren who are in captivity, if by any means they might be liberated.
Rem. Is the prayer meeting a good meeting to pray for our brethren in the system, that they may be liberated?
S.McC. Well, we pray for the work of recovery to go on, do we not, that more and more may be brought into the truth.
C.S.K. Is what you are speaking of really based on the thought of Colossians, "growing by the true knowledge of God." It is the way God regards people; must we not regard them in the same way?
S.McC. I think we have to learn how to look at things abstractly. We have to look at government abstractly. You may say, the man is such a politician. We must learn to take account of such abstractly, and indirectly the government of God is operating through them, and we must regard them in that light. The same with man, we must not fail to recognise what man is abstractly, as God's creature, and in the service of the gospel we approach man in that light, that he might be extricated from the conditions of sin and shame into which he has come.
M.B. Have you in mind to say a word on the last two verses before we leave the chapter?
S.McC. Well, David says "I am distressed for thee, my brother Jonathan; very pleasant wast thou unto me." We might have said, "Well we will not make any mention of Jonathan; he did not go all the way; he fell short." But David works on what was there in Jonathan it was very precious to him. We sometimes feel we are so much behind divine Persons; They can work on so little, and we need to have so much, and all this would help us to value the work of God in the slightest way in which it may appear.
Rem. Would David's feelings towards Jonathan be
{55}
a matter of affection between them more than the public side? Jonathan's soul was knit with David's as his own soul; David was not behind in that, and did not that hold good right through?
S.McC. Well exactly, and nothing helps us more in having to do with one another, even supposing there may be things in me that may be running contrary to the truth of the moment, if a brother comes to serve me in regard to them. It may be help if he holds to what has been present before, features that have marked one before, he holds to that; what an advantage it is in serving me!
Rem. Do we see this working out in the word in Job, "Remember that thou magnify his work," -- David magnifying what was in Jonathan?
S.McC. Well, that is right. He is taking account of the work of God. He is not making more of it than he should, because it must have been wonderful when David spoke of it as wonderful. Now in @2 Samuel 22, we have David now, we might say, extricating himself. It is a remarkable section this; it begins with: "And David spoke to Jehovah the words of this song in the day that Jehovah had delivered him out of the hand of all his enemies, and out of the hand of Saul, and he said, Jehovah is my rock and my fortress, and my deliverer; God is my rock, in Him will I trust." Then he comes to this section that we have read, and he refers to his righteousness, the cleanness of his hands, and he says, verse 24, "And I was upright before him, and kept myself from mine iniquity. And Jehovah hath recompensed me according to my righteousness, according to my cleanness in his sight." How can David say all this, when he had been involved in so much in the book? I think it is to show us that as we are helped on the lines of recovery in our own souls, in our links with God basically, we are able to take account of the work
{56}
of God in ourselves, so that we are set free in viewing the work of God in that way.
Rem. "There is then now no condemnation to those in Christ Jesus," would that come in?
S.McC. Well, I would say that would help us as to it; that alludes to status. It is not exactly the work of God in us, that is *status* in @Romans 8: 1. But it is the groundwork, in which the work of God proceeds in Colossians. We do not exactly get the work of God in us in Romans. We have to come to Colossians to get the work of God in the saints.
Rem. So Paul had just arrived at that point in the light of his soul.
S.McC. Well, exactly. In @Romans 7 and the verse that our brother alludes to in @Romans 8: 1 helps on the lines of how to regard ourselves, and then Colossians enlarges on the work of God in us.
Rem. I was wondering whether in that way @Colossians 1: 12 -- 13 would fit in. "Giving thanks to the Father who has made us fit for sharing the portion of the saints in light; who has delivered us from the authority of darkness, and translated us into the kingdom of the Son of His love."
S.McC. Well, all that would enter into it; so that David is, you might say, in all the liberty of the realm in that light. He is delivered from the authority of darkness. Think of all the influences that entered into this thought, that could be linked with the authority of darkness, but in the liberty of his soul, and his happy felicitous links with God, he is enlarging upon God's deliverance. How God delighted in him! how he says in verse 20, "He delivered me because he delighted in me." A wonderful thing to come to that in our souls, that God delights in us, according to His work.
Rem. "Jehovah hath rewarded me according to my righteousness" -- *my* righteousness.
{57}
S.McC. That is it. So he represents one who has a judgment in his soul, as to all that he has been through, and all that he has been linked with, but he is not bowed under it in this song, he is not held in bondage in relation to it, but he is brought through all, in coming right down to what is foundational. God is his rock, and he is breaking forth in relation to what he was abstractly in relation to the work of God.
E.B. So in John's 1st epistle, it is stated explicitly, is it not? "Whoever has been begotten of God does not practise sin, because his seed abides in him, and he cannot sin, because he has been begotten of God."
S.McC. John's epistle is a great epistle that helps us as to the abstract side. And, here it is a question of David being extricated, God had saved him out of the hand of all his enemies; but it is not only what God has done, but what David is doing here in the buoyancy of his soul.
M.B. So that it goes a little further than what has been quoted from John's epistle, does it not? There is an inference in his statement, that he had judged all the matters, and he says, "I was upright." Does that not mean one that was honest before God in regard to matters?
S.McC. Well, exactly, and he says, "I was upright before Him." You see the legal man is concerned about being upright before the brethren. It is right that we should be upright before the brethren, but uprightness begins in our relations with God, and works out in our relations with the brethren.
Rem. In verse 24 it says, "before him," and at the end of verse 25 it is "in his sight."
S.McC. Well, David is referring to deliverance that he has reached. Not only God's arbitrary exercise of power in taking him out, in delivering him from his enemies, but what he was coming to in himself. He
{58}
was able from this point of view to deliver himself from what would hold him under otherwise. There is an interesting passage in one of the Minor Prophets, in regard to this matter. I think it is important in view of the young brethren, when they get involved in matters, and get burdened and oppressed in their souls, and lack in joy, that they should know how to analyse things and be able to extricate themselves, with the help of God in it. In @Micah 7: 6 it says, "For the son dishonoureth the father, the daughter riseth up against her mother, the daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law; a man's enemies are the men of his own household. But as for me, I will look unto Jehovah; I will wait for the God of my salvation: my God will hear me. Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy: though I fall, I shall arise; when I sit in darkness, Jehovah shall be a light unto me. I will bear the indignation of Jehovah -- for I have sinned against him -- until he plead my cause, and execute judgment for me: he will bring me forth to the light; I shall behold his righteousness. And mine enemy shall see it, and shame shall cover her which said unto me, Where is Jehovah thy God?" It is a beautiful passage, as showing how we revert back in our thoughts to what we are basically, and have ability to arise above what the enemy would detain us in, in any damage that may have been done to us.
W.H.W. Would verse 7 in this chapter illustrate your point, "In my distress I called upon Jehovah, and I cried to my God; And he heard my voice out of his temple, and my cry came into his ears."
S.McC. Very good; showing how God was before him, and the allusion to His temple is interesting. "He heard my voice out of his temple." A remarkable expression when you think of where David must have been. He was a man who was accustomed, of course, to the presence of God.
{59}
R.G.C. Are we then helped and edified as we are enabled to think God's thoughts about ourselves?
S.McC. That is it. That is what we should come to, and sometimes when we get overtaken in things a young person maybe gets involved in the world, and the enemy robs him of his joy, as he makes room for the Spirit, he says, "How could I have ever done such a thing? How could I ever have got involved in such things?" @Romans 7 helps us. It says in verse 13 of @Romans 7 "But sin, that it might appear sin, working death to me by that which is good; in order that sin by the commandment might become exceeding sinful." That is, the operation of the commandment is to show us the exceeding sinfulness of sin. Not that I should be brought into its darkness exactly, it involves that in experience in my soul, but that I might see the exceeding sinfulness of sin.
G.J.G. Is it the working out of a matter, any matter, to its full result in that way? The exceeding sinfulness of it is seen?
S.McC. Exactly, otherwise I might not have known how exceedingly sinful sin was, if the commandment had not come in. Grace brings into my soul's view the Deliverer. We do not get in @Romans 7 deliverance exactly, we have to come to @Romans 8 for deliverance. But it brings into my soul's view the Deliverer, so that I do not serve sin's law, I serve the law of God.
C.F.I. What you have referred to in @Micah 7 is just that, that the soul looks out to the Deliverer.
S.McC. That is it. He has his eye on the Deliverer.
E.B.McC. Here it is, "For all his ordinances were before me, and his statutes I did not depart from them, and I was upright before him, and kept myself from mine iniquity." That is, the truth is before him, and that is what will keep us.
S.McC. That is it. The truth must regulate us in everything, and he says in verse 26 "With the gracious
{60}
thou dost shew thyself gracious; with the upright man thou dost shew thyself upright; with the pure thou dost shew thyself pure; and with the perverse thou dost shew thyself contrary. And the afflicted people thou dost save." If I am perverse, God will shew Himself contrary to me. A remarkable expression, because He has in mind to save the afflicted of His people.
W.H.W. It speaks of the "rest of our time." Does that come into it?
S.McC. Well, it is a good thing when we reach that. To arm ourselves with the same mind, Christ having suffered for us in the flesh. Ceasing from sin, we are to arm ourselves with the same mind, and the past time of our life will have sufficed to have walked in the will of the Gentiles, walking in lasciviousness; and the rest of our time should be linked with the will of God. It is a good conclusion to come to. The Lord helps us in our links with Himself, and in relation to His work in our souls. There is so much in ourselves naturally that is utterly unreliable. We are taught that time and time again. God brings us to it, that there is so much in oneself that is so utterly unreliable naturally, and if I rely in it, I will be sure to come to disaster; but in the work of God, we have what is completely reliable.
E.B. Is there one further element of encouragement when I have failed and broken down? -- the light of the purpose of God. He knew all about me before ever He took me up. And it has been a comfort to me sometimes -- perhaps it may be to others -- that my failure does not break down the purpose that chose me in Christ, before the world's foundations?
S.McC. Well, no. That stands right through.
E.B. And the work of God would be in relation to that, would it not?
S.McC. Well, exactly.
{61}
G.R.D. Regarding chapter 23, there is a certain governmental side, "Although my house be not so before God." Would you say a word as to that? David is still able to speak these words.
S.McC. I think it is a great comfort to us, because which of us could elect ourselves out of that? He says, "Although my house be not so before God." He was conscious that much had come into his house, that was contrary to the truth, but David was a man that stood for the truth, generally speaking, and basically speaking. He was a man that loved the truth, and God was with him.
C.S.K. Would you say that following the exercises you have been calling attention to in @Romans 7, there is the maintenance of that in Galatians, an exhortation to stand fast in the freedom that we have? Legality might come into our lives.
S.McC. Well, exactly. There is nothing robs us more, nothing robs the young people more, of joy in the Holy Spirit, than legality. We should shun it and judge it thoroughly in our souls. That does not mean to say that we are going to go on with looseness, and with the world. What will produce a hatred and right judgment of the world in all its features, is the truth of the heavenly calling enjoyed and apprehended in our souls.
M.B. Would you say then that in verse 3 here, the secret of David was that he had the light of Christ in his soul? "The ruler among men shall be just."
S.McC. That is right. He has an abstract view of the administration. Whatever may have come in to the Book of Samuel in connection with the house of Saul, or Abner, or Joab, or in connection with David himself, David emerges with a clear view as to what God's thoughts were as to himself, and as to God's king, and divine administration.
{62}
GRACE AS PRESENTED IN DAVID (4)
@1 Chronicles 22: 6 -- 19; @1 Chronicles 29: 20 -- 30
S.McC. That which is now before us is very full. The introduction of Solomon serves as another type of Christ. His position on the throne in the last chapter reminds us of the greatness of the present time, that the Lord Jesus is not on His own throne; He is on the Father's throne. It is a time of grace, and we find a transitional period here, when things are passing over from David to Solomon. Firstly in our own minds this great thought of sonship, linking with the hope of our calling as Paul refers to it in Ephesians, and where we get the expression of the surpassing riches of God's grace. It is a remarkable expression in @Ephesians 2, and the side of things in Solomon brings us to that. We should see in the section that we read, first what David has gone through in his links with God. He has been much before us and one of the things that has stood out has been his links with God, his communion with God. David is restful in relation to what is coming in and setting on this great matter as to sonship as set out in Solomon; and then we note the grace and fulness that enters into the last chapter where we are brought to God in all His majesty, glorious as He is as Head over all. And then we see the wonderful way in which the saints come into the culminating exercises of David in the final section, the great fulness and expansion of glory and happiness, and the finishing way in which David is alluded to, and then the great volume of the ministry that our attention is drawn to in the last two verses. These features may provide a basis for our inquiry at this time.
R.A.H. Would the glory of the position come before us? I noticed as it was being read in verse 23 of
{63}
chapter 29, "Solomon sat on the throne of Jehovah." I have not noticed that before -- the throne of Jehovah. Does that make it very great in our eyes?
S.McC. Yes, exactly. We were referring earlier this afternoon in regard to Amalek that the hand was on the throne of Jah. This is quite different here. God will abundantly shew the wonder of His grace and subjugating power in the Lord Jesus Christ as typified in Solomon. The Lord is on the throne of Jehovah, Solomon is on the throne of Jehovah. Not exactly his own throne, but the throne of Jehovah instead of David his father. One thing is to be noted with the subjugating side, the land is subdued before Jehovah, as we have often had referred to in years past, it is not so much the side of annihilation, but the side of subjugation, the moral sway of God in grace, in the kingdom, subduing, subjugating our wills and our hearts, bringing them under the influence of Christ.
W.J.B. Might we have a little more on this transitional period. It would correspond in some way with the present time, would it?
S.McC. Well it would, in regard to the way that sonship is being stressed. It has been so pre-eminently stressed in recent times.
C.F.I. Is the thought of the great economy of grace largely presented to us in the New Testament under figure of the kingdom?
S.McC. In the early chapters of the Acts, we can see how the economy of the kingdom is set up -- the Lord Jesus at the right hand of God, and the Spirit down here, and the power that operates from these positions, involving that hearts are brought under the moral sway of God in grace.
R.J.S. Paul of Tarsus was subdued?
S.McC. Yes, he would be. It is quite evident in his case the power that subdued him.
{64}
C.F.I. Are the richest thoughts of grace connected with sonship?
S.McC. That is what I thought.
C.F.I. "The praise of the glory of His grace," the thought is spoken of in the first chapter, "wherein He has taken us into favour in the Beloved."
S.McC. Exactly. So Ephesians is a wonderful letter, bringing us to superlative thoughts, bringing us to the richest thoughts of grace. There are two outstanding features of the truth presented in relation to the saints in Ephesians. One is sonship, which has in view the pleasure of God Himself, and the other is union, the assembly linked with Christ in union, united to the Heavenly Man, resulting in what is delightful to His own heart.
M.B. Then is the thought of sonship to be apprehended in the Lord Jesus, pre-eminently as to what He is now in the Father's presence?
S.McC. Well, exactly, not forgetting what He was in the bosom of the Father here below, the uniqueness of sonship in the humanity of Jesus in the days of His flesh here. What it must have been to the Father, to have manhood in all its spiritual excellence in Jesus in sonship. As it is said, "the only begotten Son who *is* in the bosom of the Father." He came into that place.
C.F.I. I feel the importance of the side of sonship; it takes account of the personnel, does it not, in our individual links and our place in divine purpose, whereas if we think only of the assembly as an entity, we are thinking perhaps of something a little different.
S.McC. Yes, it is important to see that in regard to sonship it brings out what the saints are severally, not exactly what we are as an entity, wonderful as that is, and glorious in the eyes of Christ. The assembly is a complete entity for the joy of His heart, but sonship brings out what the saints are severally, each one
{65}
of them bearing some distinct feature of grace, some distinctive impression of grace.
C.A.I. One has noticed that beloved Mr. Taylor has said that sonship is greater than the assembly.
S.McC. There is nothing that goes higher than sonship, as far as the saints are concerned.
C.F.I. Would that imply that the preciousness of the saints to God, what the saints are in this way, is even greater than the company that they form?
S.McC. Just so. You mean the company they form as the entity?
C.F.I. Yes, the assembly femininely. We have had a good deal of emphasis upon the thought of the greatness of the assembly, and the company as such, but it has been operating to some extent, one feels, to cause us to overlook the importance of the persons.
S.McC. Well, it is important that we should see the greatness of the personnel, and it is important that we should see that the family of sons in this dispensation is the assembly, that the assembly is unique amongst *all* families in the universe of God, because of the uniqueness of sonship in the assembly. No other family will know sonship in the same way as the assembly knows and enjoys sonship. Each one of the assembly has firstborn dignity and glory.
Rem. Does the linking of grace with sonship as you were speaking of it give us some connection between the moral history that we have to face, and the purpose of God, that God has been able to reach His purposes in spite of the moral side?
S.McC. Well I think so. I think we want to see the relation between the moral side and the side of purpose. The one serves the other, but the great end is that we should reach sonship, and so it says in verse 8 of our chapter, "But the word of Jehovah came to me saying, Thou hast shed blood abundantly, and hast made great wars; thou shalt not build a house unto
{66}
my name, for thou hast shed much blood upon the earth in my sight." Now this is not exactly cancelling out the wars of the Lord; they have their place, but we want to see that what is now before God is this matter of sonship, and this influence of sonship in the testimony at this particular juncture.
Rem. Does it necessitate a fresh and new view of Christ in our souls, not now on the side of Lordship?
S.McC. I think so. David was a valiant man, he was a valiant warrior. You remember how Hushai refers to him as a warrior. He was valiant for God in matters, but that is not the side of things that is linked with the building of the house. It is the side of sonship that is linked with the building of the house.
Rem. Does it mean that the conflict is not an end in itself?
S.McC. That is it, exactly. That conflict is a *means* to an end, but we do not exactly rest in the conflict. The conflict is a means to an end -- God has a definite end in all the conflict since sin came in, and we are to see that in Solomon he has certain ends reached.
T.C.H. So would you say that sonship in verse 6 is linked with all the greatness that has come in, is it not?
S.McC. Yes, exactly, and it is interesting what David says in verse 5 before that, "Solomon my son is young and tender." Well that is a wonderful touch in regard to this great matter, where the glory of the house is going to be expanded before us, under Solomon, that this thought of young and tender enters into it. It is important to see from Matthew's gospel, the place that sonship has, preceding the great administrative chapter, chapter 18. You will recall how the Lord anticipated Peter, and how He said in regard to the fish and the stater, to "take that for me and thee." We have the truth of His own sonship entering into the beginning
{67}
of the chapter, and then the truth of sonship not only in Him, but in the saints, at the end of the chapter, all bearing on the position in testimony in chapter 18, in the administrative side of things.
M.B. "Then are the sons free" you are thinking of? and the fact of being free from any other obligation, or anything that might rest upon us?
S.McC. Well, it has often been said that we can never rightly carry out administration except from the heavenly viewpoint. That is, Matthew and Ephesians go together, and we can only rightly fill out the Corinthian position from the viewpoint of our heavenly place.
M.B. So that the sons are free of tribute; they are not under any tribute.
S.McC. Exactly, the sons are free.
Rem. Would you say what you had in mind in referring to Solomon as being young and tender.
S.McC. Well, I think it is to help us to see features that are entering into this latter stage of things, this latter phase of things in 1st Chronicles. You will note in the final phases of the testimony in different relations, that a good deal is made of youthfulness, and in different ones. Joseph as in Genesis, following Jacob, and Joshua in relation to Moses, and now Solomon in relation to David. It is a great thing that young brothers and sisters should see, the prime place that they have in the finishing matters and phases of the testimony.
A.J.C. Would all that has been shown up in conflict make now for common features as serving in this great matter of sonship and building?
S.McC. Yes, that would be what David is moving towards, in all his directions here. The conflicts have been many and great, as David alludes to them; but how restful David is in the transition! We want to learn from this, that when it comes to transition, we
{68}
need to be with God, to be as it were, in the current of His mind. David goes over matters so restfully, and so marked by accepting the word of Jehovah, as he says in verse 8, "The word of Jehovah came to me saying, " and then what he tells us is a remarkable thing. It is different from what we get when he went in to sit before Jehovah. It is a remarkable word that he gets here, and how he goes over it and calls our attention to it.
E.B.McC. It has been said recently that the assembly is the expression of Christ here, the nearest to deity of all families, very close indeed. How does that come in with sonship? I quite understand the thought of Son over the house, because He regulates the house, but where the house is, the family is, is it not?
S.McC. The house from another viewpoint is composed of the sons. The dignity of sonship enters into the house, that is, the cedars of Lebanon represent what compose the house. It is the house as built under Solomon, expressing the dignity of sonship. It is not the feminine side so much as the masculine side.
C.S.K. Is the reference in Colossians to the Son of His love a happy link with the thought here of a Man of rest, that it is the restfulness of love that is to mark these transitional periods. God would unfold it in that way, would He not, for us?
S.McC. Exactly, it is a beautiful expression here -- He shall be a Man of rest. It is important to see manhood in restful conditions. It is wonderful to see manhood in conflict in David. Manhood shines in David in conflict, a man after God's own house. But then God is saying that the house is to be linked with Solomon the son, who is a man of rest.
F.R.G. Is that supported by the end of the 2nd Ephesians, where it speaks of what Christ has done in uniting all in one, having slain the enmity, and then it goes on to say "for through Him we have
{69}
both access by one Spirit to the Father," and goes on to the building of the house; "Ye are built together for a habitation of God in the spirit?"
S.McC. Well, exactly. All that is opening up the greatness of the house at the present time among the Gentiles; the greatness of what God has in the assembly, as His habitation in Spirit, and the beginning of the chapter stresses the thought of rest. The totality of the work of God is brought before us in the first half of the chapter in an anticipative way, not exactly in an abstract way, but in an anticipative way, and the great thought of rest is stressed, what the saints are as raised up, and made to sit down together, that is, comporting with this thought of the Man of rest. Sonship involves rest among the saints. It is an interesting thing to look through Mr. Darby's hymns. There are no hymns that are quite their equal; they have their own uniqueness. But one of the things to be noted is how the thought of rest runs through Mr. Darby's hymns. If you were to count the number of times that rest is mentioned, you might be surprised; and also for instance, expressions like "unalloyed," "unsullied;" expressions like these pointing to an unmixed condition of things. It is important that we should see that side of things.
Rem. They were the breathings of his own soul.
S.McC. Exactly.
Rem. Attention has been drawn to "He shall be a man of rest." Are you thinking of the result of the saints in the end of the verse, "and in his days, I will give peace and quietness unto Israel?" Is that how Israel is to come into rest and peace?
S.McC. Well, exactly, and just before that, "I will give him rest from all his enemies round about; for his name shall be Solomon." Think of what the position on high is to God and to Christ. That Christ has reached a place of rest on the Father's throne.
{70}
God has given Him rest, we might say, from all His enemies that harassed Him here below.
M.B. Is it suggestive, as presented in the Kings, that it is said, that he brought up the ark of the covenant out of the house of David which is in Zion?
S.McC. Well, a fuller thought is in mind there; Zion would represent Ephesians, the teaching of Ephesians in relation to God's full thought; so that the saints in this ninth verse are brought to what Christ has entered as the Man of rest, and as having been given rest, the saints are brought to that.
Rem. Peace to those who are far off, and peace to those who are nigh. That enters into the matter does it?
S.McC. Yes, exactly.
R.G.C. Does @Psalm 72 bear on this? The thoughts of rest there, the abundance of peace till the moon be no more, showing the extensive character of it?
S.McC. Yes, exactly.
C.S.K. The effects of reconciliation being enjoyed?
S.McC. Well, reconciliation is a very full subject. How wonderful reconciliation is, what it brings about for the pleasure of God, and what it brings about in our links with one another, because if we were in the good of reconciliation, we would have no difficulties with one another. We would be enjoying one another to the full.
Rem. Is the diligence to keep the unity of the Spirit in the uniting bond of peace connected with reconciliation?
S.McC. Well, reconciliation paves the way for a good deal in our relations with God, and in our relations with one another.
E.B.McC. We are enjoying that which others have had to battle for, and we should take that into account.
{71}
should we not, and enjoy too what they have brought in for us?
S.McC. Exactly, and so the word for us in verse 17, is "David commanded all the princes of Israel to help Solomon his son, saying, Is not Jehovah your God with you? has He not given you rest on every side? for He has given the inhabitants of the land into my hand; and the land is subdued before Jehovah and before his people. Now set your heart and your soul to seek Jehovah your God; and arise and build the sanctuary of Jehovah Elohim, to bring the ark of the covenant of Jehovah, and the vessels of the sanctuary of God into the house that is to be built unto the name of Jehovah." So now it is a question of our setting our hearts and ourselves to seek God, having in mind His service, His house, and His service in the assembly.
C.F.I. And His rest, God's rest?
S.McC. Exactly, that would be in mind in what is mentioned here.
G.W.B. Would what you say point to the Lord's words to Mary, that she has chosen the good part which shall not be taken from her?
S.McC. Well, it is important that we should know the restful side -- that sets it out. We shall never get very far on in our souls if we do not know much about the restful side. Restfulness promotes spirituality; as room is made for the Spirit to come in, to fill our minds and hearts with rest thoughts of Christ.
Rem. Would you say a little more about the distinction between sonship which we enjoy as the service of God proceeds, the sense of rest imbuing our spirits, and leading on to greater liberation in the service of God, and the spiritual enjoyment of rest in our personal relations with God? We are to enjoy the latter perhaps more individually than we have, do you think?
S.McC. The Lord Jesus as Son of Man is Lord
{72}
of the sabbath. That is, He is the administrator of it, and in all His service to us on moral lines. He would have in mind the thought of our being brought into the sabbath, that our souls might be at rest individually.
W.H.W. Would you think that verse 19 would work out in a practical way amongst the brethren if they thought more of the great things of God?
S.McC. That is what I thought, that David is encouraging us now, Solomon being a type of ourselves now, to set our hearts and our souls to seek Jehovah your God. It is remarkable that he does not say "to seek Jehovah *my* God," but "to seek Jehovah *your* God," as if he is trying to inculcate into our minds thoughts that have been linked with his own experiences in his knowledge of God.
W.H.W. So that it is really a matter of what we are seeking, is it not?
S.McC. Yes, exactly. There is the side of what we are brought into by divine powers, the unsurpassing greatness of God's power, but then there is this corresponding side in the setting of our hearts and our souls to seek Jehovah.
Rem. Would you say it is necessary to help the building?
S.McC. Well, the great thought in our minds is that there should be a place for God -- Jehovah Elohim takes us back to the 2nd Genesis, when God entered into relations with man.
Rem. Would that link up with the thought in @Psalm 132, "Let us go into his habitation, let as worship at his footstool" and then the invitation, "arise Jehovah into thy rest thou and the ark of thy strength?"
S.McC. Yes, that would be what was in David's mind; that is, the Psalms give us an insight into what David's exercises were. I believe that the young people
{73}
should be encouraged -- it is a day when they need to be encouraged, they should know what this influence is, this influence that is linked with sonship, and how it operates in this section. Great room is made for every feature of the work of God, in young and old, teacher and scholar alike.
R.G.C. Do we want the young to learn that although they may be only babes as regards growth, according to God's thoughts they are sons?
S.McC. That is the point. You want the young brothers and sisters to get mature thoughts in their minds, so from this viewpoint, they are not babes, they are sons. "Ye are all God's sons by faith in Christ Jesus." Sonship is a gift received in the glad tidings.
P.B. David speaks of what he had prepared for the house of God out of his affliction, but he also speaks of what he had given to the house of God out of his affections. Are those the underlying features of the joy of sonship?
S.McC. Yes, indeed, and I think in regard to that it is well for those of us who are younger to remember those who have gone before us in the line of the testimony. God never honours disrespect for age in any one of us. I am not alluding to persons who may sin against the rights of God and get out of fellowship -- I am referring to the general thought of those who have been in the testimony before us. Think of David here. What impressions Solomon would get from him. Think of what we have come into; those that have pioneered the way before us, as we think of the wars of the Lord. What we have come into, we might say, in restfulness, because it has been secured for us.
Rem. Later on in this book, dedicated things are brought into this matter, are they not?
S.McC. Yes, exactly. So that nothing is missed out, what David had prepared in his affliction, and what
{74}
others had given, everything is brought into what is flowing in the way of a current in these chapters. It seems as if everything is carried that can be carried in this current.
Rem. Is there something worth recognising in the next book where the glory of Jehovah fills the house?
S.McC. Yes, exactly. God would claim it for Himself. God thinks so much of it that He would claim it for Himself. It is to be noted before we move on from chapter 22 that Solomon is reminded of the ordinances which Jehovah commanded Moses for Israel. That is an interesting thing, and shows that what we are referring to does not exclude the thought of responsibility with us.
Rem. I wondered whether you would say something about the command in verse 17?
S.McC. Well, I think it is like the Lord Jesus in @John 14. He is going on to the Father, to set up and inaugurate the heavenly order of things, and He brings in the thought of His commandments. "If any one love me, he will keep my word." It is a great thing to keep the Lord's commandments. I suppose every one of us here would profess to love Christ, but the question would be as to whether we love Him enough. We need to love Him more, and have regard to His commandments, and that is what comes in here, but the commandment is regulating matters. Sonship in that way does not exactly, as we are viewing it in this type, take us out of the sphere of regulation; we are still in a sphere where we have to be regulated by the commanding of Moses, the ordinances which Jehovah commanded Moses, and also David's commandment.
E.B.McC. It says, "I will establish the throne of his kingdom over Israel for ever," and then again "he made Solomon his son king over Israel." Would
{75}
that mean that everything is held is it not -- he is king as well?
S.McC. Well, that is the point, that control is running all the way through. It is what we might call the authority of love over us in this section.
W.H.W. Would the commandments of Moses bear on the dwelling of Jehovah Elohim?
S.McC. The commandment of Moses would involve the law of the house, and Ezekiel refers to it later on, do you think, "The law of the house," that enters into @Matthew 18; sonship is alluded to in chapter 17, then the law of the house comes in in @Matthew 18, so we are to be reminded of that. We do not forget the ministry of Moses, because it gives us the law of the house.
Rem. Would you say that these things are not optional with us? It is not optional whether we love the brethren, it is the command of the Lord that we love them.
S.McC. Exactly, and it is important that we should see the force of the commandments in John's writings. You would think of all the Gospels that would leave out the thought of the commandments, from the human way of reasoning, it would be John's. John stresses the love side. The love side is the side that makes room and way for the commandments. Now in the 29th chapter, we find how things are gathered up, and the chapter opens again with a reference to "Solomon is young and tender." I think there must be something in that, the way David refers to it again, repeats it, as if we are to be reminded of this side of things in the assembly. The need for impressionableness, and freshness with us, because the legal side would lead to hardness, unimpressionableness; that is one thing in Judaism in the Acts that is to be noted, how Judaism leads to hardness and unimpressionableness, but what is linked with sonship known and
{76}
enjoyed among the saints is impressionableness, as in youth and freshness, the thought of tenderness.
Rem. So do you think it is not so much a question of age, as faith?
S.McC. Well, that is what I am thinking of in Solomon, that when we come to sonship, we have this side of things stressed. A state of things among the saints that is impressionable, and marked by what tenderness would suggest.
Rem. Is that in mind in the 18th chapter of Matthew in the beginning, "Except ye be converted and become as little children?"
S.McC. Well, exactly. Matthew has a way of referring to the babes and the children, as suggesting a class of persons, or a state in persons, free from crystallization.
A.McK.H. Would @Galatians 4 help at all, because ye *are* sons, God has sent out the spirit of His Son into our hearts, crying Abba Father? Would that include the young as well as the old?
S.McC. Well, it does, because "ye are *all* God's sons." The youngest believer is a son, just as much as the oldest brother or sister may be here. Sonship is not a question of state; sonship is God's gift, and precedes the gift of the Spirit. Solomon would have great regard for the experience of David his father.
M.B. Does the apostle not work on it in the epistle just referred to? You remember he speaks of the first effects of the gospel, and he says where is now the blessedness? But the great point of recovery is sonship.
S.McC. Showing that we are recovered to God's greatest thoughts. Recovery has nothing less in mind than that we should reach God's greatest thoughts, and sonship is that.
M.B. You would say that this may be the result of the grace that has reached us in the gospel?
S.McC. Exactly.
{77}
P.B. I was just going to ask if you would say more as to that statement you made, that sonship was God's greatest gift, and it precedes the gift of the Spirit. Would you say more about that?
S.McC. Well, it is quite apparent in the teaching in Galatians that it is *because* we are sons that God gives us the Spirit.
C.S.K. As to this thought of youthfulness, and Solomon being young and tender, would that connect with the thought in Zechariah with the Lord being the Branch or the Sprout, that constant freshness is ever found with Him?
S.McC. Exactly. It is a great matter that there should be freshness with us. Think of the greenness and freshness of manhood as seen in Jesus. It involves our links with God. It is a great matter that our links should be right with God; our links in communion with Him.
A.B.M. Is there simplicity and spontaneity which marks the utterances of those who are in the good of sonship?
S.McC. Well, exactly. Sonship promotes liberty among the brethren, and it is a great thing that we should have liberty, liberty in the service of God, liberty among the brethren, liberty with one another.
C.F.I. Do you think that individual liberty with the Father, whereby we cry "Abba Father" would greatly help in liberty in the service?
S.McC. Well, it would. That is why one was saying that it involves our links with God Himself, in the thought of the Father, that we should have greater links with the Father in view of liberty in sonship.
E.B.McC. Solomon is young and tender, and yet the work is great. The work is for Jehovah Elohim. The two thoughts are maintained -- the youth and tenderness do not do away with the work?
S.McC. They do not. It is a question of the greatness
{78}
of the position that we have come into, but the palace is not for man, but for Jehovah Elohim.
E.B.McC. We have been called to the greatest things, have we not?
S.McC. Well, that is the importance of the presence of the Spirit, is it not? It is to be taken account of in that relation.
J.D. Is recovery complete here, where it says, "*all* the congregation?"
S.McC. Yes, it is remarkable that we have this answer in the saints; David is concerned about all the saints coming to it, all the people of God coming into it. He said to all the congregation, "Bless now Jehovah your God," and "all the congregation blessed Jehovah the God of their Fathers," and this leads into a remarkable fulness of things in which the people of God are sustained in joy. It involves spirituality amongst the saints.
Rem. So, does Paul use the same expression when he says in @Ephesians 1 "Blessed be the God and Father?"
S.McC. Paul was not stereotyped. I suppose the brethren will have noticed how in reading the Synopsis and in reading the Collected Writings Mr. Darby will interrupt a subject, and his soul in richest feelings breaks forth as the truth affects him. I think we want to let the truth affect our souls more. It affects our minds, but we want to let it affect our souls more, the feeling part of us.
M.B. So that there is a good remark in verse 3 is there, in that connection: "In my affection for the house of my God, I have given of my own property of silver and gold."
S.McC. Exactly. Not now his affliction, but his affection, "for the house of my God."
G.W.B. Would the truth effective in our souls give us a greater and enhanced view of the glory?
{79}
S.McC. Well, exactly, and so what it says here, in verse 22, "They ate and drank before Jehovah on that day with great joy." Now we are to notice that verse, and then it says, "They made Solomon the son of David king the second time." Now this is another start you might say, a fresh touch in regard to sonship, as seen in Christ, as typified in Solomon; "They made Solomon the son of David king the second time." But the eating and drinking is an interesting matter, because the Davidic side involves what is constitutional. In Ezra and Nehemiah they came together and they read, they were together three days, and there was the reading of the law, and there was much soul-searching, and feeling in regard to it, but we have another thought in relation to David, (@1 Chronicles 12) they were with David three days, eating and drinking. And then we get here, verse 22, they ate and drank. This is a very substantial matter, affecting the saints constitutionally.
Rem. What would you say in reference to the joy?
S.McC. Well, we need the element of joy. It is very scarce at times, but joy belongs to Christianity, joy in the gospel. We should be filled with joy in relation to the glad tidings, as Luke would have us, and then John would impress us with joy too, in the Father's world, in the Father's system of things. The Lord Jesus imparts to us His own joy.
Rem. Is that the thought in liberty?
S.McC. Liberty leads to joy, yes, it is one of the fruits of the Spirit in Galatians, joy.
E.B.McC. I was just thinking of David breaking out here in the 10th and 11th verses, the way he breaks out and speaks of Jehovah Elohim. I do not think you find it anywhere else.
S.McC. No we do not. We are impressed with what comes in here in its fulness, and then you get "and anointed him to Jehovah to be prince, and Zadok
{80}
to be priest." We can see how the moral line is carried along and not forgotten. "Zadok to be priest" is a remarkable allusion here.
Rem. Would you say a little more about that?
S.McC. Well, I think it shows how the moral glory acquired in matters of the truth lends itself to this wonderful transitional moment, where Solomon -- wonderful type of Christ -- is before the saints in this way. Zadok is the one who was faithful; he was not carried away by those who sought to make Adonijah king. Zadok was not invited to the feast. He was in the divine current, the current in which God was moving in relation to His anointed.
G.R.D. In referring to making him king the second time, have you in mind that as a result of the exercises that the people have been going through and David's help for them, they really come to that? The first time was the fruit of David's commandment was it not, but now the people reach it from their side, do they?
S.McC. Exactly, from the standpoint of enjoying things. That is, the ministry has in mind, you see, that we should enjoy things and be affected constitutionally with the prime end in mind, a fresh view of Christ, in all His glory.
E.C.K. Would you say a little more that might help us as to this matter of the truth coming into our souls?
S.McC. Well, I think it is a great matter that the truth should affect us inwardly; that it should not just affect us mentally, but it should affect us inwardly, so that the service of God becomes a soul matter, and things too in the testimony become soul matters. Feelings are lying behind the glad tidings, feelings are lying behind the service of God.
W.J.B. It says in @Psalm 132, "Let thy saints shout
{81}
for joy," and the second time it says, "And her saints shall shout aloud for joy."
S.McC. We are to be reminded of how the saints are affected inwardly, as divine greatness impresses them.
W.J.B. Spiritual exultation is our privilege, is it not?
S.McC. It is, that is we have the Spirit. Why should we not exult? Why should we not be filled with joy? When we think that the Spirit is with us and in us in regard to these great matters of God's throne and Christ on it.
Rem. Is that the thought in being not drunk with wine but being filled with the Spirit in Ephesians?
S.McC. Yes, it would have in mind what is linked with ourselves is to be eliminated, and room made for the Spirit, to promote this joy that we are referring to.
A.McK.H. You have in mind something in regard to the 29th and 30th verses -- the acts of David? Would that indicate that God is over the matter all the time in view of everyone being brought into the joy of sonship?
S.McC. Well, exactly, and so the wealth of the ministry is alluded to. Well might we be reminded of the wealth of the ministry! and well might it raise the challenge with every one of us, as to where we have been, and as to where we are now, in regard to all that has passed over our heads, in our times, I mean, in relation to the abundance of spiritual ministry, as peculiarly marking these closing days.
G.R.D. Would it bear the interpretation that once Solomon is on the throne, that is, the idea of sonship reached, we can look back over the ministry and see much more in it than we did before?
S.McC. I am sure we can all say that, that as we go back over the ministry now, the more we enjoy the truth of our heavenly calling, and the more we go
{82}
back over the ministry, the more we are amazed at the depths of spiritual wealth that is in it, and therefore the importance of reading. If persons do not read, they never make much headway. Now some would belittle reading, as if it would feed their mentality, but, if by the help of the Spirit, we pursue reading as we should, we shall find that heaven will help us. Daniel was a man that read, and heaven noticed it, and we would earnestly appeal to the younger ones with all that they have in their early years, to search out the ministry, read the Scriptures, and read the ministry, now when they have the time and the ability to do it.
P.B. Would you link up the importance of reading with verse 24 -- "And all the princes, and the mighty men, and all the sons likewise of king David, submitted themselves to Solomon the king."
S.McC. Very good. I was going to refer to that earlier, and I am glad you brought us back to it. It says in verse 23, "And Solomon sat on the throne of Jehovah as king instead of David his father, and prospered; and all Israel obeyed him. And all the princes, and the mighty men, and all the sons likewise of king David, *submitted* themselves to Solomon the king." Think of the power in this realm, that brings about all these blessed results. God is in the matter, and you see, that is why we get these movements of each one of them submitting themselves. It is a delightful touch.
E.B. Would you say that after a conflict, it should issue rightly in an increased appreciation of sonship in Christ and in the saints? That the idea of sonship will become dominant, and the saints will readily submit themselves to what is current at the present moment, and will come into the gain of liberty?
S.McC. Exactly, and every conflict, I am sure, would throw into relief Christ in all His glories, for that is
{83}
the end in conflict, that we should have a fresh view and appreciation of Christ. Conflict is not to make much of man as such but to make much of Christ.
Rem. Should the 25th verse be noted?
S.McC. Yes, God following this matter. It is an interesting thing that God follows up, speaking reverently, the movements of the people and the princes and the mighty men, and all the sons of David. God comes in behind in verse 25, "and He 'magnified Solomon' exceedingly in the sight of all Israel.."
A.J.C. Thinking of the books referred to, they would help us to be balanced. We take up one line of things and become unbalanced. Is that what we urgently need at the present time?
S.McC. Yes. It is a great thing to be balanced that we should understand the ministry in its scope and extent, and not get out of balance, and make too much of a particular thing which may come out in relation to a certain set of circumstances, certain features of the truth which have been emphasized at a specific time, in relation to certain exercises.
W.H.W. Is it noteworthy that in the 28th verse it speaks of David, that he died full of days, riches and honour? Would the reference to honour suggest how his unjealous spirit in making way for Solomon only added to the regard in which the people held him?
S.McC. Well, exactly. Though David is going out in weakness he is not going out marked by decrepitude of age here. Chronicles would leave an impression on our spirits of the greatness of David in this particular part, and the fulness of what is linked with him and his place in Israel.
Rem. Would you say a word about "with all his reign?" Would that allude to the spirit of grace that marked him when he reigned?
S.McC. Exactly. "With all his reign and his might, and all the times that passed over him." What David
{84}
could tell us about those times, the experiences linked with those times! And it says "and over Israel" -- what the saints can tell about times too. And then it says "and over all the kingdoms of the countries," the great extensiveness of what is involved here.
C.C.C. So what comes before us is the evidence of the basic work of God in its own proper features coming out in the thought of these persons submitting themselves. I was comparing it with chapter 22. It says, "Jehovah has *subdued* the enemies before His people," but here there are persons of note *submitting* themselves. Would you say something as to that?
S.McC. It is remarkable how in chapter 22 it is a matter of what God has done, the land is subdued before Jehovah. "He has given the inhabitants of the land into my hand; and the land is subdued before Jehovah and before His people." It is what God has done there, but here it is the work of God amongst the people of God, amongst these prominent persons, influenced by the realm that they are in, yielding themselves to Christ, as typified in Solomon.
R.F.C. Would that make way for the magnification of Solomon?
S.McC. That is just how the truth works out, and that is how matters should work out amongst us. God is going to increase before our view the greatness of Christ and what Solomon represents. We are in the presence of regal matters, regal thoughts, and the more we understand sonship, the greater our thoughts will be, and the more regal our thoughts will be.
{85}
THE DIVINE END IN RECOVERY
@2 Samuel 12: 20 -- 25
I want to speak briefly, beloved brethren, as to the manner in which exercises are completed with David at this particular juncture.
The section which we read from, and what surrounds it, is a very humbling one, a section in which David is not a type of Christ, for we could never attach sin to Christ. David is a type of any one of us, and he is also a type, as the king, of what we have to face in all that is around us in the breakdown of what is authoritative. David is a remarkable man. The work of God in him is remarkable, and this section of the Scriptures affords much help in relation to how David is helped through prophetic ministry and goes forward in relation to divine objectives; not that he is saved from further breakdown, for the succeeding chapters show what is possible even after being helped wonderfully through prophetic service. We are all to learn from David how to walk humbly with God, for there is no knowing with any one of us where we may finish up if we get out of the hand of God. David had known what it was to celebrate victories in the preceding chapters. In the 10th chapter we read of a remarkable victory. How he was helped of God in the victories. We read, too, of the wonderful way in which he showed grace to Mephibosheth -- the kindness of God. All these features with David are to help us to see the necessity of continuing in victory that may have come from God.
David is a man of great feeling. In the second book of Samuel, as the brethren will know, things are very mixed, circumstances extremely testing. All kinds of personalities are projected on to our view; but I do
{86}
not wish to speak of them in the word which is upon one's heart, but to draw attention to Christ as He comes into view in Solomon in the completing of David's exercises in the section from which I have read. It is well to see how, amid all the darkness and gloom in this book, the work of God in David shines out at different intervals; and the prophetic word comes to him in this section. He had been caught off guard and what a fearful sin he fell into! Although he had been conscious in the 10th chapter of remarkable help in victories achieved, in the 11th chapter he is caught off guard; all emphasising the need of holy vigilance with everyone of us that we may be preserved in our relations with God. God's eye is upon the whole matter. He knows what His work is in every one of us, and He values His work, and we are to value it too. Woe betide anyone who despises the work of God in the least in the assembly! It is a serious thing to make little of the work of God in any city or in any one of the people of God. And God always brings us back basically to His work in us. We can rely on it. There is so much in us that is wholly unreliable, and God would help us in the light of the teaching of this book to face every feature of the man of sin and shame in our souls, that we may get our eyes on the Man that is before God, the Object of His love, the One in whose hands administration cannot break down, as it did in David. It is preserved eternally in the hands of the true Solomon; for this chapter is the great lesson-book for us in the breakdown in regard to administration. David comes to it in his soul through the prophetic word from God; but he comes to it at the end of the book as he goes over the features of God's King; it is abstractly in his soul. He sees and understands the character of an administration that will never break down as he goes over it in @2 Samuel 23; especially stressing the
{87}
presence of the Spirit in the one anointed of God. I think we have to make much of that -- the presence of the Spirit. Right administration can only be preserved as we understand what is linked with the dignity of the anointing, the dignity of the Spirit. When we fall beneath the level of the anointing we are sure to come to grief. And so David here, as he faces these serious exercises, having been helped through prophetic ministry, is conscious that the hand of God is upon him in the circumstances in which he is. What feelings must have passed through David's soul at this juncture; but he knew God, he had a knowledge of God that nothing could take away from him. And we have to go back to that. David is brought back to it foundationally, as @Psalm 51 shows. His confession here is very brief. There is no enlargement, no embellishment to his confession. As we go over the Psalm we are reminded of the great link he has with God and the sensitiveness that marks him in relation to those links with God, sensitiveness as to the damage done. David here is prostrate, facing in his soul this great matter in which he had been caught. A remarkable thing that such a one as David should be affected in this way!
And then we read that he arises from the earth and washes. There is a time for everything. He arises from the earth and anoints himself and changes his clothes. Now all this is helpful in regard to the completing of David's exercises, especially to see him arising from the earth. He felt it was right, but then the time comes when his position is to change. There is a change in his outlook, a change in his position. Recovery always results in that, and especially the recognition of the Spirit as is suggested in the type in the anointing of himself; he understands he is brought back to what he basically entered into -- his relations with the testimony in the 16th chapter of the first
{88}
book. You will remember how he was anointed, and how he could speak of the anointing as very few others could. David understood the anointing, but he fell beneath the dignity of it, and the idea is coming into his mind afresh as he is adjusted.
I believe we have to see the importance of the Holy Spirit. And David here rises to what is becoming. He washes himself and anoints himself. It is not a question of others, it is a question of himself, David anointed himself. John in his ministry loves to bring us to what there is with ourselves. It is not a question of David's anointing through the prophetic service, but it is a question of what David is coming to. He had belied the anointing, but now he is recognising it. He changed his clothing, meaning that the whole external appearance was changed. He is not saying what he would say formerly; he is not acting as he would do formerly as having sinned so against God and against Urijah the Hittite. It says he went into the house of Jehovah and worshipped. He comes to it that the service of God must go on. There is power to rise from the circumstances which would hold him down, facing the government of God in them. How sobering the government of God is in this chapter! But now he enters into the house of Jehovah. We come now to what David is basically in his relations with God. God is before his soul, while facing the searching circumstances of the government of God following up the way he had acted; yet he rises in the dignity that was proper to him and worships.
I would now just say a word as to the final matter in verse 24 regarding Bathsheba. She bore a son and he called him Solomon, and Jehovah loved him. He is a converging point, if I may reverently say so, between David and God. You will remember that Solomon says in the book of Proverbs, "I was a son unto my father, tender and an only one in the sight of
{89}
my mother." But we are not told here as to David's love for Solomon; we are told that Jehovah loved him. This is emerging out of all the difficulties and the sorrow. Solomon is the great focal point, type of our Lord Jesus Christ. He is a new centre of interest for David, and for Bathsheba too, but the stress is on David here. It says he called his name Solomon and "Jehovah loved him." We are brought into relation with the love side, and we need to understand the love side. God would bring us to His own thoughts about Christ, for that is what is in mind here. It is a unique reference that Jehovah loved him. And He sent by the hand of Nathan the prophet and he called his name Jedidiah -- for Jehovah's sake, not for David's sake. Think of how God comes into the matter here, taking on in this way the babe Solomon. Wonderful type of Christ! It is the uniqueness of the humanity of Christ that would be in mind in the type. It says of this babe that Jehovah loved him. What a different range of exercises is now projected on our view, for the whole realm of administrative glory opens to faith in an elementary suggestion in Solomon here. What a completion of exercises! And I believe we have to understand that, individually and together, dear brethren, the completing of exercises with us involves that Christ should be more distinctively before our souls than He ever was before. Not just as meeting certain exercises on our part, as bringing about a solution to our difficulties. That is good in its place, but God would bring us out of the circumstances of evil and engage us with Solomon, with Christ. He would bring before us the dignity and glory of sonship. Oh the blessedness of sonship in Christ! How it called out divine love, the heavens opened, and the expression of the appreciation that comes to us in the Father's voice in speaking to us by Christ in sonship. Think of what sonship is
{90}
to God! It is intimated here, and love comes into view in relation to sonship.
But then, dear brethren, we are to think not only of sonship in Christ but sonship in the saints; the dignity and the glory of it that God would bring us to, so that we might be free and happy in our movements, not in bondage but in liberty. That is what is in mind here, to bring us to sonship whether seen in Christ or seen in the saints. Sonship is an outstanding feature of the dispensation. Paul insists on sonship in Galatians. He stresses the glory of it. But he also stresses what sonship was in himself, in his own ministry. "It pleased God to reveal His son *in* me," he says. Meaning that Paul was affected internally by this great thought of sonship. The saints are formed in conformity to Christ and what benign influences they cast abroad. And it is only as sonship is amongst the saints that we shall have these benign influences; otherwise we shall have the dreadful influences of Judaism and legality which must be rejected in toto. For Judaism is against Christ and against God.
So David comes to Solomon and I finish with that. God has in mind that we should come to the dignity of our dispensation so unique -- sonship, whether viewed in Christ in all its uniqueness, the only begotten Son in the bosom of the Father, or whether seen in the saints as Paul speaks of it in Galatians. "The Son of God who has loved me," brings in the love side. If we do not understand sonship we will not understand love. Paul tells us that neither circumcision profits anything nor uncircumcision, but faith working through love. That is all I had to say, dear brethren, but the word is laid upon one's heart as to completing the exercises with us, individually or collectively, that we should be able to rise above the sorrowful circumstances of moving beneath the dignity of our position as seen in David, and come back to the work of God in our
{91}
souls and our relations with God and the precious light of sonship. So that heavenly influences may be disseminated amongst the saints, dispelling the gloom and darkness. Think of the Holy city coming down having the glory of God illuminating the world to come as in @Revelation 21.
May God bless the word.
{92}
THE SERVICE OF THE SON OF GOD
@John 11: 1 -- 44; @John 12: 1 -- 11
S.McC. The thought in mind in suggesting this part of the Scripture for a basis of enquiry is the value of each member of the family of God. @Romans 8 speaks of the liberty of the glory of children of God. The creature is to be affected by it in a day yet to come. The passage that we have read would show us the service of the Son of God, in relation to the family of God figuratively in the family at Bethany. It will be noticed by the brethren that we are speaking of the family of God figuratively here. It was a literal family of course in Bethany, but they set out in figure the great thought of the family of God; and while the passage that we have read in chapter 11 is somewhat lengthy (we cannot go into all the detail linked with it) we should see certain outstanding features that are linked with the Lord's service to this family. We should have in mind that in chapter 12, over against the dark background of chapter 11 with its tremendous sorrow and pressure, the completing of the matter involves each member of the family in a distinctive setting, and the Son of God distinctively before them. As it says in chapter 12, "Mary having taken a pound of ointment of pure nard of great price anointed the feet of Jesus and wiped his feet with her hair, and the house was filled with the odour of the ointment." It is one of the prime features that we should see in our enquiry that this kind of fragrance is to fill the realm where the members of the family of God, figuratively presented in Lazarus, Martha and Mary, are viewed as honouring the Son of God. They have been served by Him in a distinctive way, each member coming under His hand, having a distinctive
{93}
touch in relation to His service, and in their place, as the completing of the matter shows in chapter 12, honouring the One who has served them in the way He has. What should be kept before us is the great end that seems to be in mind in the Lord's service, that these persons should be set up in relation to Himself, in relation to what has been dealt with in the 11th chapter. The matter of Divine love entering into the chapter, each member of the family is viewed as the object of Divine affection, no one written off. We might be inclined to write Martha off as we have often had pointed out according to Luke, but she is to be taken account of as being served by the Son of God, adjusted in her outlook and, in the completing of the matter, forming part of the circle in which Christ is supremely honoured.
E.B. So that even death that had taken place, was but to subserve and to show forth the glory of God, and the glory of the Son of God. Would you say something about that?
S.McC. Well, exactly, the death is made to serve this great end. Whatever death may suggest as set out in this chapter as affecting the family, and casting a shadow over the whole position, the holy feelings of the Son of God come into it, the matter being dealt with so effectively. Every member as it were, comes under the personal touch and hand of the Son of God, the whole matter having in mind not exactly that the persons might be distinguished and made much of, while they do come before us, but for the glory of God and that the Son of God may be glorified by it.
C.W.M. While, as you were saying, we might in our way of thinking write Martha off, it is noticeable that in this 5th verse, the Spirit mentions Martha first. It says "Now Jesus loved Martha and her sister, and Lazarus." Martha is mentioned first. Is there anything
{94}
in that to help us in the way in which the Lord takes account of things?
S.McC. I think there is. It is to be noted in what you refer to, the difference in the words employed, that is the love in verse 5 is the love of settled disposition, whereas the love of verse 36 is the love linked with attractiveness in the one loved -- the love of friendship. Well, these two sides of the truth are to be noted, the settled disposition of Divine love towards every member of the family. But then the other side, attractiveness in the one loved is stressed. "Behold how he loved him." This Gospel brings up the matter of attractiveness of the one loved, not only the attractiveness of the love and the One who loves, but the attractiveness in the one who is loved. For Jesus Himself is viewed in the bosom of the Father in the first chapter. John in the 13th chapter is in the bosom of Jesus and on the breast of Jesus. And here we have Lazarus marked out according to the testimony. "Behold how he loved him."
M.B. Had Mary established some claim in that the Spirit says of her here, "It was the Mary who anointed the Lord with ointment and wiped his feet with her hair, whose brother Lazarus was sick"?
S.McC. Exactly. John would help us to value the work of God in one another, and value what is linked with Mary's action in the honouring of Christ.
A.McK.H. Would you say a little more about the matter of the settled disposition of love; you connected this passage with the thought of the children. Paul speaks of sons; is there in the divine family the idea of each member having a place in the affections of the Father?
S.McC. There is the thought of the settled disposition of divine love where Martha is brought in. It is not a question of attractiveness in the person loved so much, the verb is throwing into relief the character
{95}
of the love and the One who loves. "Now Jesus loved Martha and her sister and Lazarus."
E.B. Would you say a word as to chapter 3 where even the Lord Jesus Himself is stated to be the subject of the settled disposition of the Father, whereas in chapter 5 it is the love of lovability that is stated in regard to Him. "The Father loves the Son?"
S.McC. So that both sides are seen in relation to Him. We think of the settled disposition of the Father's love in relation to Him. Especially the matter of committing all things into His hand, the formal statement as to the economy. And then the love referred to in chapter 5 implying attractiveness in Christ, what holy attractiveness was there, and in the same way in @John 11 there should be the element of attractiveness with us, we should desire to be attractive in that way.
Ques. Has the service of the Lord that He renders that in view, that we should become attractive?
S.McC. I think so. The whole realm in chapter 12 is peculiarly marked by attractiveness in a spiritual way in the persons that are there, each of them the subject of a real spiritual experience under the hand of the Son of God.
A.W.H. So would the attractive features that you are speaking of, be the result of the work of God in the soul. In chapter 2, although many are stated to have believed in Jesus. He did not trust Himself to them; but would the work of God be trustworthy?
S.McC. Well, exactly. John's ministry helps us as that throughout, both in the Gospel and in the Epistles, the reliability of the work of God in the saints.
C.A.I. As to the love of settled disposition, "Jesus loved Martha and her sister, and Lazarus," would that love be a basic thing in relation to the family?
S.McC. Exactly, and it is at the beginning of the
{96}
chapter, whereas the love that we have been referring to in connection with Lazarus is in the middle of the chapter, where the testimony as to it comes out; but the chapter begins with this thought, it is lying at the very doorway of the chapter, that this matter of death invading the family of God in figure is a serious thing. What our attention is drawn to is the distinctive place of each member of the family in the affections of Christ. "Now Jesus loved Martha and her sister and Lazarus."
Ques. Would you have in mind then, the moral application of death, as well as what it is here, physical?
S.McC. I am thinking of the moral application of it in whatever way it may apply to us. The chapter is to help us as to things that may invade divine territory the environment where divine affections are radiating. That is, "Jesus loved Martha and her sister and Lazarus." We have the radiation of divine affection in this settled way which nothing can interfere with, nothing can as it were set aside, but death comes in to interfere with the enjoyment of it amongst the members of the family.
C.C.C. Would you say something as to the delay in verse 6? I am thinking of the other Gospels, perhaps Mark particularly, the immediate response in relief that the Lord grants. Would you say a little as to why this delay comes in?
S.McC. Well, the Lord has something in mind. It is not that the Lord is not thinking of the family, for it is just stated, "*Now* Jesus loved Martha." We get that word first. That is a great matter that we should understand the positioning of the verse, because in the working out of all matters in the family of God if love is lost sight of, the position will be lost. Love has to come into operation and John would stress that in his ministry in view of a right settlement of every matter, and especially what may cast a shadow
{97}
over the spirits of the members of the family of God.
C.A.I. That 5th verse, would be as it were, a background to all that follows in the chapter.
S.McC. That is how one is looking at it, that it is a background, and Mary's act too was a background to what follows in the chapter, as if in the teaching of the chapter, we are to keep that in mind, that while the Lord is detained and takes another way of moving, it does not interfere with this verse. "Now Jesus loved Martha and her sister and Lazarus." He is going to bring out something. It may involve tremendous pressure and sorrow as it did here, even, a stench being referred to, the awfulness of what came in through what is referred to here, in relation to Lazarus; Martha says to Him, "Lord he stinks already." Think of a reference like that! But over against that -- we do not want to dwell on that -- is the odour that fills the house in chapter 12; that is the completing of the matter.
Ques. Were there certain conditions there that were the occasion of death coming in that love took account of and must deal with?
S.McC. Well, we are always tested in delays. We are always tested as to what the Lord is going to do and what He may be doing. How He may be moving. Mary suggests something to us that we are to notice. Martha suggests something too, suggests something to our minds that we are to notice. Martha, as we have often spoken of, would represent one who claims to understand and to know things, but she needs adjusting in her way of thinking, and in her outlook, so that she might come into her proper functional place, in the family of God.
C.W.M. So that would you say that delays coming in as you were speaking of them, would become a test for our faith, and also for our spirituality?
S.McC. Well they are, we are often tested as to
{98}
what the Lord is going to do. We do not want to prevent the Lord, to go ahead of the Lord; we want to be near to Him and to understand what He is going to do.
M.B. Is the test as to what place He has with us; did it begin in chapter 6? You will remember His question to Philip, "Whence shall we buy loaves that these may eat? But this he said, trying him, for he knew what he was going to do."
S.McC. That is, He leaves matters with us as it were and sees just how things will work out.
Ques. Is there any significance in the order in which the names are given in the verse, Martha, her sister and Lazarus?
S.McC. I think so. I think in the putting of Martha first, John would help us to see what is in mind, lest we should in any way leave Martha out. Martha is put first because according to Luke she is not right in what she is doing, and John would help us to see where she is here, that she is not out of the picture here, she is in it, loved by Jesus, with her sister and Lazarus.
R.G.C. Was it the faithfulness of the love of Christ in speaking to her, that brought about her adjustment?
S.McC. It was, the Lord is very skilful in handling Martha, just as He was skilful in handling the woman of @John 4.
R.G.C. So it is love that begets love, is it?
S.McC. Exactly. John makes much of love in relation to divine Persons, between divine Persons and among the saints. "By this shall all know," the Lord Jesus said, "that ye are disciples of mine if ye have love among yourselves." Love is a great matter in the working out of difficult problems. Not the love that would, as we sometimes think, ignore things. That is not what we are referring to, it is the love
{99}
that values what there is in relation to the distinctive features seen in the members of the family of God in figure here.
A.W.H. In regard to the delay, it is a great test. I was thinking of a certain king in the days of Elisha, who said, "Why should I wait for Jehovah any longer?" But for those prepared to wait and go through the testing, do you think it would result in an increased knowledge and appreciation of the Lord as here?
S.McC. Well, it does, that is what the 12th chapter shows, that all the experiences of chapter 11 are to bring us together. That is the great thing that we should see, be brought together, not just on ecclesiastical ground but brought together in life as quickened, as the type would show in the life of the Son of God. That is what would be in mind.
C.A.I. At the end of the chapter the Lord Jesus is brought before as going into death, that He might gather together into one the children of God.
S.McC. One was thinking very much of that passage, and how John would keep it in our minds in relation to the closing of the dispensation, his ministry bearing on it, the need for understanding oneness and unity as John's ministry presents it.
W.H.W. Do you think in the Lord's delay of two days He is bringing about a position, where He will be able to serve them, and the service will be accepted?
S.McC. Yes, it might be that, certainly the waiting period would be a testing one for Martha and Mary and for the disciples too, for the disciples no doubt might be tested by the Lord's movements, why He was allowing things to work out this way.
A.McK.H. Martha in a way questions it in verse 21. She said "If thou hadst been here, my brother had not died." Is that a good remark, or does she need adjustment about it?
S.McC. She needed adjustment about it. It says,
{100}
"Martha then when she heard Jesus is coming went to meet him, but Mary sat in the house. Martha therefore said to Jesus, Lord if thou hadst been here my brother had not died." It is as if she is reproaching the Lord, as if she is drawing the Lord up in regard to the matter; and the Lord says to her, "Thy brother shall rise again." It is a very assuring word that the Lord gives her.
M.B. I was going to add that Mary says the same thing, showing that this was just the test. She says it almost complainingly, it is like us is it not? But the Lord stayed away until the blow fell, in order that He might be known in a new way as the resurrection and the light. It is greater, is it not, to bring Lazarus out of death, than to prevent his dying?
S.McC. That is it, life was to be brought in as a result of this experience. Life that was to be known and enjoyed in the members of the family, a great thing that we should understand in our setting together in the light of these chapters. Chapter 10 stresses the thought of the sheep, the object of Christ's care, the holy vigilance of His love in caring for the sheep includes the words "They shall never perish." But then, up comes chapter 11 where it looks as if one of the members of the family will perish, death claims him. Well, is the Lord able to cope with the situation? He certainly is, in the light of what we have here.
A.B.M. Is it encouraging to see that when this thing came in that was so disturbing and caused so much sorrow, the Lord was not taken unawares. He understood the whole position from start to end, even though Mary and Martha were taken unawares, He was not. Is that encouraging?
S.McC. It is all encouraging in that way.
C.J.G. So that the word 'therefore' comes in in verse 6. There are a number of 'therefores' in this
{101}
chapter and in the 12th. Is it a sequential matter, and the Lord steadily moving on to His own end?
S.McC. That is what it would be. The Lord at different times uses that word. He says 'on account of this' and 'therefore.' He says "On this account the Father loves me because I lay down my life that I may take it again." @John 10: 17. He provides a basis in relation to which divine love can radiate, and that is what is coming in here, that we have the glory of God entering into the chapter, the Son of God being glorified.
E.B. Notwithstanding the fact that in the ways of God He allows the matter to proceed even as far as corruption! I have been very much impressed as we have sat together, that evil principles may come in and invade a locality, a corrupting influence may invade, and yet it is not beyond divine love to deal with it. He allows it to go that far, however, would you say?
S.McC. That is the point, that the Lord shows how far the thing affects Himself. It says that He was deeply moved in spirit and was troubled. The word, as you will notice, means "groaned;" it is translated elsewhere "spoke very angrily." Here it was the inward feeling in spirit produced by the deep pain caused by seeing the power of death over the human spirit. Think of divine feelings coming into this great matter, that one of the members of the family of God was affected. The other members are to be affected too, by what is being done. Think of the Lord's feelings especially at the matter of the fruit of sin operating, because death is the penal sentence in relation to sin.
C.A.I. So the Lord had been appealed to, had He not? The message had gone, "He whom thou lovest is sick." And he had remained two days, so that there were deep feelings with Him in letting this matter proceed.
S.McC. Exactly. He was not ignoring what was
{102}
taking place. He was not forgetting it, because the verse that we began with, reminds us that He loved Martha, and her sister and Lazarus, and that love would go through, nothing would interfere with it; but then He allows this matter to proceed that adjustment might be brought in where needed, and I think where Martha shines as the result of the service of the Son of God to her is when she uses the word the 'teacher' in verse 28. She earlier takes the place it would seem in speaking to the Lord, of knowing things, and not needing any help in regard to what should be done, the Lord has to adjust her. She says "I know that he will rise again in the resurrection." Verse 22, "But even now *I know* ... ." Martha is making much of her knowledge. That is what exposes us, that is what will bring out where we are, but we are not prepared and ready to receive and to take on divine teaching.
F.G.S. What we may think we know would appear very small in the presence of One who could say "I am the resurrection and the life," would it not?
S.McC. Exactly. I suppose if you had talked to Martha, she would say, There is nothing wrong with me. But the Lord you see is dealing with her, just like the woman in the 4th of John, the Lord has her under hand. I mean the fact that I may say that I have not got a conscience about a matter does not mean anything. Divine teaching comes in and shows that I am wrong. And I have to accept it that I am wrong. Paul said "I am conscious of nothing in myself but I am not justified by this: but he that examines me is the Lord." So that if I say I do not have a conscience about a matter to justify myself that is a poor thing. My conscience has to be regulated by the Word of God.
T.R. Referring to verse 8. Did the disciples have something to learn? They say to him, "Rabbi even
{103}
but now the Jews sought to stone thee, and goest thou thither again?" But yet the Lord is prepared to move where death has come in.
S.McC. Exactly. They would say to the Lord "Save yourself." It is almost akin to what Peter says, after the revelation in @Matthew 16.
W.H.W. Is what the Lord said about stumbling something to be taken account of?
S.McC. It is. You mean in verse 9. "Are there not twelve hours in the day." It is to be noted the length of the day the Lord refers to here. "If anyone walk in the day he does not stumble, because he sees the light of this world. But if anyone walk in the night he stumbles because the light is not in him." We are to notice the negative reference to light here, because it would imply that on the positive side the light is to be in us. Not just around us, there is the idea of light all around us, but then there is the idea of light in us.
R.G.C. Is that why you stress the point the Teacher is come? Is that where we get the help?
S.McC. That is it, and I think that is the great turning point when Martha begins to see that teaching is the great thing in mind, and she comes under the hand of the Lord, and it says in verse 28 "And having said this, she went away and called her sister Mary secretly, saying The teacher has come and calls thee." That is she sees the value of the teaching, the wonderful value of the teaching that comes in at this particular juncture. Was not the Lord teaching all the way through? He was, but she is stressing now the teaching at this particular juncture.
A.McK.H. In chapter 20, Mary turning round, says to Him in Hebrew "Rabboni, which means Teacher." Is that the attitude? Some of us have had to make a change and turn right around.
S.McC. John would help us as to that. He would
{104}
help us to turn around, turn completely around, when we are facing the wrong way, especially in regard to this matter of divine teaching.
P.B. She calls Him 'the teacher' after he has said to her "I am the resurrection and the light, he that believes on me though he have died shall live, and everyone who lives and believes on me shall never die. Believest thou this?" Is that the answer to our calling him Teacher?
S.McC. Well, there are great truths that are referred to here. The Lord brings something else that is in His mind, into Martha's mind. How often it is the case, that we may have certain things in our mind, but the Lord wants to bring other things into our mind.
W.H.W. Does Martha get help when the Lord brings the truth in as a present application? She says "I know that he will arise ... in the last day."
S.McC. Yes, that is the point. She is stressing the orthodox side, and often you see orthodoxy ensnares us, it may be all right in its place, but if we are building up too much on orthodoxy, on religious reputation, or all that is linked with orthodoxy, we may miss the point. It is a question of what the Lord is saying now, what the Lord is doing now.
W.H.W. Do you think that Mary might represent to us the work of God, whereas Martha represents what has to be taught?
S.McC. So that Mary is there, but not saying anything here. Her time will come too, she will come into the chapter as it proceeds, just as we are all in it. Let none of us elect ourselves out of the matter, we are all in it you see, because a great matter is in hand, great instruction, and a great result is in mind, a refined result. All the uncouthness and awfulness linked with the tomb and the cave, all that is to be left, and @John 12 opens up a realm in which the members of the
{105}
family are seen as set together in life, not criticising one another, but as valuing one another in the light of the family and Christ being the Object.
Ques. Is He bringing the truth of things to bear upon them when He asks the question, "Where have ye put him?"
S.McC. Well, all that would enter into the teaching in the subject. It says in verse 32, "Jesus therefore, when he saw her weeping ... " Notice that, that Mary is the one that is weeping. Verse 32, "Mary therefore when she came where Jesus was, seeing him, fell at his feet, saying to him, Lord if thou hadst been here, my brother had not died. Jesus therefore, when he saw her weeping." Who is the one that is weeping here? -- the one that anointed the Lord. The one that in devotion and affection for Him anointed Him. That is the one that is weeping here, it is not Martha, Mary is now before us. Martha is not weeping, she is stressing what she knows. She is assuming to know, and that has to be dealt with, because "If anyone think he knows anything, he knows nothing yet as he ought to know it."
W.H.W. So is it the case of the Lord developing inward feelings with us?
S.McC. Yes, and adjusting us in regard to the truth. That is, the teaching is adjusting us in regard to the truth, and it is imperative that we should get the gain of the teaching in regard to the truth, what the Lord is stressing now, as you were saying earlier.
C.A.I. Is it significant that Martha had to do with the Lord outside of the village and Mary finds that He is still in that place? Has each one to come to the Lord where He is? He has drawn near, but there is a movement required on the part of each one, is there?
S.McC. Exactly, the different features of each one are to be noted in that way, and then the influence of
{106}
Mary has often been alluded to. She was apparently an influential personality, "and the Jews who came with her weeping" -- think of that, even the Jews are affected, and then it says "Jesus therefore when he saw her weeping and the Jews who came with her weeping, was deeply moved in spirit and was troubled and said, where have ye put him? They say to Him, Lord come and see. Jesus wept." This is one of the most touching references to the Lord Jesus, and especially is it remarkable as coming into John's Gospel. We might understand it better in Luke's Gospel where stress is laid on His holy humanity. John's Gospel is stressing the Person and what it was to Him here, the Person in manhood being before us, that was affecting the family of God.
E.B. Are we to think of that in regard to assembly sorrows, that the Lord is pre-eminent in feeling the pressure and the sorrow that comes among the saints?
S.McC. We are to understand divine feelings in the matter. We may make a good deal of our own feelings, and it is right that we should feel things -- Mary feels things here. It is right that we should feel things, but then think of the feelings of a divine Person, who can measure the sorrow and the disaster as no one else can, infinitely perfect in His holy sensibilities as He was as Man.
W.H.W. Do we gather from these feelings of the Lord's the way He would lead us to understand the way divine Persons have come into the economy?
S.McC. What are you meaning by that?
W.H.W. I was thinking how feelingly They have come into the economy, and They have come in so that we might be attracted into it. Take the 4th of John that you quoted, the woman is attached to Jesus, is she not?
S.McC. Exactly. A divine Person has come into the place of manhood and the tears are linked with His
{107}
feelings as in that position. The matter is not an ordinary one, it is a matter that He feels greatly that such a realm should be invaded by death as it was in this instance.
P.B. I was just going to follow up what you said, as to the 38th verse. "Jesus therefore again deeply moved in himself comes to the tomb." Is that to draw attention to His Person -- deeply moved in Himself?
S.McC. Yes, stressing the inward side of the feelings. "Jesus therefore *again* deeply moved ... " The repetition of this is to be noted, that it was not an ordinary matter here that was drawing out such feelings on the part of the Lord. He could measure things as no one else could measure them, but we are to measure them too.
A.McK.H. I suppose Joseph's brethren never knew the feelings of Joseph. It says, "He sought a place to weep and went into the chamber and wept there." It would be like this, the Lord shows His feelings now, but there was a time when He was holding them back. They did not understand, did they?
S.McC. That is it, what regard He had for them. What lay behind all that transpired in His service in relation to them, and that is what is coming out here. And then it says in verse 38, "Now it was a cave and a stone lay upon it. Jesus says, take away the stone. Martha the sister of the dead says to him, Lord he stinks already for he is four days there." Now Martha has to be adjusted again. She is adjusted to begin with and seems to get a certain measure of gain, but she is again saying wrong things. What she was saying was not true, it was not affording any help and light to the position. She is drawing attention to the corruption, to the stench that was there as she thought, whereas, the Lord is seeking to get her eye on the glory of God.
{108}
C.A.I. She was referring to what was in the natural and not what was in the spiritual.
S.McC. Exactly, and the Lord has in mind to get her eye on the glory of God. He says, "Did I not say to thee ...?" The Lord would bring these matters up with us as to what has He been saying to us, what did He say to us, why did we not understand? We have thought of that in the Gospels, the Lord being affected by the fact that they did not understand. The Lord says, "Did I not say to thee, that if thou shouldest believe, thou shouldest see the glory of God?" When He had said that, it says, "They took therefore the stone away." Will everything come out linked with the stench and the corruption? What was in mind, was the glory of God and Lazarus coming forth in life.
W.H.W. Would the stone in any moral way represent the difficulty we often have in accepting fresh truth?
S.McC. It is a very heavy and cumbersome matter, a stone, as we understand, and Jesus says "take away the stone ... " He is not going to take away the stone. He could easily have commanded the stone and it would have rolled away, because He is going to bring Lazarus out, but you see there is what *we* have to do about this matter. "Take away the stone."
A.McK.H. What about the grave clothes?
S.McC. Well, all that enters into the teaching of the passage in connection with Lazarus, the allusion to the Lord in verse 41 lifting up His eyes on high, bringing in the thought of the Father. He says, "Father I thank thee that thou hast heard me but *I* knew ... " Think of the Lord stressing what He knew -- Martha had been stressing what she knew -- I know, I know -- like many of us do, but the Lord says here in speaking to the Father, "But *I* knew that thou always hearest me; but on account of the crowd who stand around
{109}
I have said it, that they may believe that thou hast sent me." That is, the Lord is saying things here that we might believe, that we might be affected, that we might accept the truth, especially in view of Lazarus coming forth.
Rem. They seem very slow to arrive at what He was seeking to bring them to. Are we not like that? Why are we so slow?
S.McC. The Lord would help us to come to what He is teaching us.
F.H.B. Is the whole family to learn that the whole situation of sickness and death and the grave had been designed and that the Lord was in control of the whole situation? Is His glory to come out in that way?
S.McC. That is it, and so it says in verse 43 "Having said this he cried with a loud voice, Lazarus come forth. And the dead came forth bound feet and hands with grave clothes and his face was bound round with a handkerchief. Jesus said to them, Loose him and let him go." Now here is another matter that they are to come into. The Lord does not do everything; He does do certain things. He does do crucial things, but then we have to do things, and we have to understand what is to be done both in regard to the stone -- that stone is to be noted -- that the Lord does not take it away, *we* are to take it away. And the grave clothes, we are to loose him and let him go, it is now the liberty of the family that comes into view, the liberty of the glory of the children of God. Confidence is involved.
P.B. Why should He cry with a loud voice?
S.McC. I think it is to show the importance of the matter in hand, the power that was required, the feelings that entered into the dealing with the matter.
F.G.S. Why does it say the dead came forth?
S.McC. It is just what Lazarus was, he was dead.
{110}
It says "Where was the dead man Lazarus" in the next chapter.
F.G.S. Yes, I wondered if there was any connection.
S.McC. It is important that we should see as we come to chapter 12 that the family is unified in honouring the Son of God.
Rem. It is your thought that as members of the family we are feelingly to enter into the whole of what has transpired in chapter 11, so that we can enter into the service of God feelingly in the 12th chapter.
S.McC. That is it, and to see that it is not a question of any of us being made much of, it is a question of the Son of God, that is the great thing, that the Son of God may be glorified by it. There are no grave clothes in chapter 12, there is no stone to be taken away, the members of the family are at liberty and free as the full result is secured in them surrounding Jesus, each in his or her place.
E.B. It is a glorious completion to a very distressing matter.
S.McC. Well, it is and I think we shall be helped and the brethren in this city will be helped and all of us will be helped when we see that the grave clothes have to be left. You cannot bring them into chapter 12, all that is linked with the corrupt side of things, the cave, the deep hidden side of things. Lazarus was to be loosed and let go, that is, the saints are to appear in the liberty of the glory that is theirs as children of God.
P.B. The house being filled with the odour of the ointment, is the contrast to all the corruption, is it not?
S.McC. Exactly, so that we do not remain over the tomb all the time, it is a question now of the new set of circumstances in chapter 12 and the Lord Jesus supremely before the members of the family, honoured
{111}
by them. Judas comes into it, he has got something in mind, but he does not fit into the picture, he stresses the side of the poor, whereas the teaching is stressing the side of the Son of God being glorified.
R.L.P. So that at the beginning of chapter 12 Judas is like what the apostle says to the Corinthians, if I "have not love I am nothing."
S.McC. That is it. Judas did not have love. He was ostensibly in the picture, he was there as part of those that were there, but vitally he did not belong to it.
R.G.C. Does Mary express active love in what she does?
S.McC. There are things to be done. Martha represents the silent side. She is there, she is not left out again, and has part in honouring Christ, because what Mary does would be representative I suppose in the realm.
{112}
RADIATION OF DIVINE AFFECTIONS IN JOHN'S GOSPEL (1)
@John 1: 14 -- 18; @John 3: 14 -- 16; @John 5: 19 -- 20
S.McC. In suggesting these passages that were read one has in mind the thought of divine affections and the influence they are intended and calculated to have upon us. It is important that we should come under the influence of divine affection because the way that God has chosen to become known, to make Himself known, involves this very matter. He has come into relationships intelligible and well-known to men, relationships filled with warmth and tenderness of the affection that peculiarly marks them, and John's ministry, bearing as it does on our time, the last days, would especially have in mind, over against the public breakdown and failure around us, that we should come under the influence of divine affection. Mr. Taylor once used the word "radiation" in connection with this gospel as to divine love, the radiation of divine affections. It needs to be understood better by us, because John the evangelist would bring before us divine love in the movements of Christ coming into manhood. Subsequent movements linked with His own mediatorial service and the mediatorial service of the Spirit involve that we should understand divine love, not just in an arbitrary way as made known to us in the scriptures, but that we should feel and be affected by the radiation of divine affections.
The first passage we have read speaks of the Person of Christ in a peculiar way; John would have us understand the glory of the Person of Christ, an essential point, in his teaching. We shall not understand divine affections properly unless we see the great import
{113}
of the incarnation, the greatness of what is involved in a divine Person becoming Man, the Son, the Word. The Son alludes to His personal dignity and glory as representing God and bringing God so near to us; the Word refers to the inherent ability in Him as the "Logos" to make God known, to reveal God.
Into the mediatorial service there enter the unique wondrous positions taken up, and this radiation of divine affection that is calculated to bring others into the current of it and to keep us in it from all that is around in the way of apostate influences and currents, and to hold us in this circle of divine affections.
Rem. Could you say something, then, as to this contemplation of Him, of His glory?
S.McC. Well, that brings out how certain were affected by it. It was not just something that came across their horizon and passed on. It involved the most stupendous of all matters, a divine Person here in manhood in a known and intelligible relationship, contemplated in it in all the unsullied blessedness of the relationships that were between Him and the Father, God known in that wondrous name of grace that is presented in this gospel, the Father, not *our* Father but *the* Father.
R.G.N. Would the parenthesis here show how deeply John himself was affected? He repeatedly breaks out in worship as he writes. His ministry bearing on our day would draw attention to the importance of this feature of worship with us, would it not?
S.McC. I think that is, because John the Evangelist is dealing here with the movement of the Lord Jesus Christ into manhood. He stops for a moment to draw our attention to radiancy, referring to the glory, because glory involves what is radiant and divine affections here are seen radiating in the understood, well-known, intelligible relationship of an only begotten with a father. Then the Baptist is drawn in also to
{114}
give us a touch as to the greatness of the Person that can be taken account of in this relationship. That is, John the Baptist cries. It is not a matter that we can speak of academically, although it is essential that our minds should be girt with the truth in speaking of it, but as in @Philippians 2, so here the subject is brought in as to our Lord's person in an environment of refinement, where the feelings of the saints are present.
C.F.I. So he speaks of a glory as of an only begotten with a Father. Would that be intended to convey to us something of the intimacy in which Jesus moved as a Man with His Father day by day and the radiation of love between them?
S.McC. That is how one understands it. It is what they observed in His practical everyday movements in His links with God here, His links with the Father. He was here in a physical sense -- the Word became flesh and dwelt among us; He was before their eyes in that physical condition, and yet there was something which they penetrated beyond, in His links with God as the Father.
G.R.D. Would the understanding of what you are speaking of as to the affections in John mean that christianity is not just a system of teaching, but rather the affections are caught up in the activity of divine Persons and we become attached to them?
S.McC. Exactly, and attached to them in such a way that we are affected by these currents of love and affection and find our part appreciatively and intelligently in them.
G.R.D. Would you say, as you have referred to John bearing particularly on our days, that there was a possibility at the beginning, and is now, of the teaching becoming *unduly* prominent, not that we would lessen its value, but does John write just for
{115}
what you said, to draw attention to and attach us to the Persons Themselves?
S.McC. John writes in a day when degeneracy in doctrine had set in, when the teaching became corrupted, and his ministry has in mind revival in the affections of the saints; and what he presents to us is this wealth of divine affection that is radiating in the relationships into which divine Persons have come.
E.B.Mc. Is this radiation, the effect of it, seen on the holy mount, the shining forth and the glory and the address "my beloved son?"
S.McC. It would. The whole environment was radiant with divine glory. The voice, the excellent glory speaking, all suggesting an environment in which divine affections are radiating.
I.C. What is the thought of those words, "and dwelt among us"?
S.McC. Well, it is to throw into relief the nearness into which Christ has come to men. In coming into the mediatorial position into which He has come He is not operating at a distance from us, but He is right amongst us, as John referred to it "and dwelt among us."
W.H.W. Is that thought, full of grace and truth, important to us, lest we try on our side to introduce some other thought?
S.McC. I think so because grace and truth would bear upon conditions on our side that need to be met. If God comes into these circumstances in the way in -- which He has, and man being what He is, of necessity there must be the adapting of divine love to meet these conditions on our side, and grace and truth enter into that, grace enlarging before our minds the side of supply, and truth enlarging before our minds the great adjusting features in what has come in in the way of light as to God.
D.B. Would the 17th chapter in particular show the wonderful intimacy between the Father and the Son?
{116}
S.McC. Yes, it does, and the way He speaks to the Father and speaks about the saints. I think we need to make room for the Spirit, to allow the Spirit to come in and to affect us through His service and ministry, with the warm of divine affections that are flowing in these intelligible relationships in which we contemplate divine Persons.
E.W.C. Would the thought of "with the Father" involve what it was to the Father to have One in that relationship here?
S.McC. Well, I think verse 18 stresses that. You will notice in verse 14 the figure of speech. It is not an actual relationship that it refers to, but a figure of speech -- that is, John the Evangelist is describing what came on to their view and appeared in testimony in the position into which Christ had come. He is naming it through this figure of speech. But when we come to verse 18 we get the formal statement as to the position of the Lord Jesus in the bosom of the Father. That would bear out what you are referring to, what Christ was in sonship here as Man to the Father, all the moral and spiritual excellence of a condition of manhood according to the mind of God, the like of which had never been seen before.
E.W.C. It would be the activity of divine Persons to bring us into these holy relationships with their feelings and affections.
S.McC. The uniqueness of Christ's sonship is before us here. It is a question of how we are brought into it through the contemplation of it, especially making room for the Spirit so that He might affect us by this influence of divine love flowing in these intelligible relationships.
R.E.H. Do we come into the gain of this relationship through the knowledge of this grace and truth? Is that the way we come into it?
S.McC. Yes. They would represent resources that
{117}
bring about all that is needed on our side so that we might enjoy the wealth and warmth of divine love as exhibited in this relationship to the full.
C.F.I. Is the word "contemplation" important in regard to what you are saying? You referred to teaching, but we have contemplation in the first chapter of the epistle "that which we contemplated." These relationships are held without deterioration between divine Persons, but we come into them and see them in all their purity there.
S.McC. Well, that is it. Therefore the need for the Spirit, the need for making room for the Holy Spirit in our day so that we can be helped in this contemplative attitude of mind, because it is not in us naturally. The Holy Spirit would help us in contemplating divine Persons in this wonderful arrangement of divine love, according to eternal purpose where God wishes to be known. God who is infinite in majesty, inscrutable, dwelling in light unapproachable, yet coming near in relationships intelligible to men, relationships in which there is radiating the wealth and the warmth of divine love, that men might be affected by it. How great these things are!
M.R.B. How do we make room for the Spirit? What is to be our attitude to the truth, giving the truth its place? You referred several times to the thought about making room for the Spirit that He might come in. I would like you to help us to just how that is.
S.McC. Well, we are helped to make room for the Spirit as refusing all that is linked with ourselves naturally. As having received the Holy Spirit we have positive power to help us in the judging of ourselves, and as judging ourselves we make room for the Spirit to come in in positive power and positive help in regard to these matters.
G.A.A. And following on that, this idea of contemplating.
{118}
Do we need to make room for time for contemplation -- make room for it?
S.McC. Exactly. That is, we have got minds, divinely given faculties, for the mind is a great faculty among the saints. Paul says "we have the mind of Christ." That is, among the saints in a gathering like this we have that wondrous divinely-given faculty to take in divine thoughts as to divine Persons and divine love.
R.E.H. If I am not diverting you, I think you said last night that self-judgment by itself can bring in darkness?
S.McC. Well, exactly, therefore the importance of self-judgment in the light of Christ, because there are plenty of persons around us who are going on in self-judgment to a certain degree but are in darkness and distress of soul. They do penance and other forms of self-judging effort to hold self in its proper place, but it does not bring them anywhere because self is the centre and self is the object.
R.E.H. Would you allow the possibility of that being amongst us?
S.McC. That is often what happens with young believers as they get into the throes of deliverance, that they get so occupied with themselves, their own inconsistencies, their own evil thoughts, that they enter as it were a tunnel of darkness and it is difficult to see beyond it, but as we go through it in the strength of our links with Christ we reach the Deliverer.
R.G.N. Is that seen in John the Baptist here in his acceptance of his own eclipse as the greatness of Christ who was before him. He seems to lose sight of himself entirely as the greatness of Christ comes before him.
S.McC. He does. He is a remarkable man, John the Baptist. He was a man who was with God and sent from God, and therefore his thoughts and his
{119}
impressions were clear in regard to these great movements which call for spirituality as seen in type in John. Not that John belongs to our dispensation; he belongs to another dispensation, but the type would involve spirituality on our side; that he is able to take account of divine movements and to be affected by them.
J.W. "I have seen and borne witness that this is the Son of God." The truth of that had come home to his soul, had it not?
S.McC. Well, exactly. It had. He cried, meaning that his soul was entering into the matter.
G.R.D. Would the several references to grace and truth in this section that we have read show that what was coming to light in the relationship into which the Lord had come and in which He is presented as with the Father has a bearing towards us, because grace and truth would hardly be needed, would it, as between the Father and the Son dwelling in His bosom (of the Father)?
S.McC. The point is to remind us what is needed on our side, as it says "for of his fulness we all have received and grace upon grace. For the law was given by Moses: grace and truth subsists through Jesus Christ." The mediatorial position involves that grace and truth comes into operation in the adjustment of us in relation to divine Persons in the position into which They have come.
G.W.B. Does the footnote help us, that which is commencing to be with the incoming of Christ?
S.McC. Well, exactly. It did not exist before. It began to be, the verb means that it began to be; it did not exist in the same way before.
C.F.I. What do you understand by "grace upon grace?" Would it indicate the way that the sense of supply came into the soul of the disciples? Would
{120}
John have in mind the way they had received supply after supply of grace?
S.McC. Exactly. What he is writing here is what they had reached substantially in their souls. It is not that wave upon wave was passing before them, it is how they were affected by it. "We all have received, and grace upon grace."
G.H. So is it both these things, the capacity to apprehend these relations and to be influenced, affected by them?
S.McC. Exactly, that which is involved in these relationships into which divine Persons have come is not what is beyond us. While we are always faced with inscrutability, there is that which we have capacity to take in, and John's gospel makes a good deal of capacity in the saints to take in divine thoughts in relation to divine Persons and their movements, as having come within our range.
G.H. So we see in John himself one who is superior to the doctrinal degeneracy that you have spoken of. The matter was in him, the substance.
S.McC. That is right. So that christianity involves substance. It involves what is substantial. It is not merely doctrine in itself; doctrine in itself does not involve life and John's gospel stresses life, and while doctrine regulates and controls our thoughts as to the truth, John's gospel in its teaching involves more than that, and what we have in verses 14 to 18 is pointing to divine affections as calculated to affect us in a substantial way.
R.E.H. It has been said that we must first see any particular truth set out in perfection in Christ and then extend it to the saints. Is the thought here that this life is to be extended?
S.McC. Well, it is. It is going to be extended in the saints and what is projected on our view in these verses is what was here in testimony in Jesus. Eternal
{121}
life was there in testimony, sonship was there in testimony. If we are to know sonship and eternal life, we need to understand it as presented in testimony here in Jesus in manhood.
E.B.Mc. And what subsists too, in Him. It says grace and truth subsists. Law is by Moses but that does not subsist.
S.McC. Well exactly. So that it says in verse 17, "grace and truth subsists *through* Jesus Christ." Now that is a peculiar reference there. It is not often in the gospels that you get Jesus Christ alluded to.
E.B.Mc. What had you thought of it?
S.McC. Well, I think the stress is on the mediatorial, administrative position, the way that divine affections have come in toward us. While the prime thought in verse 18 is what manhood in its spiritual excellence is in Jesus in sonship to the Father, it is preceded by what is towards us, subsisting *through Jesus Christ*. "Through Jesus Christ" is the line of what is from God towards us. "In Christ Jesus" is the line of what is toward God in connection with us.
R.B.M. Would you enlarge on the thought "of His fulness" too?
S.McC. Well, I think it is what is coming out in manhood. It would not be deity. That would be quite apparent to all of us because we could not receive that. It is a question of the excellence, of what was there in manhood, the fulness alluding to what is opened out in connection with it.
W.H.W. Is this all standing over against the reference to the law of Moses?
S.McC. Exactly, because we do not have the substance in the law of Moses. We have the shadow.
W.H.W. Yes. I was thinking of the way you were presenting it just now, it is subsisting through Jesus Christ.
S.McC. Exactly, so that it is important that we
{122}
should understand this "through Jesus Christ," that all that has come in in relation to grace and truth in our day in this dispensation has come in *through Jesus Christ*. That expression "through Jesus Christ" throws into relief the whole system of mediatorial operations.
Ques. As seeing it in Christ is it calculated to make a change? We are changed from glory to glory as we behold it in Him.
S.McC. Well, in result it would work out that way.
W.H.W. So all the words of the law would be seen in finality as we contemplate what is presented in this blessed Person.
S.McC. Exactly. He came to complete the law, to fulfil the law -- that is, to give the completeness of it, to set it out in its fulness, we have a remarkable reference to that in Matthew, the Lord making the reference Himself. He did not come to set aside the law; He came, to give the fulness of it, so that in the presence of Jesus in the mediatorial position we have things set out in substance and John would stress substance -- substantiality, all this over against degeneracy in the truth.
R.L.P. Would John writing then at the close of his days give a greater value to this matter, glory and grace from chapter 1 to 21 marking the whole dispensation?
S.McC. Exactly. We see in chapter 21 the wonderful way in which it is active, the modus operandi of it in relation to Peter, how it affected Peter, the way the Lord dined with the disciples and then took on Peter, so that Peter in the presence of it yields fully to the Lord Jesus.
R.G.C. Is it the cure then from despondent self-occupation the understanding of how divine affections have been expressed, as between Themselves and then towards us?
S.McC. Exactly, and we have to be lifted out of
{123}
ourselves if we are to be helped in relation to the truth and also as to what gives substance for the service of God. What gives substance to the local position is persons who are formed as making room for the Spirit to bring them into the warmth and influence of divine love as suggested in these relations.
R.E.H. Had John seen the breakdown that had taken place when he wrote this? Is that particularly encouraging?
S.McC. Well, it is. That is what he writes in view of and the truth is to be preserved in life. The truth is not exactly preserved in creeds; while men sought to do that, with perhaps good intentions when they did it, they fell into the error of disregard for the Spirit, and error entered into it.
G.R.D. Would you say something as to verse 18 and the reference to the Lord "who is in the bosom of the Father." Is there something there which is unique to Christ in manhood?
S.McC. Exactly. Something that specially belongs to Him. It is very difficult for us to pursue an inquiry into the truth without wondering how we come into it, what part *we* have in it, how does it affect *us*. The brethren will always note how difficult it is to pursue far without bringing that side in, but what verse 18 would project on our view is the excellence of manhood in sonship in Jesus for the Father's delight, for God's delight is presented here in the Father and we should learn how to make room for the Spirit to help us in the contemplation of it, because the more we contemplate it the more we shall reject in ourselves all that is so opposite to it.
P.B.I. Does this make way for the declaration of it? The contemplation of Christ uniquely in this position in the bosom of the Father makes room in our hearts for the declaration of the Father?
S.McC. That is, the declaration has come out that
{124}
way. He *has* declared Him. That is, it has come out, the declaration bearing upon the whole public position involving not only the saints, but involving men. That is, God is declared, but how is He declared? Well, this verse shows us how the declaration comes in, through the only-begotten Son who is in the bosom of the Father, showing what substance attaches to christianity. It is a system where divine love and divine affections are peculiarly active and operative.
R.E.H. We have the expression "until Christ," but all that had gone before was totally inadequate, was it not? We get life here.
S.McC. So that the position here is to be noted because it is to stress that the mediatorial activities and service do not imply mere arbitrary action. It is God drawing near in the greatness of all that He is in a relationship intelligible to us, so that in the contemplation of these relationships, our souls and minds are affected as the Spirit would bring them under the influence of divine affection thus radiated.
C.F.I. Does this declaration bring in the full thought of God?
S.McC. Well, exactly. So that in "He hath declared Him" the "Him" is God. The "He hath declared" refers back to "No one has seen God at any time." It is the full declaration of God and the full declaration of God involves Father, Son and Holy Spirit.
G.R.D. And the present tense "who *is* in" the declaration would be a completed thing but the relationships remain, do they?
S.McC. Exactly, and so the declaration is complete. Nothing can be added to it. The Lord later in @John 17 uses another expression "I have made known unto them thy name and *will* make it known." That is pointing on to @John 20, but here the declaration is regarded as a completed matter.
G.A. Also in chapter 17 "I have manifested thy
{125}
name to the men whom thou gavest me out of the world." Does that fit in?
S.McC. Yes, it is the inward bearing of it upon the disciples in @John 17, but there it is the public side of it that God has come out and drawn near to men. He has not been hidden as it were from men, but He is declared, as it says.
G.H.R. Is the early part of verse 18 calculated to keep before us the greatness of Christ as the one by whom God has been declared: "No one has seen God at any time; the only begotten Son who is in the bosom of the Father he hath declared him."
S.McC. Yes, exactly. The declaration of God had come in this way, by the only begotten Son. Now that points to the uniqueness of Christ's glory, the uniqueness of His manhood, because certainly it could not refer to abstract relations in Deity, it alludes to the unique place of Christ in manhood, the only begotten Son Who is in the bosom of the Father. That is, the Father is projected on our view in the light of His wondrous place in this arrangement because the Father is supreme in this economy of love which these relationships involve.
C.F.I. Do we see love -- in all its fulness in this relationship?
S.McC. Exactly.
M.R.J.M. Does this suggest a nearness that is possible to us. John in the bosom of Jesus in chapter 13?
S.McC. Well, exactly. He is in the place of love, and how fitted and capacitated thus to speak on this exalted subject in the way in which he does, and how fittingly he refers to what we have here -- the only begotten Son who is in the bosom of the Father. What food there is for our affections in contemplating the excellence of manhood as seen in Jesus in this exalted relationship of love!
W.H.W. I was wondering if Paul did not use this
{126}
thought in his exhortation in Ephesians, "till we all arrive at the unity of the faith and the knowledge of the Son of God, at the full grown man, at the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ?" @Ephesians 4: 13.
S.McC. I think so. I think this enters into the stature of the fulness of the Christ. The gospels. Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, give us the stature of the fulness of the Christ; that is, what is presented in Christ as man.
R.B.M. The wording of this in John has often appealed to us, who is in the bosom of the Father. Do you think it implies the thought of the mediator? They were able to contemplate the glory of this One, but if they saw Him they saw the Father. Is that right? Contemplation I mean of the nearness of this relationship.
S.McC. Well, exactly. The Lord says "he that hath seen me has seen the Father." The Father remains in the inscrutableness of Deity, but the Lord Jesus has come into a place involving relative inferiority but in which place He is contemplated as the Object of the Father's love, the bosom particularly referring to the affections of the Father towards Jesus in the excellence of His manhood in this relationship.
Rem. I think it has been said that love is the glory of God and that the glory of God is love. Does that come in here?
S.McC. Well, love is what God is in His nature, whether we think of God in the absolute or whether we think of God in the relative, love is what God is, the working out of it involves glory, the outshining of God would refer to the working out of His nature, because God is love and the great link between the absolute and the relative is love. John's epistle says "God is love." That is an absolute statement.
{127}
R.G.C. Does the "He" written emphatically show the intertwining of love and light?
S.McC. Exactly. How love and light are linked together, because the declaration would involve that God is in the light but in the position of "in the bosom of the Father" is to show the love, the affections that are radiating in God thus becoming known.
R.G.N. The Lord's invitations a little later on in the chapter and the apostles going and seeing and abiding there would show how ready He was to lead others into the position?
S.McC. Well, exactly. Where dwellest thou? "They said to him, ... where abidest thou? He says to them, Come and see." I think we want to see the importance of this side, because it is the kernel you might say of Christianity, the wealth of divine affections lying behind the whole external structure of the position, and what we are going on with is not what they have in the philosophers and others, who set on theories and ideas and principles that are to govern men arbitrarily. What we are linked with in christianity is the radiation of divine love active in the channels that we are referring to here in Christ in manhood.
G.R.D. Would it be right to think then that divine Persons have entered into these relationships because of the delightfulness of it to them? Not exactly in declaration, whether it is having effect on any or not, but because of what the relationships mean to them.
S.McC. The position of the only begotten Son who is in the bosom of the Father is peculiarly stressing what manhood in sonship is in Jesus for the divine delight. We need to contemplate it; we need to allow the Spirit to strengthen our minds, strengthen our souls to contemplate and feed on the excellence of manhood in Jesus. There is much that we cannot compass
{128}
but the Father can, but much that we can enjoy in regard of it.
E.B.Mc. He only could declare Him dwelling in the bosom. The full declaration of what God has for man is seen there.
S.McC. Well, exactly. The declaration of God involves that all the three Persons of the Godhead are active in regard to this great thought of God coming near to men, active in intelligible relationships, relationships that involve endearment and relationships which involve the activity of divine affections.
J.C. So you would say it should move us that the declaration here is connected with the thought of the bosom?
S.McC. Well, it should, because it is the kernel of the position we might say in the divine arrangement, the bosom of the Father is a great central position and the Son in manhood is viewed in it. Object of the divine delight and at the same time declaring God in that wondrous position.
J.W. Mr. Darby says in his hymn "We see the Godhead glory Shine through the human veil" (`188:6).
S.McC. Well, we are always reminded at every turn of the road when contemplating the Lord Jesus in manhood that there is that about Him which we could never understand. We always have to keep in mind in regard to any divine Person, whatever position they may take up there is an inscrutability about each of the divine Persons that we can never pierce or get beyond.
R.E.H. Is the contemplation and enjoyment of this the greatest power in our souls for deliverance? I was thinking of John, who never refers to himself in the gospel except as the disciple whom Jesus loved.
S.McC. Exactly. And this is to help us in the working out of the truth in difficult days, that we should see that love is a prime matter. It is a prime
{129}
matter -- love in the working out of the declaration of God. The declaration of God involves light. Light is a prime matter. "He that doeth truth cometh to the light that his deeds may be manifested that they are wrought in God." And love is a prime matter. These are two great prime matters, light and love; and light is not in that way arbitrary -- it is emanating from this environment.
R.E.H. So that light and love are extended in the epistle of John, are they not?
S.M.C. Yes.
W.H.W. Do we see here that John in the beginning of his ministry brings before us an unassailable position -- the economy? That is, the Father has come into it and the Son is in it and the Spirit is in it, and then he proceeds with his ministry?
S.McC. So that whatever may have come into the dispensation this is an impregnable position, an unassailable position. Nothing in the way of defection, nothing in the way of breakdown can ever interfere with the divine arrangement in its essence and substance. What has been interfered with is our enjoyment of it, in which the enemy always would entrench himself so that God might be robbed of His portion in us.
G.W.B. So in that way does grace become a necessity for the operation of what we are speaking of?
S.McC. Well, it is essential on our side. Grace is operational; it is love in activity adapting itself to conditions on our side. That is really what grace is. It is love in operation; it is love viewed operationally, in regard to the adjusting of conditions on our side.
H.H. Does the blessedness of christianity lie in what is seen in persons as over against arbitrary doctrine?
S.McC. Yes, only that we are not setting aside doctrine. John would make a lot of doctrine. The
{130}
Lord Jesus Himself uses the words "my doctrine." @John 7: 17. The Lord would keep that word right in our minds, but then there is much more than doctrine involved in the position in what we are saying. Now when we come to @John 3 we get divine love operating on a great extended scale in regard to the scene of need, "God so loved the world that He gave His only begotten Son that whosoever believes on Him may not perish but have life eternal." This is now to enlarge the vista of our thoughts in relation to the Gospel so that we may not be narrowed, we may not be small in our outlook, but be enabled to think of the world and to think of men abstractly and divine love operating towards them.
E.B.Mc. "May not perish but have life eternal" is the thought, is it not?
S.McC. That is it. Perishing would allude to what sin has effected in man, but God brings in now eternal life -- sonship in the first chapter in Christ and also we might say extended to the saints in chapter 20, but now eternal life is a prime matter in relation to divine love here, and it is meeting certain conditions in our hearts that sin has brought in.
Eric C. What is the world that God has in mind? It says "God so loved the world." Would you say a word as to what is meant by that?
S.McC. Well, it is quite obvious that it would not be the moral evil that is around us. It would allude to what the world is abstractly. It is a great thing to be able to look at the world abstractly, to look at men abstractly, and God loves men. Someone was asking the other day about some who would say it is not right to speak about God's love to sinners, God's love to men. God loves men, as it is written "when the kindness and love to men of our Saviour God appeared." There it is in Scripture -- @Titus 3: 4. God loves men and we are to think of men abstractly
{131}
in the light of what they are to God, as forming part of an ordered system of things in which His pleasure is found.
E.C. Does that refer then to the people who are in the world as we speak of it. Is that right?
S.McC. Well, it alludes to the world as an ordered system of things of which man is part abstractly.
C.F.I. It is what God had before Him at the beginning and He has never given it up.
S.McC. Exactly. Sin entered into it and has marred it. It has marred the system and it has marred man as part of it, but God is eventually coming back to it and the glad tidings have that in mind.
H.H. Something that God *has* made and *has* loved. Would that be right?
S.McC. Well, it belongs to Him. It is His own workmanship. It is not what the world has become under the power of Satan. It is what the world is in His own mind and thoughts as coming from His own hand, man forming a part of it.
D.B. The worlds were framed by the word of God. Would that link on?
S.McC. Yes, they were framed by the word of God. We sometimes speak of creation as if it were just an arbitrary act but what you referred to would show it is more than an arbitrary act. Divine wisdom enters into it; divine intelligence and feelings enter into it.
G.W.B. So the preaching to men would be an extension of grace and truth?
S.McC. Exactly. That they should be brought in to what this divine arrangement involves in its working out in operation. It has in mind that men should be brought into eternal life.
G.W.B. Would not that affect our feelings in relation to the glad tidings and the presentation of it?
S.McC. Well, it would enlarge our outlook. It would open up a great vista before our souls in preaching
{132}
the gospel that God has in mind for men, eternal life.
J.W. Is this a part of the radiation you were speaking of His own affections?
S.McC. It is just that exactly; so that we do not merely have the radiation of divine love on the inside but we have it on the outside that men are impressed even in regard to the glad tidings with the warmth of divine affections that enter into them.
A.G.I. The Lord was concerned that the world might know the love of the Father in the 14th chapter.
S.McC. Yes. That is putting us in mind that the thing is laid out, not that the world has come to it, but there it is. That is what He did that the world might know that He loved the Father. There was a testimony there, whether the world took it on or not.
R.E.H. God's attitude towards men is unchanged in spite of the state they have got into, as it says in the gospel, referring to the Lord's feelings, that He groaned in spirit. Do you think we should take on more of divine feelings, in seeking to present light and truth?
S.McC. Exactly, that God's approach to man is not arbitrary. It involves His love, that He so loved that ordered system of things which sin has marred that He sent His only begotten Son that whosoever believed on Him may not perish but have life eternal.
R.E.H. So that life eternal is in contrast to sin and death.
S.McC. Well, exactly. And then verse 14 was read "As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness thus must the Son of man be lifted up that everyone who believes on him may not perish but have life eternal." That is, it involves the reception of the testimony presented, that the flesh is viewed in its state before God, as utterly condemned and set aside, and those who feel their state of sin may look, their eyes directed
{133}
towards this Object towards which faith is active. The Son of Man and the only begotten Son; the Son of Man stressing our side, the only begotten Son stressing God's side.
E.C. So that this would be in mind in relation to the open air preaching, would it not?
S.McC. Every preacher should convey something of the warmth and radiancy of divine affections as he preaches the gospel.
W.H.W. Is the "must" of verse 14 what we might speak of as a divine "must"? When we come to looking into chapter 1 there is something very great there but when it comes to the actual presentation of the truth, does this "must" not bear upon us?
S.McC. Well, exactly. Our state had to be met. Such was our state that nothing less than the lifting up of the Son of Man would meet it and the lifting up of the Son of Man involves that our minds and affections are to be carried off the scene in which sin has been active in a state which God has condemned and set aside in the cross of sight. The lifting up points to the way that divine love is moving. It is the heavenly side that is in mind.
H.H. The way that divine love takes for its own radiation, would you say?
S.McC. Yes, exactly. So that the whole moral question is met. We have our side in verse 14 and God's side in verse 16.
E.B.Mc. It was a tremendous move on God's side in that way to meet men, in the Son of Man that man's need may be met entirely.
S.McC. Well, exactly.
W.H. Would verse 16 show how impregnable the position is that we were contemplating in chapter 1? It is what God produced to meet that position.
S.McC. And is it not all the more affecting when we think of what God had in manhood in Jesus, all
{134}
the moral excellence that we spoke of that John draws attention to in Christ in manhood in sonship in the bosom of the Father, all that that was for the divine delight, to think of His preparedness to give that up, to give His only begotten Son, because it alludes to that. He is prepared to give it up that men might have eternal life. It shows the immensity of what is involved in God's movements towards men.
G.H.R. So does all this suggest how blessedly available all this is to men? It says, "And every one that looketh upon it shall live." @Numbers 21: 8.
S.McC. Yes, exactly, that in meeting this great question of sin, marring man and marring the world which was for the pleasure of God, this is the way divine love meets it. I think we need to think more of what manhood was in sonship in Jesus as in the bosom of the Father, that it was from that position as it were, that God gave His only begotten Son. It was not exactly what the Lord Jesus was in His movement from heaven. That was His own movement, a voluntary movement from heaven; but as in the position in which He is viewed as Man, God sent Him. When we think of all the excellence that was there in His manhood to God, well, "He gave His only begotten Son that whosoever believes on Him may not perish but have life eternal."
R.E.H. So we see the necessity of partaking of these divine feelings to rightly present the gospel to men?
S.McC. Exactly, and in relation to our activities among the saints too, "For God has not sent his Son into the world that he may judge the world but that the world may be saved through him." All our activities should be in the light of reconciliation because the world stands provisionally in reconciliation at the present time.
G.R.D. Would you say a word as to life eternal?
{135}
We have been speaking of the gospel in relation to this. Is the gospel intended to lead men into that thought of life eternal?
S.McC. Well, exactly; an order of blessing that is glorious, that goes through time right into eternity and will last eternally, an order and environment of blessing where God is known. Man stands in relation to God in this fixed condition of blessing.
C.F.I. Would that be set out in the relations of the Lord Jesus as Man with God?
S.McC. Well, exactly. It was there that eternal life was in testimony. When the Lord Jesus became Man and entered these living relations as Man with God, eternal life was there in testimony, and how wonderful it is to contemplate it in that light. Some of course thought that the words "in the bosom of the Father" (@John 1: 18) allude to His place now, but while they include His place now, and what will be His place eternally, they refer to the uniqueness of His place too, in manhood here. In coming into manhood He came into that position, the preposition "in" in @John 1: 18 "made movement towards," the Greek preposition "eis" meaning movement towards; that is, He came into that position.
{136}
RADIATION OF DIVINE AFFECTIONS IN JOHN'S GOSPEL (2)
@John 13
S.McC. Pursuing the thought of divine affections as John the evangelist brings them before us, we come to this well-known chapter. I suppose it is one of the best known and most used chapters in ministry. I am sure the Spirit would help us to understand it better. We did not touch this morning on the passages in @John 3: 35 or in @John 5: 20. It might be of interest in passing just to refer to the fact that divine affections as referred to in those two passages introduce two important features of the truth in the dispensation. What follows the statement in @John 3 is the administration of the Spirit in the 4th chapter -- the living water, a matter of prime importance, the presence of the Spirit subjectively in delivering power in our souls. It would show what a prime matter the gift of the Spirit is, as typified in the living water, in that, reference is made in the end of chapter 3 to the Father's love for the Son and all things being given into His hand. Divine affections are seen as moving in the ordered and arranged system of operation in relation to this matter of living water, the woman in @John 4 becoming a subject of the administration -- the Lord leading her in the course of the teaching into the great subject of the worship of God. Then in John chapter 5 what follows the reference in verse 35 to the divine affections is the great matter of quickening; one of the prime features linked with the saints and their part in divine thoughts. Quickening alludes to a divine sovereign operation whereby we are made to live in the divine nature, in divine love. The reference to divine
{137}
affections and the Father's love for the Son preceding the gift of the Spirit in chapter 4 in type in the living water, and the great feature of quickening in chapter 5 is all to impress us with the way that divine affections radiate, in what means so much to us and is of such prime importance with us in our part in the great things of God.
R.G.C. Would you say a word on the two references to love in chapter 3 and chapter 5. It is a different word in each case.
S.McC. Well, these words, as we know, are instructive words. They convey different thoughts, the love of chapter 3 in verse 35 is the love of settled disposition, the settled disposition of the Father towards the Son, specially prefacing the matter of the administration of chapter 4. Whereas in chapter 5 it is the love of friendship, implying attractiveness in the object of the activity of the love, the Son being peculiarly the attractive Object. I think it is of note that this should come into @John 5, because @John 5 refers to what the saints are individually as quickened and made to live in the divine nature and thus capacitated to enjoy the knowledge of God as coming into this divine arrangement, capacitated to serve God as quickened thus.
C.F.I. Would it imply some touch beyond the Spirit's operations? The Spirit's operations are in mind in chapter 4, but here it says, "The Son also quickens whom He will."
S.McC. It is remarkable how John would throw into relief at given moments in different circumstances the varied operational activities of each of the Persons of the Godhead, whether it be the Father or the Son or the Spirit. It would seem as if we are to be impressed with the greatness of this ordered arrangement in which divine love is serving us that *each* of the Persons is operating in relation to the prime object
{138}
in their activities, the saints being brought into conscious known intelligent relationship with them.
G.H. Does quickening enter into the service on the first day of the week?
S.McC. Well, quickening is a basic thought. We could not rightly have part in the assembly service without this great thought of quickening. Quickening involves life. It is how we are made to live in the divine nature, capacitated for our part in the divine nature, by this sovereign activity on the part of the Son.
E.W.C. Would you say how quickening stands in relation to faith?
S.McC. Quickening is not a matter of faith. Resurrection is a matter of faith, but not quickening. Quickening has to do with the Spirit indwelling the believer, the Lord operating by means of the Spirit.
J.C. Is there any link with @Ezekiel 37 -- "Shall these bones live?"
S.McC. Well, that would enter into it, although @Ezekiel 37 would link more with @John 3 the great matter of the new birth; but the principle of it extends forward into the matter of quickening in @John 5; in Ezekiel it is more life viewed from a potential viewpoint, where life is viewed as a matter of power, "They lived and stood upon their feet an exceeding great army," verse 10. Quickening in @John 5 is not necessarily a matter of power, it involves enjoyment; we are capacitated through quickening to enjoy the divine nature, to live in it.
R.L. To live and have part in it.
S.McC. That is what quickening is. Made to live.
E.H. Is not the great thought in John, life?
S.McC. Yes, you have something else to say?
E.H. Well, I was struck this morning with it. I thought that the third and fourth of John come in
{139}
on a parallel line with 21st Numbers, and we may be lacking in the truth of this.
S.McC. Well, the matter of eternal life is of course somewhat different from quickening. We have to understand what each feature of life suggests. Eternal life involves a sphere in which we are made to live, but quickening in @John 5 is a sovereign activity on the part of a divine Person *in* us, in our souls, involving that we *inwardly* and *spiritually* live in our relations with divine Persons.
J.C. Would chapter 4, verse 14, be parallel to it? "The water which I shall give him shall become *in* him a fountain of water springing up into eternal life." Would springing up be the quickening?
S.McC. I think the springing up involves the Spirit's activity in the believer on another line, leading to eternal life. It is not a question of the divine nature in that verse, but of the known presence of the Spirit in a subjective way in the believer involving delivering power, and emancipation from what would hold us, leading up to eternal life. But quickening in @John 5 is that we are quickened out of a state of death, capacitated and made to live in the divine nature.
P.B. What is the difference between the divine nature that you are speaking of here, and what Peter speaks of "that through these (promises) ye may become partakers of the divine nature?" @2 Peter 1: 4.
S.McC. Well, that would enter into it; partakers of the divine nature involves what we are made to participate in through quickening.
G.R.D. Verse 20 of chapter 5 reads, "The Father loves the Son," and then it goes on to speak of both the Father quickening and the Son quickening. Would the fact that love is referred to earlier show a perfect blending of these operations of quickening, that is the Father causing love to flow toward Christ and
{140}
Christ causing love to flow toward the Father -- would the love marking each of them mark that out?
S.McC. Yes, exactly. @John 5 stresses the relationship between the Father and the Son in this great matter. The Father quickens, and the Son quickens, and we learn from other passages that the Spirit quickens. But our attention is specially focused on the Son. "The Father loves the Son and shows Him all things which He Himself does," and our attention is particularly focused on the Son as quickening, His voice involving quickening power.
E.W.C. Does that involve the present operation of quickening?
S.McC. Exactly. The assembly knows quickening and is the subject of quickening in a way that marks no other family in the universe of God. Quickening as we are referring to it involves an action in the saints of the assembly that no other family will know in the same way.
Ques. Is that treated of in Colossians in view of our going over into the land?
S.McC. Colossians, being a church letter preparing us for the full light of the heavenly position, brings in the thought of quickening. It is interesting to see its place in Colossians; the relative value of quickening and resurrection is to be noted; on the public side resurrection is the greatest testimony to the power of God that we have; but in @John 5 on the inward side, quickening is an actual operation, not anticipative, but an actual divine operation involving that we are made to live in our souls in the divine nature.
R.E.H. Is quickening the result of divine speaking?
S.McC. Well, the voice of the Son of God enters into it. He is the last Adam, a quickening Spirit.
W.H.W. Is it in any way an answer to the contemplation of His glory as in the first chapter, and
{141}
the desires that enter the soul as we are attracted to that blessed Person that we have contemplated?
S.McC. That is how I understand it; and as coming under His hand in these relationships so glorious, divine affections radiating in them, as coming under His hand, we are made to live, hearing His voice we are made to live in the divine nature, capacitated to enjoy divine affections in the realm in which they are known.
W.H.W. Is the incident at the beginning of chapter 5 to throw into relief what the Lord has given expression to here?
S.McC. Exactly. In contrast as we might say at the present time to all that is around us. There is the professed carrying on of the service of God, the professed living in relation to God, but the absolute lack of power is so manifest everywhere. John's ministry would help us to see that the economy in its formal operation means that as we come under the hand of Christ the Son of God we are *quickened* and made to live in the divine nature, so that the enjoyment of it is not merely a doctrinal matter, we are made to *live* in the divine nature. It is an actual inward result.
W.H.W. Would the food in chapter 6 bear on this quickening, in the support of it?
S.McC. Exactly. The food in chapter 6 is to sustain the life that is quickened, showing that it is a constitutional matter. Quickening is not just a matter of light. Quickening involves the Spirit in the saints and coming under the operation of the Son of God, so that we are made actually to live in our souls in relation to God.
R.J.S. Is there any suggestion of it at all in Lazarus being brought forth from among the dead and then "loose him and let him go" and what comes to light in chapter 21? Is there any link at all?
{142}
S.McC. The great teaching in regard to Lazarus is the truth of resurrection, and as we were referring to earlier, in Colossians resurrection comes before quickening, because resurrection in Colossians is the prime matter; but when we come to John quickening has a unique place in chapter 5.
S.R. Chapter 5, verse 21, says, "Even as the Father raises the dead and *quickens* them." Both the Father and the Son are said to quicken.
S.McC. The point in the teaching is to focus our attention on the *Son* as co-equal with the Father and as loved by the Father in certain relations. In this chapter, it says "For even *as* the Father raises." It is not to focus our attention so much on the Father as on the Son in this peculiar glory.
R.M. Very interesting. Showing that it is a selective matter. It is not a general matter, but a selective matter, peculiarly applied to the saints of the assembly in this dispensation, at this present time.
E.W.C. In its application to the saints in this dispensation, would it have a special bearing on our living in the joy of the relationship that we had before us this morning?
S.McC. Yes, exactly. That is where it is in mind that we should live, in the enjoyment of divine affections flowing in these relationships.
W.H.W. Is the truth here moving towards the point "That all may honour the Son even as they honour the Father?"
S.McC. A very important thing, that we should see, that while the Son has come into a place involving a subordinate position for Him, a place of relative inferiority in the course of the mediatorial operations, we are brought to see the greatness and dignity of this Person who is as to His Person unchanged by any position that He comes into and so @John 5 would
{143}
impress us with His greatness, that He is co-equal with the Father.
M.M. In chapter 3 the Father honours the Son, and in chapter 4 the Son honours the Father. In chapter 5 they are equal?
S.McC. Yes, in the economy. You can understand that in the abstract relations of Deity we could not speak of divine Persons honouring One Another. They love One Another as we are told in the scriptures, but you would not speak of Them honouring One Another in the way that we are alluding to it here. It is a particular reference to Their relations to One Another in the economy. It throws into relief the grace and dignity of the arrangement in which divine Persons are viewed as serving, that although Two have taken positions involving relative inferiority, yet in an abstract way Their place remains the same.
P.B. Would you help us as to verse 26 "For even as the Father has life in himself so he has given to the Son also to have life in himself?"
S.McC. Well, that is to stress this prime matter of life in relation to the operational activities of divine Persons in the economy. The economy would be in mind in that verse, the Father being the Supreme One in the economy. The Father is always viewed as supreme in the economy.
S.R. So in that way we would note the word 'even.' You are directing our attention now to the affection flowing from the Father to the Son.
S.McC. Exactly. So that this matter of quickening, as we pass from it, is an important thing that we should understand, because assembly service is not carried out in mere terms, it is to be carried out and sustained in the energy of a life that is the result of the quickening power of the Son of God. We do not enjoy the divine nature or relations with divine Persons just as a matter of light, while light governs us
{144}
as to our enjoyment of them, but as the result of an actual quickening act within us on the part of divine Persons.
A.P. Would you be free to say something as to @Ephesians 2 in regard to the matter of quickening. One would like to get a little clearer. I am thinking of verse 5 "God ... (we too being dead in offences) has quickened us with the Christ."
S.McC. Well. @Ephesians 2 links on with @John 5 with only this difference that @Ephesians 2 involves in its scope what is anticipative, not what is actual, but what is anticipative. God can call things that be not as though they were, and the totality of the work of God from Pentecost to the rapture, is in mind in @Ephesians 2.
C.F.I. Do you link the thought of quickening with eternal life, or do you make it go further than that?
S.McC. It links with eternal life, in that we could not fully enter upon the enjoyment of eternal life apart from it.
C.F.I. That is most important, that whilst the Spirit is free to come and dwell with us, we do need this quickening touch from the Son Himself to live in divine affections.
S.McC. Well, exactly, that is the whole point, in stressing the operation of the Son in quickening power in chapter 5. The Spirit in chapter 4 is viewed as delivering us from all the negative results connected with the operation of sin. You have a woman who is enslaved inwardly, she is a woman of remarkable affections, but she needs to be emancipated, she needs to be delivered inwardly and the Spirit comes in in the way of power, so that she is delivered inwardly; but then @John 5 involves the operation of the Son of God by the Spirit, the Spirit being in the saints, by which we are made to live in relationships according to God and have part in the divine nature.
{145}
C.R. "We've heard thy quickening voice?"
S.McC. Well, that enters into it. The quickening will apply to our bodies, the Spirit will quicken our mortal bodies, but what will extend to our bodies then, has been begun in us by this great act of the Son of God. So that in our part in the assembly service there is the side of faith in relation to resurrection, we take our part in sonship as in the faith of the mighty working of God's power in resurrection, but then the quickening too involves an actual inward operation so that our enjoyment of our links with divine Persons is real and actual, not just a matter of light.
I.W. Does that give us another touch of Their affections, "The Son also quickens whom he will"?
S.McC. Exactly. But the assembly has the prime place in this matter. It is selective quickening in that way in @John 5, whereas the quickening of the dead may be viewed elsewhere; but in @John 5 in that particular part the saints are selected as the present objects of divine quickening. Now in chapter 13 we come to divine affections entering into the closing phases of the Lord's service. I think it important that we should see what comes to light in this chapter, the deliberate movements of Christ in relation to His own, as understanding what had been committed to Him (verse 3) looking back on all that we have been considering in chapters 3 and 5, "Jesus *knowing* that the Father had given him all things into his hand." They were given on the basis of His love for the Son. It involves what was said in @John 3 and @John 5, and in the light of that the Lord proceeds with this great service in the light of what is so great in the economy.
W.H.W. Is what is said in the end of verse 1, "Having loved his own who were in the world loved them to the end," just a continuation of the thought
{146}
that we began with this morning of the radiation of love and affections?
S.McC. I thought so. Specially brought into this passage which says, "Before the feast of the passover." That is, the shadow of the cross is coming in. The shadow of death is coming across His public path. "His hour had come that He should depart out of this world to the Father," and then we get this statement, "Having loved His own who were in the world, loved them to the end." That is, in the full light of the cross, in the full light of His exit from this world, the lifting up, we get the radiation of His Own love in His blessed activity towards His Own.
R.M.D. Why does it say that "He came out from God and was going to God?"
S.McC. I think to throw into relief what is involved in the cycle of mediatorial operations. This wondrous cycle of mediatorial operations involves that the Word becomes flesh, a divine Person becomes Man, including also "Therefore doth my Father love me because I lay down my life," involving that that divine Person should go into death, and too that He should go back to the Father, that He should return to the place whence He came. I think in that expression the majesty and gloriousness of the scope of mediatorial operations are set out.
W.H.W. Is it necessary then, to get the gain of this chapter, to carry in our minds what the Lord has said in chapter 5, "All may honour the Son even as they honour the Father"?
S.McC. Well, exactly. We are never to forget that while the Person whom we know as the Son has come into a lowly position in subordination to the Father, that Person is worthy of equal honour with the Father as to His Person.
W.H.W. I was thinking of those words "He lays
{147}
aside his garments." He lays all that aside, to serve His own.
S.McC. A very touching allusion to His greatness. It says "And that he came out from God and was going to God, rises from Supper and lays aside his garments, having taken a linen towel he girded himself." As if the Lord, as we know, is leaving us an example. He says later down, verse 13, "Ye call me the Teacher and the Lord and ye say well, for I am so; if I therefore the Lord and the Teacher have washed your feet, ye also ought to wash one another's feet. For I have given you an example." What an advantage we have, do you not think, in a divine Person in service in this matter of radiating divine love, leaving us an example so that we might profit by it.
R.N. The Lord refers later on to His going and they are now to be in His place.
S.McC. The Lord leaves them in the place that He was in.
E.B.Mc. It says "Jesus, knowing that the Father had given him all things into his hand and that he came out from God and was going to God, rises from supper and lays aside his garments," verses 3, 4. That is the spirit in which He takes it up.
S.McC. It is His own distinctive movement in that way and He goes down to the feet of the disciples. This whole chapter is to stress *love in activity*. Not exactly love objectively, in a picture, but love in activity, love that we have participated in as being the objects of it, sharing in the service, getting the gain of the service, and the Lord would set it on amongst us in the way that we are to serve one another.
R.G.C. That love might beget love. Would that be the consequence?
S.McC. That would be the result. There are two features, two elements, appear in this chapter which
{148}
have to be noted, one in Peter and the other in Judas. Peter, although he needs adjustment, has affinities with the Lord Jesus, affinities with the circle of divine affections in which love is serving the saints here. Judas on the other hand, is an element of darkness, right in the circle of affections ostensibly, but yet having no inward affinity with it, and one who cannot be helped. The Lord says, "Have not I chosen you the twelve and of you one is a devil." What a solemn word! But then the Lord went on with the matter, and Judas is fully exposed in this chapter as one who has no affinity with the love that is operating in it.
C.F.I. John would impress us with the way in which the saints would be viewed as His own. They have affinity, they are born of God, what there is substantially with them.
S.McC. That is the point. It is having loved *His* own, a beautiful reference to what they were in their links with Him as having affinity with Him.
E.B.Mc. They were calling Him Teacher and Lord. He said, "Ye say well, for I am so. If I therefore the Lord and the Teacher have washed your feet, ye ought also to wash one another's feet." The laying of His garment aside, would bring that in, would it not? That is, He had the right to an official position, but He lays everything to one side to take this service up, and it is what we have to do, is it not?
S.McC. Exactly. It is important that we should understand what the Lord is doing. There is definite intent in what He does. He has given us an example. He has done it with a view to giving us an example as to the way in which we are to serve one another, and divine affections in John's ministry are to affect us to the extent that we should understand *our* part in the divine economy. It is not only the divine Persons are in the economy, but we are in the economy,
{149}
we are a part of the economy and love is to extend through *us* in its service to one another.
G.R.D. Do you mean that the Lord in loving His disciples and in serving them like this was really taking account of the fruit of His own service in them, just as on the opposite line, the devil knew what was in the heart of Judas, he counted on something of himself being in the heart of Judas and wrought on that?
S.McC. A very solemn thing. Showing how near the elements of evil are, how near the power of the enemy is in relation to the choicest features of divine affections in their activities toward the saints.
R.E.H. Does this then stress the need for this inwardness in us? Externally all the disciples were apparently the same, because Judas was not easily discerned?
S.McC. Exactly. Therefore the importance of right links, vital links in the economy of love that we are referring to. Peter was adjustable. He had very defined ideas, as we have often noted, he is very fixed in what he says in verse 8: "Thou shalt never wash my feet. Jesus answered him, Unless I wash thee thou hast not part with me." That touches a cord in Peter's heart and he responds immediately.
R.E.H. Is he adjusted by the prospect of having part with Him?
S.McC. Well, exactly. And that is what divine affections have in mind in their operations, that we should have part with Christ, whether in the testimony here below or whether on the upward ascending line in heavenly relationships as associated with Christ.
C.F.I. What would necessitate the service of the feet washing in a negative sense? There is the positive side of part with me.
S.McC. Well, I suppose it would involve our contact
{150}
with things here; not so much the positive action of sin in us, as the mere contact with a scene that is defiled and the constant necessity, in having to say to divine Persons and divine things, of a purified state with us. The feet washing helps toward this end, do you not think?
C.F.I. It would bear on the water in that connection.
S.McC. Well, I think the water particularly applies to what is purifying, separative in that way, so that there might be nothing to hinder our part with Christ in any contact that we may have, even legitimately, with things here below.
E.C. With regard to ourselves, the Lord goes on to say "Ye ought also to wash one another's feet" in verse 14. How is that worked out among us?
S.McC. I think the Lord contemplates that there is capacity among the saints to take on this service. He is not raising any question as to whether they will be equal for it, or what they would attend to in the doing of it. He is treating the subject in the light of the capacity there is among the brethren to take it on. And there is this capacity among the brethren to serve one another by love in this way, and there is much need for it.
G.A. It is to be seen experimentally, you mean, not preaching love to one another, but to be seen experimentally, the practice of it.
S.McC. Well, exactly. Seen by actions, seen by what we do. It may be through a word, but then the thing is done.
R.E.H. Could you help us as to what lay behind Peter's objection, because as serving one another we might meet the same?
S.McC. Well, I suppose Peter is like the most of us. He needs help all along the line. I do not think any of us would elect ourselves out of that, at least
{151}
one would not, for oneself. We constantly need help. Peter is a representative man, and he represents one who thinks he has the right thing in mind, but he has not and the Lord has to help him, but He helps him in the simplest kind of way and yet the most definite way, by insisting that love's service is going on.
R.L.P. What about the strong expressions so frequently used, not only by Peter, but also by us?
S.McC. Well, a strong negative is always a difficult thing. When you get persons who insist on strong negatives there is good reason to query what they are pressing.
W.H.W. I suppose Peter would illustrate the necessity of this service of love.
S.McC. Exactly. And therefore the constant need in our relations with one another as to love's service continuing. Supposing there is a Peter and even supposing there were a Judas. Is love's service to be held up? Are love's activities going to be detained? The Lord would help us to see that He has given us an example that *whatever* may be the case, love is to go through. It says, "Having loved his own who were in the world, loved them to the end." "To the end" means going through with everything. However situations arise and distance comes in between us we are to be prepared to continue with love's service. The activity of love here means going through with everything whatever may be involved.
E.B.Mc. It means going down. That is the bondman. He brings in "The bondman is not greater than his Lord." That means that we should be prepared to humble ourselves to take this on?
S.McC. Well, how that would balance us, lest we should think more of ourselves than we ought to think. There is nothing more disastrous in our local gatherings than high thoughts as to ourselves, and thinking we should be given a greater position than we are
{152}
capacitated for. Why cannot we be content with part in love's arrangement, in working out love's thoughts? But the official side humblingly comes in as we insist on something perhaps that we do not have the capacity for.
E.C. "Simon Peter says to him, Lord not my feet only but also my hands and my head." The Lord does not take much note of that. I was just wondering why the feet are stressed particularly.
S.McC. Well, it is a question of the last point of contact, the feet. When we go up the feet will be the last point of contact. It is not the head nor the hands that need washing but the feet, as the immediate point of contact with a defiled scene.
W.H.W. Does Peter's request that the Lord should wash his hands and his head not indicate the way in which we can bring the thought of demand in on the service of love?
S.McC. Yes, it shows an element in Peter that we need help on in our souls. He withdraws on the one hand, saying "Thou shalt never wash my feet," and then on the other hand he goes too far in telling the Lord what should be done, "Not my feet only, but also my hands and my head." Whereas the whole point in the service was that the Lord was doing it. He was carrying it on, not Peter.
E.B.Mc. In Philadelphia, "They shall come and shall do homage before thy feet," so that the feet need to be attended to.
S.McC. Yes, exactly.
E.B.Mc. As you say, they are the last point of contact with the earth. They need to be right.
S.McC. It is an important thing that we should just restfully allow love to have its way with us. We would like to tell the Lord what to do perhaps. Peter misses the whole point in the matter, that it is love that is serving and love knows what to do.
{153}
G.H. Is it the same in the Song of Songs? The bride is urged not to "awake my love till he please."
S.McC. How often when perhaps a brother or sister may seek to wash our feet, we may try and tell them how they should do it, what we expect to be done in relation to it, how we think it should be done. That is not the point in the service. It is love that is doing the service, and love is intelligent in the way it should be done.
R.E.H. Was love's service interrupted in Corinth and drawn attention to in chapters 13 and 14?
S.McC. Exactly. Paul has to put it abstractly before them in chapter 13. Sometimes things have to be put abstractly before us when the concrete side is so lacking with us.
R.M. As to our service to one another, the Lord says "He who receives whomsoever I shall send receives me." Is that not the way we should appreciate such service?
S.McC. Yes, it throws into relief thus the importance of accepting love's service as it comes towards us, that in principle we may not be receiving Christ, because Christ is there representatively in what is done.
R.G.C. The expresser of His love is going to get gain also, as well as the one to whom it is expressed, as in verse 17 "If ye know these things blessed are ye if ye do them."
S.McC. Well, exactly. The Lord would help us to see that it is a blessed service to have part in.
R.N. Is it important that the objective that the Lord speaks of be in mind whether serving or being served? "Part with me" would help us, would it not? That is to be in mind in all service.
S.McC. Yes, it is not in this service just a matter of our relief. There is a positive end in mind in our part in the things of God, that we should be free in
{154}
the assembly, free in divine things, free as having part with Christ in these holy matters.
R.E.H. So that we should all have a concern that the brethren should be given the best out of all.
S.McC. Well, exactly, that love might be in circulation. Not just love abstractly, in Corinthians 13, but love in positive circulation among the brethren in their relations with one another, in their actions and outlook toward one another.
E.W.C. This service is "person to person" is it not? Not a matter taken up by the assembly.
S.McC. Very good. Nor is it a telephone service. We speak of "person to person" calls. This is a "person to person" service. It is not done at a distance, but you are getting down to the feet of the saints, and how worthy their feet are to be washed, as we think of who the saints are and the greatness and the light of the operations of the divine arrangement.
F.W. Would you say a little as to the towel and the wiping?
S.McC. Well, we need help on the accessories to the service; where the brethren understand the dignity and grace of sonship, and love is active in it, this service will be a very easy matter.
J.C. I was wondering if you would be free to say something as to what bearing the linen towel and wash basin have on the one who serves?
S.McC. Well, the linen towel is absorbent. It is not irritating. It is easy to irritate one another, but in love's service we want to bring in the absorbent quality, this quality that does not excite fleshly activity in the object of the service. Linen was a great feature in the priestly garments of old and does not excite perspiration.
R.E.H. Love bears all things.
S.McC. Exactly.
R.E.H. Would it mean that the one served is comforted?
{155}
S.McC. Well, it would, and it stresses the priestly side of service. That is, it is not a social activity, it is not an activity undertaken because I like you more than anyone else, it is a priestly activity that the linen towel would suggest, meaning that it is towards the saints without natural and social consideration.
A.Sk. Would the expression "He that is washed all over" suggest the dignity of the saints?
S.McC. Well, it is what they are basically. The new birth would be implied in that. That is, the new birth is a divine operation which brings something into our beings morally that affects us throughout. It is not anything more than that. It is the introduction of a thread into our moral being which affects us throughout our being.
W.H.W. I was wondering if verses 31 and 32 do not show the answer in the Lord Himself in the liberty that flows from a service such as this being rendered.
S.McC. I think it does, because where love is in activity among the saints in their relations with one another, just as it was here, it leads to expansion, to enlargement of thought and outlook in relation to divine operations. An immensity of scope is brought on to our view in verses 31 and 32 in relation to Christ on the cross, Christ on high and Christ in the assembly.
G.R.D. Is that why the thought of "Teacher" comes in in this service of feet washing, and is it in view of going on in the understanding of what belongs to the Lord in other spheres?
S.McC. Say something more.
G.R.D. I was just thinking of the value of this service of love to one another in relation to the truth and teaching. "Ye call me Teacher and the Lord." The Lord says "I, therefore, the Lord and the Teacher." I wondered whether if there was, along with the feet washing, the atmosphere that love would produce,
{156}
paving the way for a development of features of glory that belong to Christ.
S.McC. I think that is right, and the reference to "the Teacher and the Lord" and then "The Lord and the Teacher" would imply conditions present with us that are prepared to make room for these features, the authority of Christ on the one hand, and His ability to instruct us in the mind of God. It is a great advantage when you get an atmosphere like that among the saints as prepared to make way for what is conveyed in these thoughts, we are bound to get enlargement and expansion, do you not think?
G.R.D. Yes, and the position as to Judas seems to become confined as love in this way is operating.
S.McC. Yes, exactly. And especially is it to be noted the place of John in the bosom of Jesus in regard to the full exposure of Judas, as if to intensify in our minds and thoughts the importance of our being in the radiation of divine affections if the power and intensity of evil and its awfulness as in Judas is to be counteracted.
E.B.Mc. Why was it that Peter has to ask John?
S.McC. Well, why should he not? Why should we not ask someone who is nearer the Lord than ourselves? We might as well be simple about it. We know that there are some that are nearer to Christ than others, though the door is open for this peculiar place for everyone of us, but we all know that there are degrees of intimacy, there is greater attractiveness and lovability with some than with others, and it is good to recognise divine selectiveness among the saints.
L.I. Is it to his credit that Peter was prepared to ask John?
S.McC. Yes, I think it was. Why did he not ask the Lord? He asked the one who was nearest the Lord -- John. And why should we not ask those that may seem to enjoy divine love more than the rest of
{157}
us. Why should we not? We may say "Oh well, I want to get it direct from the Lord Himself." But we may not get it direct from the Lord Himself. We may have to get it from someone else.
E.B.Mc. It shows that he was very near to John, if he trusted John, very good that he should ask him.
S.McC. I think it is all to stress our amenability to help in this realm, whether it comes through Christ, or through one who is in conscious intimacy with Christ, we should be amenable to help and adjustment.
R.E.H. It is a continuation of serving one another, is it, not?
S.McC. Exactly. It is love's service. John is in the place of love and he would serve in love in this matter; so as it has often been noticed, here it says, "But he, leaning on the breast of Jesus, says to him, Lord, who is it." In the synoptic Gospels the question is, "Is It I?" But in @John 13 it says "Lord, who is it?" Who could it be in such a circle as this?
W.H.W. What do we learn from the fact that John leans on the breast of Jesus before he asked this question?
S.McC. I think it shows that he is leaning on the support of divine affections. The support that divine affections would afford. It is not a question exactly of intelligence here, it is a question of a believer such as John would represent, giving an answer to an enquiry on the basis of his contact and intimacy with Christ. Sometimes we depend a lot on the amount of ministry that we have read, on the book and papers and letters that we have read. We often depend a good deal on them to give an answer, but John is depending upon his intimate link with Christ to help him with a right answer.
E.B.Mc. We ought to know such.
S.McC. We should. Heaven knows them -- all about them.
{158}
R.M. It is very interesting that in chapter 21 this detail is reiterated. It says "Peter, turning round, sees the disciple whom Jesus loved following; who also leaned at supper on his breast, and said, Lord, who is it that delivers thee up." It describes him, does it not?
S.McC. Is it not remarkable how it is brought in in relation to Peter's full adjustment. It was brought in here in chapter 13 in relation to Judas, an impossible element, but it is brought in in the completing of Peter's matters in @John 21, showing the prime importance of persons who live in this kind of environment, on the breast and in the bosom of Jesus.
R.E.H. Would you suggest that it, would be open to all to enjoy this intimate link? At the same time, we are not to overlook the service of the brethren?
S.McC. Well, exactly.
Rem. So John was dependent upon his intimate links with the Lord and Peter was dependent on his brotherly links with John.
S.McC. So that now immediately you have the power of evil dealt with; Judas goes out and the circle of affection is free of that element and the Lord begins to expand on their view the most wonderful range of glory in relation to His going out of the world. In verse 31, "When therefore he was gone out, Jesus says, Now is the Son of man glorified," alluding to the moral glory of the Son of man in relation to the cross. And then, "God is glorified in him," alluding to how God is glorified in relation to the cross. Then "God also shall glorify him in himself" (that is, in God), a peculiar allusion to the greatness of the Lord's Person in returning to heaven; and then "shall glorify Him immediately," the great realm that is now opened up in the assembly, where, through the Spirit's activities and service, Christ's glory is expanded on the view of the saints. It is not that we have to wait till the millennium, when God will bring the firstborn into the
{159}
habitable world and His kingdom glory will be displayed; but there is a sphere now in the assembly, consequent upon the Spirit coming and the forming of the assembly, where Christ's glory is expanded immediately upon our gaze.
P.B. Would God glorifying Him in Himself go as far as @John 17: 5?
S.McC. Well, I think it involves that. The Lord in that verse asks as Man to be glorified with the glory which He had with the Father before the world was. And "God also shall glorify Him in Himself," alludes to that, the Lord returning as Man to the greatness of His place in deity.
G.A. The working out of what we have looked at in the feet washing, would that not bring added glory to a divine Person?
S.McC. Well, it would. That is how divine affections in their radiation would work out -- in glory to divine Persons. So as we finish we would note that the Lord says, verse 35, "By this shall all know that ye are disciples of *mine*, if ye have love amongst yourselves." What is it that is going to be a public testimony to the fact that we belong to Christ, that we are His? Is it the amount of light that we have? No. It is the amount of love that we have -- the amount of love that is radiating among the saints.
G.A. Is there further radiation in the term that the Lord uses, "children?"
S.McC. Exactly. He stresses, in the figure employed, the objects that we are, of such parental interest and care -- the Lord Himself maintaining a fatherly influence in that way.
R.G.C. Is it a two-way matter?
S.McC. A two-way matter -- reciprocal. We have to understand reciprocity, in John's ministry. There is the reciprocity of affection between the Father and the Son, and the Spirit too, and there is to be reciprocity
{160}
between divine Persons and the saints, and there is to be reciprocity among the saints themselves.
L.I. It says the world loves its own; "love amongst yourselves" would be a counter to that, would it?
S.McC. A counter to that. What a wonderful thing it is, and how the young brethren should be more and more impressed with it, that they are vitally linked with a circle where divine love and divine affections are radiating. There could be nothing greater than what there is in the assembly at the present time in the presence of divine Persons.
{161}
RADIATION OF DIVINE AFFECTIONS IN JOHN'S GOSPEL (3)
@John 14: 19 -- 23; @John 16: 26 -- 27; @John 17: 20 -- 26; @John 20: 17 -- 18
S.McC. The section in John's Gospel from the 14th to the 17th chapters, is a unique section in the teaching of the Gospel -- a section that is replete with references to divine affections. The Lord is going to heaven, and all that He says is in view of that. He is going there to establish and set up a new and heavenly order of things, linked with His presence there and the Holy Spirit's presence here in the assembly. In view of His leaving them the teaching bears upon the coming of the Spirit, and @John 14 in the latter part of it, beginning with the 15th verse, is particularly contemplating the time of the assembly and the day of breakdown when things would be different from what they were in the beginning; but even in the midst of that, divine thoughts are viewed as workable, even in the reduction to the smallest possible extent, as seen in the Lord's word in verse 23, "If anyone love me, he will keep my word, and my Father will love him." And in verse 21, "He that has my commandments and keeps them he it is that loves me, but he that loves me shall be loved by my Father and I will love him and will manifest myself to him." All this supposes the presence of the Spirit in the light of verse 16, as with us and in us, and the Father and the Son moving towards us as loving Christ and as keeping His commandments. So that it is important that we should understand the divine affections radiating in these particular circumstances. Because what is provided in these circumstances is
{162}
the possibility of divine Persons going on with us when everything publicly may be broken up. It throws into relief the greatness of the believer, the greatness of those that belong to the assembly as being the objects of divine Persons, not One, but all Three, as having to do with the believer as loving Christ and keeping the commandments of Christ. The believer thus becomes the object of the concentrated activity and interest of all three Persons of the Godhead -- love entering into it and affecting the position.
G.B. So that we are not orphans, we are not left as orphans here.
S.McC. No, exactly. The Lord says, "I am coming to you." He is alluding to the disciples, when He says "I will not leave you orphans," as having companied with Him, and their hearts and affections had become attached to Jesus, and now He was going to leave them, and the Lord in using the word orphans, is taking account of what filled their hearts at the thought of His going.
J.S.C. Could we not put ourselves there abstractly?
S.McC. On the public side the Lord is not here, so that publicly we stand in that position; but inwardly we know, as we have done this morning, the preciousness of what is linked with His promise here, "I am coming to you."
R.E.H. What would His commandments be in this present dispensation?
S.McC. It is whatever light He may have given to regulate us, that becomes the commandment of Christ to us. You will remember how Paul referred the Corinthians to the Lord's commandment, referring to the general bearing of the Epistle. He says, "Recognise the things that I write to you, that it is the Lord's commandment." @1 Corinthians 14: 37.
R.G.C. Is verse 12 of chapter 15 included in the commandments?
{163}
S.McC. It would be one of the commandments. The Lord does not leave it optional with us. It is a matter of what is imperative, that we should love one another. It is a very interesting thing both in John's Gospel and John's Epistle, that loving one another is not optional. It is not left to our choice. It is a matter of being regulated by the commandment of Christ that we love one another.
J.W. Would you draw a parallel between that and Joseph where it says "According to Thy commandment shall all my people regulate themselves." @Genesis 41: 40.
S.McC. Very good. In the type that would amplify what we have here, that the solution of the whole position in Egypt lay in regulation by the commandment of Joseph. What I think is so important here, and what we should see is, that the believer as regulated by the commandments of Christ becomes the object of the concentrated interest of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit. It is marvellous when you think of it, that three divine Persons should have their interest centring in one believer as John would draw attention to it -- a believer on an assembly footing as we have been taught. It is not just a believer in isolation going on in his own way according to his own thoughts; it represents those who are regulated by the commandments of Christ and who are on an assembly footing, even in a difficult day.
R.G.C. Does he emphasise the privileges and advantages of such believers in the two references to "in that day." "In that day ye shall know" and "in that day ye shall demand"?
S.McC. Exactly, that is what calls out the activity of the love of Christ. We might say, does He not love all of us, does He not love all the saints? But here it is put on the basis of "He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me, but he
{164}
that loves me shall be loved by my Father, and I will love him and will manifest myself to him." We are to understand the radiation of divine affections in this light, that it is not just on the basis of what we are as born again, but on the basis of what we are as keeping the commandments of Christ and loving Him.
Rem. Do divine Persons then, love what is lovable in the believer?
S.McC. Exactly, so that the believer as on this footing that @John 14 contemplates, becomes attractive to divine Persons.
R.E.H. Is this then an added reason for the outgoings of divine love, that we in responsibility would furnish?
S.McC. Exactly; the Lord in this Gospel gives as it were the occasion for the Father's love to express itself. "On this account the Father loves me because I lay down my life, that I may take it again." And here the believer is giving an occasion for divine love to express itself.
H.W. When He says "keep my commandments," does not that link with what is written on the fleshly tables of the heart?
S.McC. Well, that is another feature of the truth. That is a question of what divine Persons do, as to the ministry, the new covenant ministry that is alluded to there. Here it is more the expression of the mind of Christ in the way of controlling us in a world where lawlessness is in expression.
G.H.R. Are the words "Yet a little while and the world sees me no longer, but ye see me" calculated to indicate to us how divine Persons are now concentrating upon the period of the assembly?
S.McC. Well, exactly, it is the faith period, it is the time of the assembly, and the Holy Spirit is contemplated as taking His place in the assembly, forming the assembly. The world does not see Him nor know
{165}
Him, and the faith period is contemplated as the Lord says "Yet a little while and the world sees me no longer but *ye* see me; because I live ye also shall live." @John 14: 19. That is life in the highest aspect that we have in John's Gospel. It is life that is bound up with Christ as He is and where He is in the glory.
S.R. So is this a choice product of the Lord's own service we may say, in persons having affection for Him, the Lord having secured this in a peculiar way?
S.McC. Yes. His service is all directed towards us that we might be helped on to this line, and it is a wonderful thing to look upon any of the saints and think of the possibilities with the saints individually, in this light.
P.B. So in view of the break-up, He says, "He that has my commandments and keeps them he it is that loves me," the Lord emphasises the keeping them.
S.McC. That is the point, "Keeps them." It is not just having them that is important, but "He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me." Persons say that they love Christ, but if they do not keep His commandments, we have a right to challenge their love for Christ. All these young people here that have never committed themselves to the Lord's supper, we have a right to challenge whether they love Christ. They might say, "Yes, I love the Lord," but do they love the Lord? Why were they sitting behind this morning? If they love Christ then what will be manifest is, they will keep His commandments.
R.F.H. So that this position is to be seen and taken account of, in contrast to the statement in @2 Timothy 19 "The Lord knows those that are His."
S.McC. Exactly, this is something concrete. It is not something just abstract, it is something working out concretely in a day of brokenness, that there are those
{166}
that are known as loving Christ, having His commandments and keeping them.
J.R.F. That word, "having my commandments" is precious, isn't it? Does it mean treasured in our hearts? It speaks also of the word and the keeping of it.
S.McC. "He that has my commandments" is a delightful reference to what we have. There are many things that we do not have, but this is one of the things that we do have. If we have the commandments of Christ, then the keeping of them is something more.
A.R.G. As to these dear young people that you refer to, they are nearly always present at the preaching of the word. Do you think that those who serve in that should strive to keep the commandments of the Lord well under their notice, to stimulate them towards the breaking of bread?
S.McC. The preachers will always seek to help them all they can. The brethren, too, generally. It is a great thing to see that, if we profess to love Christ, John would say, well, the proof of it would be in keeping His commandments. The Lord says "He that has my commandments and keeps them, *he* it is that loves me."
E.B.Mc. What is the difference between that and the words in verse 23, "If anyone love me, he will keep my word, and my Father will love him." Is the word greater than the commandment?
S.McC. The word is fuller than the commandments; the commandments are regulating, the word is enriching. That is, the word opens up to us the mind of Christ, opens up to us what is linked with His own precious thoughts. So that the reference to the word follows. The first is the regulating thought, and if we are subject to that and keep the commandments, then we will get this other thought as to keeping His word, meaning that we are enriched in divine thoughts.
{167}
D.B. "If ye shall keep my commandments ye shall abide in my love, as I have kept my Father's commandments and abide in His love." I was thinking how touching it is that the Lord kept his Father's commandments and abode in His love. He did not just give himself without having commandment from the Father.
S.McC. So that He has left us a model for that, amongst other things.
R.G.C. Is the word best known by one who is nearest to Christ, as John on His bosom?
S.McC. Yes, what an understanding John would have of the mind of Christ; that would be in the keeping of His word. Colossians says, "Let the word of the Christ dwell in you richly," a remarkable suggestion, so that the position is not impoverished. The word would bring in what is substantial, the commandment more the authoritative side, the word more the inward enriching side.
R.E.H. So you are emphasising that we must recognise this moral order, the commandment coming before we have the thought of the word?
S.McC. Exactly, I think it is an important principle to see in the way of God that as persons act on the line of obedience in faith, they will get further light as to what is before them. We often attempt to reverse the position and expect to get light before we act, but when the truth is presented to us, and we act on it, we get more light.
L.I. In relation to the word that Paul uses as to the Lord's supper (@1 Corinthians 11: 17) I notice the note says, charging or commanding. Would that be important in relation to what you have said regarding the Lord's supper; we have a right to challenge those who are not remembering the Lord?
S.McC. Exactly, we have a right to ask why they are not remembering the Lord if they profess to love
{168}
Him; because this would involve that the commandments are kept, and in the keeping of His commandments, we have the proof of love for Christ.
G.A. May it not be possible for such to be looking for light instead of realising that they need to come under the regulation of His commandments.
S.McC. They need to be subject, obedient; the Gospel is preached first of all for the obedience of faith; and as we are regulated in that way, subject to the commandments, then we get help and light as to what may be before us.
G.B. Is that seen in the 9th chapter of John where the blind man receives sight? It says, "He went and came seeing." Is that in line with what you mean?
S.McC. Yes, he was subject to the word of Christ, and as subject to the word of Christ his eyes were opened, he got sight. He was able to see.
G.B. It is noteworthy that it says here in verse 19, "Because I live ye also shall live," that is really life operative, is it not?
S.McC. Yes, because life, as we are referring to it, is always subjective. Eternal life involves what is objective, a sphere into which we are brought in the knowledge of divine Persons among the saints in the assembly, but life as we have it in this 19th verse involves what is operative, what affects us subjectively, that is life in contact with Christ, "because I live, ye also shall live." That is, our living hinges on His living, because He lives we live, because all that we are and have is bound up with this glorious Person.
G.B. That brings us within the range of the knowledge of the love of the Father. Is that not a feature of what we enjoy?
S.McC. Well, as keeping the commandments of Christ, we come under the notice of the Father. As it says, "He that loves me shall be loved by my Father and I will love him." Now I think we should
{169}
see before we leave this passage that it is throwing into relief the personnel, those that form the assembly. We walk in the light of the assembly in a difficult day, and think of the greatness of those that form it, as suggested here, that as keeping the commandments of Christ and loving Christ they become the objects of divine affection, expressed toward us by the Father and the Son.
P.B. "And we will make our abode with him." Does that involve the radiation of love as residing in persons, the personnel of the assembly?
S.McC. Yes, it points to the greatness of what is present in the persons who form the assembly. What do we know and what can we say about it, about enjoying the abiding of the Father and the Son, the Holy Spirit being with us provides the basis for the Father and the Son making their abode with us?
M.M. Is this something of the reciprocity you spoke of yesterday, of love's movements, the workability of it?
S.McC. Yes, exactly, love operating in me towards a divine Person draws out love from a divine Person towards me. It is a remarkable thing, when you take account of it in that light. So that, as having to do with one another it would help to see the dignity of one another. If I have to do with a believer in whom the Father and the Son are abiding, what an important thing it is. I would regard him or her with the dignity that is becoming to such a position.
E.B.Mc. "The Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things and bring to your remembrance all the things which I have said to you." That is, the Spirit is here, and there is no excuse for us not knowing.
S.McC. There is not, and there is no excuse for us not loving either, because the Holy Spirit is with us
{170}
and in us, and we have every encouragement to love Christ, to keep His commandments and love Him.
R.E.H. Are there two thoughts emphasised herein, first the power of what is found in the Spirit, and secondly the position of being orphans, that we have no other reserves or resources?
S.McC. That would be the point in mind, that the Spirit is the secret of power in the position, as with and in the saints of the assembly. However broken up things may become in the dispensation, the Spirit does not leave the saints. The Spirit came here to abide with the saints forever.
Rem. Will the thought of enrichment, as you have been drawing our attention to, be seen in Philadelphia, as marked by keeping the word of Christ?
S.McC. Yes, Philadelphia means "brotherly love," as if we are reminded that in that choice phase of assembly history love has free and unhindered movement, and the Lord loves to go over the features that are there, even to the extent of saying that He would cause those that opposed to come and do homage at the feet of the saints.
A.P. With regard to what the Lord says, "I will manifest myself to him," this seems to come consequent on our accepting what you have said as to the thought of commandments, as coming under the authority of the Lord in obedience.
S.McC. Exactly, so this morning what we were looking for was a manifestation of Christ. That is what we normally look for, even in a day of brokenness. The supper opens up the way for Christ to manifest Himself to those that are regulated by His commandments.
P.B. So that we are either in the flow of divine love or we are not there.
S.McC. Well, that would be the point in @John 14.
{171}
It is a great matter to be in it, to be in this current and flow of divine affections.
Rem. A constitution built up in love, would manifest itself on their part, in keeping His commandments? The Lord's word to His saints is an evidence of His love to them.
S.McC. So that @John 14 onwards contemplates an assembly constitution. It involves what we have in the realm where the light of the assembly is, that is what @John 14 onwards has in mind, the collective position, what the saints are as left here, in the absence of Christ, the Holy Spirit, among them, and the greatness of this assembly period. So that we should all value what there is among the saints.
J.C. Does verse 31 give us a lead? The Lord Jesus Himself says, "That the world may know that I love the Father and as the Father has commanded me, thus I do." There is a positive evidence of His love for the Father in what He does.
S.McC. He always moved in relation to the Father in the Gospel. More than once does He refer to His relations with the Father in this light. And He says at one time, speaking of the Father, "I know His commandment is life eternal." A remarkable thing that the commandment, as we are speaking of it, involves the radiation of divine affection. We are so accustomed to think of the commandments as arbitrary matters, whereas the commandments here are the basis for the radiation of divine love, the love of the Father, the love of the Son, and we may say, the love of the Spirit too, for that is entering into it.
P.B. So it says, "I give my peace to you." Is that the result of it?
S.McC. Well, exactly.
Rem. They are really commandments of love, are they not?
S.McC. Yes, love is the great subject matter in these
{172}
closing chapters. And now when we come to chapter 16, the Lord says, verse 26, "in that day ye shall ask in my name; and I say not to you that I will demand of the Father for you, for the Father himself has affection for you, because ye have had affection for me and have believed that I came out from God." Now the Lord is pointing to the fact that in going on high, He would no longer have demanded for them, as in the 16th verse of the 14th chapter, he begs the Father to give them another Comforter; but now he says "In that day ye shall ask in my name" pointing to their liberty as set up in the power of the Spirit in living relations with the Father. It shows the greatness of the present moment now that Christ is gone on high, that the Father is, by reason of the Spirit present with us, moving towards us in the radiation of His affections.
R.E.H. Is that connected with "He shall do greater than these?"
S.McC. Well, I think it is touching the way the Lord says in connection with that day, that is the Spirit's day, or the assembly day, the "Father Himself has affection for you." They knew the affection that Christ had for them, but now He is seeking to inculcate into their minds the Father's system of things, a system of things in which the Father's affections were active towards them because of their love for Christ.
R.G.C. Why do you think He attaches this thought of believing with this thought of affection? Before, it was knowing and keeping.
S.McC. Now it is the activity of faith, in relation to the testimony presented. It says, "And have believed that I came out from God." He is referring to the particular activity of faith on their part in regard to the teaching that He had brought forward in the ministry. That He "had come out from God" and was "going to God."
S.R. Does the feet washing that we had yesterday,
{173}
lie behind this in the mind of the Lord? In going out from, and going back to God.
S.McC. Yes, He refers there to the fact that He came out from God and was going to God, and they believed it. It says "And have believed that I came out from God." This shows the importance of faith taking on the truth, that we come under the Father's observation, and the activity of His affection towards us on the one hand, first because we have affection for Christ, and secondly because we believe and accept the truth and take it on.
J.W. Is that not what divine Persons are longing and waiting for, for that moment that we might really believe the truth?
S.McC. Yes, they have in mind that we should take on the truth in whatever way the truth may come to us. The Father seems to have great pleasure in the saints because they believe the testimony presented.
J.W. I just wondered there. It seems from that very point the Lord Jesus says, "The hour is come," and turns to the Father, as much as to say what He has waited for He has reached.
S.McC. Yes, and He says, "And have believed that I came out from God." It really means "from the God." Hidden in that expression is His place in the deity. As it says "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God and the Word was God;" the preposition 'from' in this verse, means with, from with God, alongside God in communicative associations, which the preposition denotes.
A.T.S. Then in the next verse it says, "I came out from the Father." Would you say something as to that, in relation to the previous word "I came out from God?"
S.McC. Well, it is very interesting, how He alludes to that following this expression, "and have believed that I came out from God." He says, "I have come
{174}
out from the Father and have come into the world." Notice that, the first statement is just the statement that He came out from God, having in mind the scope of mediatorial operations, but then it says, "I came out from the Father and have come into the world." That would allude to the particular way in which He appeared in public testimony in the world. The world is always presented in John's writings in contrast to the Father, as if the revelation of God in this light becomes a peculiar means that the enemy operates against through the system referred to as the world.
A.W. That would be when He began to be about 30 years?
S.McC. Well, I suppose it would enter into that. His baptism, the Holy Spirit coming upon Him, the way He went out and came into the world, it would have in mind His public service. He says, "Again I leave the world and go to the Father."
Ques. Is there any difference in this "coming out" here and in @John 6 where He speaks of "coming down?"
S.McC. Yes, @John 6 is administrative. The whole chapter is filled with the administrative line, "The bread of God is he who comes down out of heaven and gives his life to the world." It is the administrative chapter there.
R.N. Would you say a little as to knowing the Father? You were speaking just now of the Lord coming out in testimony. Is it worked out with us in the way He had peculiar links with the Father every day? I would like some help.
S.McC. I would think so. I think it alludes to what we have in the first chapter, "we have contemplated His glory, the glory as of an only begotten with a father, full of grace and truth," although it is not the stressing of *my* Father "I came out from
{175}
*the* Father." That is, it is God known in that name of grace.
R.N. So that we are to learn to go to the Father not only in privilege, but in matters of testimony too, are we?
S.McC. Well, exactly. And I think we should understand and enjoy more intimacy with divine Persons, as these chapters of John's Gospel impress us with, intimacy with the Father and the Son and with the Spirit. Divine Persons, as it were, are not at a distance. Their company, reverently speaking, is to be known and enjoyed.
R.E.H. So that this is a link then with the 1st chapter and a transitional period, we might say, the Lord educating them into it?
S.McC. He is about to leave them, and He is impressing their minds and hearts with the Father's realm, the Father's world, God known in that name.
S.R. Is the climax reached in the disciples when they say further down, "By this we believe that thou art come from God?" Is that a climax that the Lord was seeking to reach in them?
S.McC. It says, "Now we know that thou knowest all things and hast not need that anyone should demand of thee. By this we believe that thou has come from God." That is, the things are taking effect with them, they are progressing in the truth. Progress in the truth, progressive knowledge is a great matter. There is the idea of revelation, as with Peter in one sense, as in @Matthew 16, but then the matter of progressive knowledge is another side, and this is progressive knowledge here. He says, in verse 27, "And have believed that I came out from God." And then, they say, "By this we believe that thou art come from God." They are progressing in their knowledge.
J.W. In view of progressing, is it the desire of the Lord that we might ask the Father in His name, so
{176}
that our joy might be increased too, along with the knowledge?
S.McC. Yes, the Lord is seeking to help them as to the liberty that they had, direct liberty with the Father. He would impress them with the fact that the Father's affection is for them. The Father Himself, the stress is on Himself, that Person, not exactly through the Spirit or through the Son, although we have to do with the Father by the Spirit and through the Son, but the Lord is, stressing the immediate intimacy. "The Father *himself* has affection for you, because ye have had affection for me." Showing that every bit of affection for Christ comes under divine notice.
G.B. That should enrich and enlarge our capacity to worship the Father in the service of God.
S.McC. All these experiences would lead on to that. @John 17 would have in mind the service of God. @John 16 is the public position where the demonstration of the Spirit is brought in, and where there is opposition to the truth. It is a great thing that we should understand, that as loving Christ we come in for the radiation of divine affection. The fact of our having affection for Christ draws out the affection of the Father Himself, not the affections of the Spirit, not the affections of the Son, but the affections of the Father Himself.
S.R. It would stand out in contrast, would it not, to the reference earlier to the position of orphans.
S.McC. It would, it is to throw us into immediate and intimate contact with divine Persons. So that we are not just depending on what is external, in the way of ministry and the like, while all that enters into the position, and has its place and should be valued accordingly, but the importance of immediate and intimate links with divine Persons, that is what gives substantiality to our enjoyment of the truth.
M.M. Was that seen, we may say, livingly in the
{177}
apostles in the Acts, where there was so much set against the assembly?
S.McC. Exactly.
R.E.H. I was going to ask if the intimate knowledge of divine Persons as you have suggested to us, would help us in the understanding of the ministry, and what is the mind of the Lord for us at any moment, and we would never be at a disadvantage if we knew divine Persons better.
S.McC. Well, that is the point exactly. The reason why we get defective in regard to the truth, is because our links with divine Persons are really interfered with. Something comes in that hinders for the moment our relations with divine Persons themselves, so that we do not see the truth as it comes at the moment.
G.H.R. Does this draw attention to the harmony and unity of divine love in its radiation, so that their faith should not break down? The Lord felt for them, and understood how they would feel.
S.McC. Exactly. It shows the greatness of Christianity, the greatness of things in the assembly, that the believer should be the object of divine Persons in this way.
G.H.R. So that would it help us to hold the truth in affection? I was thinking of that expression, "I came out from God." I suppose the Lord was bringing out the thoughts of God that He had for men.
S.McC. Yes, exactly, the coming out from God would have in mind the whole scope of mediatorial operations.
G.H.R. And I wondered if it was not calculated to exalt in our thoughts the greatness of the revelation.
S.McC. Exactly, because it is great. The Lord Jesus Himself, is set before us in His personal greatness, as the One in whom the revelation comes to us. "In the beginning was the Word and the Word was with God and the Word was God." The Word refers to
{178}
Christ as One who was apprehended in that way by the disciples. He was able to express God to them.
R.E.H. Would this give us equal liberty in addressing the three divine Persons in revelation?
S.McC. Why should we not address Them as we know Them? We are challenged as to our knowledge of Them. We are challenged as to our discernment as to each divine Person. What can we say about it? Can we discern the Father abiding with us, and can we discern the Son alongside of that and the Spirit too, personally with us and in us.
A.C. The Lord stresses speaking to the Father in His name, three times.
S.McC. Well, exactly. That is because His absence is contemplated; the name points to the time of His absence. Now in @John 17 we should see the dignified setting of things in this closing section, that is looking on to the Lord's present position in the assembly in the closing verses of that chapter, that "The love with which thou hast loved me may be in them and I in them." That would look on to the great position of Christ in the midst of the assembly. Divine affections come into this section, as He says in verse 23 "They may be perfected into one, and the world may know that thou hast sent me, and that thou hast loved them as thou has loved me. Father, as to those whom thou hast given me, I desire that where I am they also may be with me, for thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world. Righteous Father, and the world has not known thee, but I have known thee, and these have known that thou has sent me. And I have made known to them thy name, and will make it known; that the love with which thou hast loved me may be in them and I in them." All this is to stress in our minds the great radiation of divine affections in the assembly. That is what is contemplated.
{179}
E.B.Mc. He has a company here that receives His words and keeps His words. Would that lead up to this? That is, He gives them credit for all that. I suppose abstractly, but still He says that of them.
S.McC. It is remarkable how He speaks about the disciples in this chapter, and how He refers to their capacity, as in that verse "The words which thou hast given me I have given them, and they have received them." And then He says, "The glory which thou hast given me I have given them," and then He says, "The love with which thou hast loved me may be in them and I in them," all stressing the greatness of the capacity that there is, in the saints.
S.R. The same kind of love is it in this last verse that you refer to?
S.McC. It is the quality of the love that is stressed. "That the love with which thou hast loved me may be in them." That is, the quality of that love is among the saints. It is a wonderful reference to the dignity of the position in the assembly. The Lord is in immediate link with the Father, as He says, "And now I come to Thee," and He is contemplating His position in the assembly in the service of God, "That the love with which thou hast loved me may be in them and I in them." He is in the assembly as the Leader of the praises, and the quality of the love is there in the assembly.
Rem. "And will make it known." Is that to the assembly?
S.McC. That is @John 20, the verse that we read; that is why we read that verse, that the activity of divine affections involves that God should be known in the fullest way. "I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God." "Go to my brethren and say unto them, I have made known unto them thy name," is past, "and will make it known" looks forward to @John 20.
{180}
J.W. Could you say something as to the Lord's desires that they might behold His glory? "My glory which thou hast given me," verse 24. In Manhood, is it not, in glorious Manhood?
S.McC. Yes, it would be that. It is acquired glory. It is "the glory which thou hast given me." We are to note the difference between the glory in verse 24 and the glory in verse 22, that the glory in verse 22 is a glory that we share in, but the glory in verse 24 is a glory that we do not share in, but we are privileged to contemplate.
A.P. So that verse 22 I think we have been taught is the glory of sonship. Would you say something as to that?
S.McC. It is what is conferred. Well, the radiation which the glory suggests, in regard to this matter of sonship, is an important thing. It involves our liberty with divine Persons and our liberty with one another.
A.T.S. Yesterday you were remarking on love being the link between what belongs to absoluteness and what is relative, does this verse 24 connect with that? "Thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world."
S.McC. It shows that love is the great link. Love was there, and love is here, and love is the great link. It is important to see love as John presents it in this unique way.
R.E.H. Would this help us in our view of the saints, to take account of their capacity, and what has been referred to here?
S.McC. Exactly, so that we should have greater capacity for the enjoyment of divine love. I think that is the whole bearing of the teaching in these latter chapters, and that the capacity of the saints should be enlarged to enjoy divine love as it is known in this the Spirit's day.
P.B. Does love for divine Persons, and love for one
{181}
another help us as to this oneness the Lord has in mind?
S.McC. Yes, look at the high standard; he says "The glory which thou hast given me, I have given them, that they may be one, as we are one." "I in them, and thou in me." What does this refer to when we think of it in relation to divine Persons? It involves a perfect state of love. And then He says, "That they may be perfected into one and that the world may know that thou hast sent me and that thou hast loved them as thou has loved me." The Lord stresses unity, oneness, throughout in this chapter.
E.B.McC. I suppose this glory was at Antioch, where the disciples were first called Christians. It is the same glory, isn't it, and it rests on the saints now. The saints are different from anyone else in the world. A certain glory rests on them.
S.McC. Well, it does. It would work out I suppose in testimony, although I suppose the great thought is the service of God here in verse 22, "The glory which thou hast given me I have given them that they may be one as *we* are one; I in them, and thou in me that they may be perfected into one and that the world may know that *thou* has sent me." And then in verse 24, "Father, as to those whom thou has given me I desire that where I am they also may be with me, that they may behold my glory which thou hast given me." The working out of divine affections involves that we should be with Christ and alongside of Christ where He is, in contemplation of His glory.
R.G.C. With regard to the world, why is that brought in? Is it that love may be practical and public with us?
S.McC. Well, I think the expression "that the world may know," conveys a general testimony of the oneness and unity among the brethren; it is not that the world accepts the testimony, but the testimony is there.
{182}
I suppose the full answer will be in the world to come, when the saints will be displayed as God's righteousness in Christ.
G.B. "That the world may believe that thou has sent me." Is not that prominent there? Isn't that what the world will know as a result of the sending?
S.McC. Yes, "And that thou hast loved them as thou hast loved me." It is really a Philadelphian touch there.
M.M. Could we reach the height of privilege, without that preceding publicly, do you think -- without this testimony, "That the world may know that thou has sent me?" That is the fruit of the saints loving one another, and then we can reach the highest privilege assemblywise, can we?
S.McC. Well, I think in the way it is put, "that the world may," looks on in full result of the millennium when the saints will be displayed as God's righteousness in Christ.
G.B. Is this the complete answer contemplated to all the enemy has sought to bring in. "What hath God wrought," would that be the answer?
S.McC. Well, it is, and so in Philadelphia the Lord says, "and they shall know that I have loved thee." That is, there is a testimony to those that have opposed. When it will be we cannot define, we are just left with the suggestion, that the Lord will cause them to know that He has loved them. Wonderful thing that the saints are marked out as the object of divine affection.
D.B. In Ephesians it says "That he might also display in the coming ages the surpassing riches of His grace in kindness towards us in Christ Jesus." Would that be a similar thought?
S.McC. Well, that looks on to the day of display.
P.B. Would you say in relation to the 24th verse that the glory which the Father gives to the Son,
{183}
which He does not communicate to the assembly, is something unique to Him and the Son becomes an Object of worship in that?
S.McC. Well. He does, and it shows the great desire that a divine Person has that we should know and contemplate this kind of glory, what one divine Person gives to another. Because the Lord receives the glory here from the Father, "The glory which thou hast given me."
A.R. We would seek to make room for that in the service, while enjoying our sonship, would we look on His as distinctive in the Father's affections in that way?
S.McC. Exactly, that however great our privileges are, however unique the privileges of the saints of the assembly are, and what we are as in association with Christ, there is always a uniqueness about Him that is to be maintained. He does not say Our Father and Our God, he says, "My Father and your Father, My God and your God." I think that is the full result of verse 26.
J.C. So that the Lord Jesus Himself stands out as excellent amongst dignified persons? Verse 26 I am thinking of, the same love that was in Him is in the saints, dignified persons.
S.McC. Yes, exactly, we need to understand the dignity of the saints as belonging to the assembly, more and more. That is what the Lord is helping us to see, all the time, the great dignity that attaches to them. And so @John 20 verse 17 gives the most wonderful light ever communicated to man in regard to the privileges of the people of God. "I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God." That is the activity of divine affections involves that we should understand and know our part and place with Christ in this exalted way, linked with His Father and our Father, with His God and our God.
{184}
R.G.C. Is that the full answer then, to "I will not leave you orphans?" We have the Lord coming to us, and the Spirit come to us, and the Father's love.
S.McC. Yes. He comes to us and takes His place amongst us and leads us out in association with Himself in relation to this realm where God is known in this remarkable way.
G.A. This glory that has been given the saints, we need to take account of that side of things in the saints, it is a question of looking for that.
S.McC. Well, exactly. We want to enjoy one another in the light of what we are according to what has been conferred upon us. That is the dignity of sonship. It is a wonderful thing to get a view of the saints in the light of sonship, what they are as having that conferred glory. It is not something that they work up to, nor something that is connected with the development of a state in them, it is something divinely given, belonging to everyone of the assembly, as having the Spirit.
{185}
DIGNITY AND WEALTH IN ADMINISTRATION (1)
@1 Kings 4
S.McC. It is thought that we should get help from considering the various features that mark Solomon's administration. There is a remarkable link between David and Solomon, Solomon really being a counterpart to David. The thought of wisdom comes particularly into Solomon's administration, wisdom in a superlative way, linking on, I think, with what we get related to administration in the letter to the Ephesians. We will recall how wisdom is mentioned there, in the first chapter, in relation to the counsels of God, then in the third chapter in relation to the all-various wisdom of God seen in the assembly. Solomon, too, specially stresses the side of sonship. Throughout the whole administration of Solomon there is diffused the spirit and grace of sonship. It would seem as if every department of Solomon's regime is marked by coming under the influence of the spirit and grace of sonship supremely set out in Solomon. And it is thought in considering this chapter this morning we might see how restful and happy conditions are in mind, in the working out of this character of administration among the people of God. I believe at the present moment, merging into the world to come, we are to know and prove the blessedness of this kind of administration, where sonship is supreme in the minds and hearts of the saints, so that it says in verse 25 "Judah and Israel dwelt safely," a remarkable reference amid the richness and glory of the administration referred to in this chapter. I believe that the administration working out from the Solomonic viewpoint involves that the saints are brought into conditions of this kind, where
{186}
food abounds, not only ordinary food, but in type, spiritual food in richness and abundance. Nor is there lack of ministry, either in the way of light and instruction, as we see as the chapter ends. The chapter opens up with reference to the departmental side of Solomon's administration, introducing into our minds a wealth of personality. We are not to be afraid of the thought of personality in the assembly, because on the line of sonship, each one being a son, each one having a distinct impression of God and of Christ, we have a wealth in developed personality in the assembly, which is to impress us with the richness and the glory of God's inheritance in the saints. Unless we see this we shall never be able, in our local gatherings or elsewhere, to work out divine thoughts properly in relation to Christ and the assembly, especially from the heavenly side that 1st Kings, in its teaching, has in mind in type. I thought we might begin with seeing the departmental side in the opening verses, then the side that comes in from verses 7 to 20, where we have got areas and environment that are not the best, but yet in relation to which Solomon's administration has a part and things are held. Then the food matter, and then the matter of the ministry and the light that comes abundantly in the last few verses.
C.A.I. In the opening verses, the first six verses, the idea of persons being sons appears in most instances, does it not?
S.McC. It does. The whole realm of administration proceeding from Solomon's throne is marked, in every detail of it, by the spirit and grace of sonship, suggesting to our minds and to our hearts the liberality connected with this kind of administration.
R.G.C. Do we get nobility suggested in that they are called princes?
S.McC. That is just what it suggests. The chapter opens "And these are the princes whom he had." It
{187}
is a great thing to understand spiritual nobility among the saints expressed in persons, so that the whole realm marked by spiritual refinement, not by the uncouthness we see around us on every hand, which is beneath the dignity of the assembly.
R.G.C. It says, "But the noble deviseth noble things; and to noble things doth he stand," @Isaiah 32: 8, and that is to mark us, especially in administration.
S.McC. A remarkable reference, and a reference we need to pay attention to, because nobility in the saints works out in the setting on of noble things, not degraded things, but noble things, and also standing to noble things. It is not only that they are devised but stood to and this is linked with the working out of the administration of the world to come, which is really before us here in this chapter.
A.R.G. In the list of things we are to think on "whatsoever things are noble" are included?
S.McC. Very good. It is interesting to notice that, especially in the epistle to the Philippians, where it is the working out of heavenly light in experience here below. Philippians rightly follows Ephesians, because it is the working out experimentally of the heavenly light given in the letter to the Ephesians; therefore it is filled with the thought of spiritual refinement.
G.H.W. And that was seen working out supremely in Solomon, "and King Solomon was king over all Israel."
S.McC. Yes, an important thing to notice, how the divine thought is arrived at in this verse. You remember in @Psalm 114, reference is made to Israel coming out of Egypt, "When Israel went out of Egypt," the house of bondage, "Judah was his sanctuary, Israel his dominion." Judah is the Davidic side, where the wealth of the service of God is set up under David, the sweet psalmist of Israel. Solomon is prominently the ruling side, Israel was his dominion in the Solomonic side;
{188}
-- we have both sides referred to in that psalm, both reached in their fulness in Christ, at the present time at the right hand of God.
R.G.N. These persons seem to be those who have won or acquired their nobility rather than inherited it. They are not sons of Solomon, are they?
S.McC. Yes, I think sonship refers to dignity acquired through gift. We are all God's sons by faith in Christ Jesus. That is, we do not work up to that, it comes to us by way of gift. But princes represent persons who by moral greatness acquire a place of worth in the testimony.
D.A.I. You spoke of a link between David and Solomon. Do we see that in @Proverbs 4? Solomon says, "I was a son unto my father," and "He taught me." Is that how it is acquired?
S.McC. Exactly, so that along with this great thought of sonship we have also the feature of love diffused through Solomon's realm, through his administration. We were looking at the radiation of love the other day in John's gospel, the radiation of divine affections in the working out of the administration according to John; Solomon gives us that in type, "I was a son unto my father, tender and an only one in the sight of my mother." I think the Lord is stressing the love side in the assembly, pending the rapture. The rapture is just at hand, we are about to be caught up, and we need to understand the love side, it makes room for spiritual and heavenly refinement amongst us.
D.A.I. So that the administrative thought is to go forward in the light of sonship, as bearing on the family side.
S.McC. And we have to see the greatness of the thought expressed in the word "administration." We are so inclined to link administration with the care meeting, the working out of local difficulties when a problem arises, but administration in the divine realm
{189}
is a much greater and wider thought than that, involving divine authority, as we had elsewhere, the Lord merging with the Spirit, in bringing divine love into our hearts. That is only part of administration; there are many other features.
A.R.G. Has it been said by a beloved servant of the Lord that there will be some form of administration in eternity, because God is love?
S.McC. The administration of love will go right on through all eternity. We shall never be without administration, and it will be the administration of love, love in activity towards divine Persons and towards one another.
D.R.T. Verse 29 brings in largeness of heart. "Largeness of heart, even as the sand that is on the seashore."
S.McC. Largeness of heart is a beautiful touch here, as we were alluding to the liberality that is linked with sonship substantially known and enjoyed in the assembly. While the administration of Solomon involves that every feature of evil is taken account of in all that might adversely affect us, as in the principle seen in Joab, Abiathar and others, on the other hand it is stressing the largeness of heart along with the side of wisdom.
D.R.T. So all the people should be expressive of this deep affection.
S.McC. Well, that is what we are trying to get at; that the whole realm is to be marked by this kind of thing; because 1 Kings, in the immensity of the system of things that come before us under Solomon, stresses christianity at the present time in its heavenly bearing in the assembly; 2nd Chronicles stresses the millennium more, where you have the idea of distance, but in Kings there is no idea of distance. There is no veil in the temple mentioned.
C.A.I. Does this involve a question of our apprehension
{190}
of how christianity functions and what it is. I was thinking of the word in Colossians, "Giving thanks to the Father who has made us fit for sharing the portion of the saints in light, who has delivered us from the authority of darkness and translated us into the kingdom of the Son of his love." The economy functions on those lines, does it not?
S.McC. That is what we want to get hold of this morning as we are together. It is not a question just of a picture, but of what marks the functioning of the saints in the light of the assembly, and their place in the assembly in sonship, at the present moment.
A.R.G. Would you say a little more to help enlarge our view as to what administration really involves? We have been, I think, rather cramped about it.
S.McC. Well, it is very simple to notice that the administration of New Zealand, for instance, is a very extended matter. It works out from Wellington, but it affects every town and village and everything in the country. And so in christianity everything is coloured, by what is working out at the present time from Christ on high, in heaven, and the Spirit here in the assembly.
Rem. So that it says of judgment, judgment is His strange work, as though that is not paramount in the mind of God.
S.McC. That is, it comes in because of certain things that arise, but it is not, as it were, His normal work, it is His strange work.
W.H.W. The thought of administration comes into the gospel. I mean in preaching the gospel, we need to have as a background the truth of Ephesians, to represent God correctly.
S.McC. Administration enters into the gospel, and all the wealth that God has in his heart for men, all that is linked with the heavenly light that we have
{191}
in the letter to the Ephesians in sonship and other things, is presented in the glad tidings.
W.H.W. Do you think there is a sort of a reference to that here, verse 2, "Azariah the son of Zadok was the priest," as the footnote gives us. Zadok was priest in David's reign, but when it comes to Solomon's reign the thought of sonship is predicated of the priest.
S.McC. We have a remarkable reference in this man Azariah, because the Spirit of God draws special attention to this man, and it shows the need for observing what the Spirit has to say about him. First of all he is a prince, priesthood is linked with prince-hood here. It is not just the exercise of something on the basis of arbitrary right, but from the standpoint of what has been acquired in the way of moral power. "These are the princes whom he had: Azariah the son of Zadok was the priest;" as the margin points out.
R.G.C. So that priestliness is a great feature to be developed amongst us.
S.McC. Well, it is, based on princeliness. In Numbers the princes and the priests link on together. We get one chapter about the prince and one chapter about the priests, and it would almost seem as if the princes merge into the thought of the priests. We want to see that the exercise of priesthood is based on princely qualities among the saints, and it is also based on the thought of the family. The priest here is the son of Zadok, the family idea is running through all this; meaning that what is arbitrary is tempered by the basic family thought.
W.H.W. The Lord was seeking to get that into Peter's mind in the end of @Matthew 17, in regard to the stater, "Giver it to them for me and thee." He would impress Peter's mind with the dignity of sonship.
S.McC. Immediately preceding, as it does, the administrative chapter. In the formal administration in
{192}
chapter 18 we can, see how the thought of sonship tempers, as it were, and modifies what might be arbitrary, in the working out of the administration.
D.A.I. Is that why Paul associates the brother with him?
S.McC. Exactly. Because there is a modifying thought in the suggestion of the family link, and we are weak on that side. We need to understand that the family side is a basic matter, and confidence lies in the family side; confidence in one another, would make the most of one another, on the line of the family.
L.I. I was interested in what you said about the thought of modification in connection with @Matthew 18. Would it be reasonable to say that the persons involved in Matthew are sons, the brother who visits another is a son, and the one to be saved is a son? Would that govern the affections and movements of each?
S.McC. Yes. Matthew calls him a brother. That is a great word in our spiritual vocabulary. "If thy brother," Matthew would impress that in our minds, "thy brother." It is proceeding on the basic idea of the family. When we refer to modification we are not in any sense suggesting that evil should be modified, because evil is never to be modified. Evil is to be judged in the full light of God's judgment of it in the death of Christ, but in the working out of the priesthood, the family side being basic, tempers and modifies, what might be harsh and extreme otherwise.
L.I. I was thinking of the feelings that would lie in the person that might visit another.
D.R.T. And would "Between thee and him alone" involve between thee and God alone first in what is priestly?
S.McC. The passage just says, "Between thee and him alone." It is no doubt a priest, he is characteristically a praying man, he has to do with God about
{193}
matters, but the teaching in @Matthew 18 at that particular part is not our relations with God, but our relations with one another. Because many of us claim to be all right with God when we are all wrong with one another. That will not do; because if we are right with God we will be right with one another.
G.A.A. Is the family side that we are looking at, brought forward in Solomon's wisdom in the previous chapter where the mother of the child is discerned?
S.McC. Well, it is remarkable how the matter of discernment comes up in Solomon's administration, because there has been a lot of discussion amongst the brethren in conversation about discernment, how it works out. Chapter 3, verse 8, "And thy servant is in the midst of thy people which thou hast chosen, a great people, that cannot be numbered nor counted for multitude. Give therefore to thy servant an understanding heart, to judge thy people, to discern between good and bad; for who is able to judge this thy numerous people? And the word pleased the Lord, that Solomon had asked this thing. And God said to him, Because thou hast asked this thing, and hast not asked for thyself long life, neither hast asked riches for thyself, nor hast asked the life of thine enemies, but hast asked for thyself discernment to understand judgment; behold I have done according to thy word." Now what comes in is this matter, a very difficult matter, as to a child and two women laying claim to it. How does Solomon discern? Does he read one woman's heart and discern who is the true mother? He does not. He brings it out in their actions; brings it out in what they say, by that test. It says in verse 26 "Then spoke the woman whose was the living child to the king, for her bowels yearned over her son and she said, Ah, my lord! give her the living child, and in no wise put it to death. But the other said, Let it be neither mine nor thine; divide it. And the king
{194}
answered and said, Give this one the living child, and in no wise put it to death: she is its mother." His discernment worked out in what she said, in the woman's words, not exactly what was in her heart, although it involved what was in her heart; but from what she said, he discerned where the true mother was.
W.H.W. Does Abigail set out the faith side? She had really received the ministry of Samuel and David says, "Blessed be thy discernment;" I was wondering whether the basis of her discernment was not faith.
S.McC. Very good. Because of all that she had heard and received (perhaps it was the first time she had met David) what a value she had placed upon David! What an appraisal she had of him! It was all, as we would speak of it now, on the principle of faith.
G.A.A. Is it noteworthy, what you remarked a moment ago, that Solomon had no sword? He called for a sword. I wondered whether he rested in the wisdom he had and used that.
S.McC. And wisdom is a great matter, because linked with wisdom is resource. Wisdom is the handmaid of love. Where you get love operating among the saints, where you get love amongst the saints, wisdom is there to help out in the working out of matters.
G.W.B. So when it is a question of looking into the facts of any issue, does the matter of experience enter into it?
S.McC. Well, it does, and I think it is a question of where we are substantially. During the meetings that we have had in recent times that word "substantiality" has constantly come up, and it is important that it should come up, because it is not a question of just going over an historic picture, the scriptures are
{195}
bearing on us as we are here this morning, and it is to help us substantially in regard to the truth.
A.R.G. Is not that what came out in the true mother of the child, the love was there, was it not?
S.McC. Yes. It is very interesting to notice in regard to this man Azariah, he is called the priest here. In Chronicles, in the genealogies, a remarkable thing is said about this man. We get a whole list of genealogies in the opening chapters of Chronicles, but there is something specifically said about this man. We have a bracketed remark in regard to him. When the Spirit of God comes to Azariah he immediately stops and says, "He is it that exercised the priesthood in the house that Solomon built in Jerusalem." He is it. Notice it does not say, "He it is that exercised the priesthood." In @1 Chronicles 6: 10, we get the levitical line. Gershom, Kohath and Merari developed in the genealogy, and when it comes to verse 10 it says "And Johanan begot Azariah;" then we get this remarkable comment by Ezra, as it would be, Ezra the scribe; he has something to say about this man. He says, "He is it that exercised the priesthood in the house that Solomon built in Jerusalem," not "He it is" but "He is it;" that is, the stress is on substantiality in the use of the neuter word, it is not the personal pronoun so much that is intensified, but the neuter quality. "He is it that exercised the priesthood in the house that Solomon built in Jerusalem." That is, it is typically a question of the full light of the assembly, the Lord's full place on high, the heavenly side.
W.H.W. That would be in keeping with what you have been saying about substantiality. It was seen in that man.
S.McC. That is just what I am referring to. You remember it is said of the Lord Jesus in Luke "The holy thing which shall be born shall be called Son of
{196}
God," stressing substantiality in holy humanity in Jesus; "the holy thing," gives the intensification of the substantial thought. Christianity is marked by substance.
A.R.G. What is the thought then of his being over the superintendents. You spoke of Christ on high, did you, just now?
S.McC. I am not thinking of Azariah as a type of Christ. King Solomon is the great type of Christ in verse 1, and the house that Solomon built in @1 Chronicles 6, would be the assembly on the heavenly side as 1 Kings would have in mind. Solomon is a type of Christ on high and Jerusalem represents the assembly in her heavenly relations, although working out on earth here below.
C.A.I. Would Azariah then indicate that there are persons who are able to move in priesthood in a fully developed way?
S.McC. Exactly, expressing the thought of substantiality in the exercise of this influence in the assembly.
C.A.I. So that in this matter of substantiality, does it mean that persons are to be valued according to what they are?
S.McC. Not according to what they are not, but according to what they are.
L.I. Paul could say "ye have us for a model." Would that be substantiality?
S.McC. Well, I should think it would, and specially as being referred to as the priest, he would have a remarkable influence over the whole position.
G.H.W. Would Azariah have the true knowledge of God and know how to use it aright?
S.McC. Well, he would. That is what the priest suggests. He suggests persons who know God, who know the law of God, and have capacity by the Spirit to think and act for God.
W.H.W. Do we need an understanding of the first
{197}
verse before we see or understand the working of the personality as it follows?
S.McC. That is what I thought; that we must understand the importance of this verse. It does not say, "Solomon was king over all Israel," but "King Solomon was king over all Israel." It may seem redundant -- why the repetition of "king?" It might seem superfluous, but it says, "King Solomon was king over all Israel," intensifying in our minds the substantial thought of rule according to God in Christ in this type.
T.R.H. Does it not record that God has set princes in the earth? Would that have all this in mind, universal administration and the following up of these features which you are suggesting to us?
S.McC. "Princes shalt thou make them in all the earth." @Psalm 45: 16. We see how the marital side is working out in this extension of moral influence among the brethren, as the light as to Christ and the assembly is appreciated in our souls, it works out in extension of ruling influence among the brethren on moral lines.
C.A.I. Would the thought of mutual relations among the brethren conflict with this matter of substantiality and dignity in persons?
S.McC. Personality among the brethren does not militate against mutuality. Sometimes mutuality is stressed to the point of militating against personality. In that case mutuality may be really a cloak for democracy, which is never according to God.
Rem. Would we see mutuality and personality in Mordecai, his greatness is stressed; then it says he was accepted among the multitude of his brethren?
S.McC. Very good. A very interesting and helpful reference. The personality that develops in Mordecai, a man that was prepared to lay down his life for the brethren, works out in that the brethren are all mutually in the matter. It is not militating against it. It is working out in mutuality amongst the brethren in support of the truth.
{198}
A.M. Paul says, "I Paul," does he not, and John "I John," then in the last chapter of Revelation "I Jesus."
S.McC. Then we have Adoniram. He is an interesting man. The last part of the 6th verse says, "the son of Abda was over the levy-service." Well, what is the levy-service? I understand the levy-service to be the bringing of more and more of the brethren into the work. There is a lot of work to be done and done quickly, before the translation takes place; and the levy-service has to do with the brethren being brought into the work. This man becomes a martyr. You will recall that in the days of Rehoboam when Adoniram came, in relation to the levy-service, they stoned him to death because of the wrong issue that had been projected on to the view of the saints, and the awful conditions that came about.
Rem. You spoke of more being brought into the service. Would you say a little more in regard of it, as to what the service covers?
S.McC. Well, it says, for instance, in chapter 5: 12, "Jehovah gave Solomon wisdom as he promised him." That is a beautiful touch in itself. "And there was peace between Hiram and Solomon, and they two made a league. And king Solomon raised a levy out of all Israel; and the levy was thirty thousand men. And he sent them to Lebanon, ten thousand a month by courses; a month they were in Lebanon, two months at home; and Adoniram was over the levy." That is what I mean by more and more being brought into the work. When you come to David, the levitical age is reduced, so that more and more can come into the work, into the service; and when you come to Solomon you have still an added thought. David says to Solomon, "Thou shalt add to it," the thought of addition comes in in Solomon; so he brings in this great thought of the levy, which brings in more and more of the available material into the work.
{199}
R.G.C. What about the two months at home and one month on the hills?
S.McC. A good thing to bring up.
R.G.C. We like the conspicuous work naturally; what about the inconspicuous work that is so valuable?
S.McC. Every minister will make the most of his own locality, and he will always see to it that he is at home enough to share in the working out of exercises on the home front. "The home front" is a good word for those that minister, those that serve.
L.I. I think it is a great matter to be at home, at the care meeting on Saturday night, the arrangements, in connection with it seem very important, do they not?
S.McC. Well, exactly. Because they help in this matter of those that stand by the home front; because we are needed at home. We need to work out exercises at home.
Rem. Is that why Paul reminds the elders at Ephesus that for three years he himself had gone into every house, admonishing everyone with tears?
S.McC. House to house work is needed. It would promote felicity among the brethren, happy conditions, if there were more and more house to house work, involving the service linked with bringing the saints on to the heavenly line of the truth, as in Ephesians. It involves patient, arduous, continuing service, on the most menial lines, house to house, promoting mutual affections among the brethren.
W.H.W. Is that seen in the number "12" in the next section.
S.McC. Very good. Say something more about it.
W.H.W. I was thinking it was helpful to see that the first one is connected with Mount Ephraim, which would give the elevated side of things to begin with; and then "12," being love's number, I thought would link on with the thought too.
S.McC. So that it intensifies this great matter of
{200}
love working out in the service; that is twelve is the most divisible of all the numbers, and it involves our ability to work with one another. There should not be any spirit of rivalry; the holy city is marked by the numeral twelve. As conditions of love among the brethren have their place, we are set to serve one another in love; not accusing one another falsely or making out that these personalities are wanting to dominate the realm. One of the great weaknesses that appeared in recent years was the charging of godly brethren with dominating matters among the saints. Every person should have a concern that their influence does not dominate among the saints; but we need godly care and we need personality in the caring for the things of God. The numeral twelve suggests the intensification of love in this way among the brethren.
R.G.C. So that leadership referred to in verse 5 "Azariah, son of Nathan, was over the superintendents." That deals with the false idea of democracy, does it not? There is to be leadership, is that the thought there?
S.McC. Well, exactly. There is to be leadership.
C.A.I. So there are twelve superintendents in verse 7.
S.McC. We do not have official leadership, in a broken day. The church is in brokenness publicly and we cannot speak of official leadership. It is leadership in love among the brethren, promoting the interests of Christ and the work of god, leadership in shepherding, in priestly feelings, leadership as in Paul in the way he served the saints at Ephesus, going from house to house.
R.G.C. Chapter 3 of 1st Timothy, verse 1, says, "If anyone aspires to exercise oversight." It is not to be a leader, but to exercise oversight, the *work* is emphasised, is that right?
S.McC. Yes, and the door is open to everyone of us in that way.
{201}
Rem. I was asking if the levy-service would be worked out in Stephen?
S.McC. Very good, in Stephen and in Philip; that is, they had no official commission, you might say, to begin with, they were taken on on the principle of the levy-service. Stephen lost his life in it but he corresponded with Adoniram, who was over the levy-service. He lost his life in it. This levy-service is a great matter, because we want to bring the brethren more and more into things. Leadership among the saints, in love, would involve that all the brethren are brought into matters.
H.B. I was going to ask if Judah illustrates a fine principle. When word is given that he is the one to go up, he immediately turns to Simeon, his brother, and invites him to come with him. @Judges 1: 2 -- 3.
S.McC. Showing how leadership does not militate against mutuality, it leads to mutuality; and that is the whole point here that the levy-service involves that more and more are being brought in. Well, let us look over the field, about the preaching the gospel and all the services that are to be done. Is that brother being used as he should; or is this sister's service valued as it should be? Let us look over the field. Solomon's administration would involve that more and more are brought into the matter.
G.W.B. Has there not been a danger with us to single persons out in regard of the matter of leadership?
S.McC. Well, as I said, in a day of brokenness we should be careful about the idea of official leadership in localities, putting a brother in the chair, as it were; that kind of thing is to be avoided. If, in our localities, we have brothers who have gift, their gift will make room for itself. The brethren cannot help making room for it, because they would recognise gift; otherwise they would be against God if they did not.
{202}
B.M.D. Is that why the word "elders" is usually in the plural?
S.McC. Meaning that there is no such thing as a brother over a city. Gift is universal, catholic, never local, but if in a locality there is a gift, the brethren will be glad to make room for what he has. But then his gift will not overshadow the locality. In the working out of administration in care among the saints, it is a matter of eldership; the elders are in the city, the whole city.
W.H.W. In regard to leadership, would it be safer to speak of the feature of leadership?
S.McC. The feature of leadership among the saints in a day of brokenness.
W.H.W. That allows for bringing in a sister. There are sisters in scripture that have the features of leadership.
S.McC. Deborah was an outstanding example.
W.H.W. Yes, and Elizabeth in the beginning of Luke.
Ques. Would @Hebrews 13: 7 bear on it at all? "Remember your leaders who have spoken to you the word of God; and considering the issue of their conversation, imitate their faith."
S.McC. Very good.
Rem. "Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, and today, and to the ages to come."
S.McC. @Hebrews 13 helps us as to the matter of leadership. Leadership past, and leadership present. We are to remember our leaders who have spoken to us the word of God, that is leadership past, a great matter to see. The young brothers need to think of the leaders who have gone before them, we were referring to it at the outset, think of what has entered into the establishment of the testimony in this area, the work of J. G. Deck, J.N.D., the work of Mr. Wigram and Dr. Glenny and others, all the pioneering work that
{203}
entered into that. We are to remember those and imitate their faith.
T.R.H. Would Judah, who has been referred to, be an example for us? "Hear Jehovah the voice of Judah, bring him unto his people, may his hands strive."
S.McC. Well, exactly. We could look now at these references to the twelve superintendents. Their areas are not the best; sometimes younger brothers say, if they were only in a certain locality, where they have no troubles, no difficulties, how much better they would get on in their souls. That is not the divine way. The divine way is to prosper where God has set you, whatever the trouble is. Not that one is putting a premium on trouble, but you take this matter of Mt. Ephraim, it was a place of trouble, the prophets say a good deal about Ephraim, and then you take the upland of Dor, and the villages of Jair, and the region of Argob which is in Bashan, sixty great cities with walls and bars of bronze, and then the area of the Amorites, and Og, the king of Bashan. All these geographical references bring up difficult terrain in which they had to operate and work out the administration.
H.T. So that David could say, "In pressure thou hast enlarged me."
S.McC. Well, exactly. That is the way it works out normally. The truth increases in value to us as we pass through things with God.
H.B. And is it not said prophetically of Jesus, "He shall grow up from his own place."
S.McC. One of the most delightful references we have in the prophetic scriptures. "He shall grow up from his own place." If you want to exercise influence begin at home, begin in your own locality. The Lord Jesus began at Nazareth. They could not resist the grace that marked his words as he set on the preaching. I
{204}
suppose we have not got as far as we intended, but we might look at it this afternoon.
W.H.W. I wondered if you might just make a remark as to the two married daughters of Solomon. Have you any thought about that?
S.McC. We might be able to say more about it this afternoon. I think they suggest persons who are taking on matters. The one *takes* Solomon's daughter as wife and of the other it says. Solomon's daughter *was* his wife. There is a kind of reciprocal feature in the statements; but despite the difficulties he was prepared to take on what was linked with the regime and the administration in a subjective way and work it out.
{205}
DIGNITY AND WEALTH IN ADMINISTRATION (2)
@1 Kings 4: 20 -- 34
S.McC. As we did not finish chapter 4 we might refer back a little to it, for the teaching of it is important in regard to the present time. As was said this morning 1 Kings gives us the heavenly side of the type of the truth bearing on Christ and the assembly at the present moment. Chronicles gives us more the side linked with the world to come -- the millennium, therefore the remarkable stress of sonship in Kings which we do not have in Chronicles in the same way. While it is there, it is not seen to the extent to which it is seen in 1 Kings, and the absence in Kings of the veil, the folding doors in the temple, all stressing in our minds in the teaching in the type, the liberty connected with the side of things that we are considering. We might just refer to this verse 7 to the end of verse 19 and verse 20 where it is alluded to, to see how the working out of the administration under Solomon, as in verse 20 involve felicitous conditions among the brethren, as it says "Judah and Israel were many, as the sand which is by the sea in multitude, eating and drinking and making merry." It is to point us in our thoughts to the prosperity of an administration of this kind of character where the spirit and grace of sonship is prominent, difficult territories entering into the areas in which influence is exercised, verses 7 and 19, but whatever the area and whatever the disadvantage may be and difficulty, each yields its quota to the richness and fulness of what is linked with King Solomon's table. I think that souls coming amongst us need to get an impression of King Solomon's table, that there is no doubt amongst us, it is
{206}
not that they are just coming into a sphere of light, important as that is -- there is light as we shall see in the sphere, but there is an abundance of spiritual food of a rich substantive and qualitative character.
A.T.S. It was one of the things that impressed the Queen of Sheba, was it not?
S.McC. Just so. She was impressed with the happiness of the realm, the relations between Solomon and his servants, and I think souls in coming amongst us should get an impression as to the felicitous conditions that belong to the assembly world.
W.H.W. Would Paul be referring to that in @Philippians 4 where he says "And know also ye, O Philippians, that in the beginning of the gospel, when I came out of Macedonia, no assembly communicated anything to me in the way of giving and receiving save ye alone" and so on: "Not that I seek gift, but I seek fruit abounding to your account?"
S.McC. The letter to the Philippians is remarkable for the particular happy atmosphere that there seems to be amongst the brethren. Not just superficial happiness but the settled joy and happiness that is linked with the enjoyment of the truth from the heavenly side.
W.R.S. Does that link with the thought of eternal life enjoyed amongst the saints?
S.McC. Well, it does. It would involve that, that there is an environment and sphere in the assembly where we have buoyant conditions. Eternal life involves that.
G.W.B. Would the two references by the Lord in @John 20 to "Peace be to you" stand related to what you are saying, in the matter of peace?
S.McC. Well, It would. The Lord had in mind to set them at ease. It is a great matter to be relieved from stress in the assembly realm. The assembly realm brings before us a deathless state of things, where the power of death is known, is broken, so properly
{207}
speaking in the assembly realm we should be free and happy in our spirits.
L.I. So would the people here not be speaking about the difficult territories or areas you have mentioned, but as dwelling together they would be happy in the joy of divine things.
S.McC. Just so. The difficult things have been gone through in the opening chapters of the book. The features of the man of sin and shame which appeared to the displacement of David and Solomon were thoroughly gone over in the first three chapters in the book, and Solomon is projected on to our view through the prophetic service of Nathan, the maternal influence of Bathsheba, and the moral weight acquired in military prowess of Benaiah, and Zadok comes into it as bringing the horn of oil out of the tent of meeting, to anoint Solomon.
L.I. Would such conditions as are before us in this chapter greatly facilitate recovery? I was thinking of @Luke 15, "How many hired servants of my father's have abundance of bread, and I perish here by famine," and it says "they began to make merry."
S.McC. Exactly. This involves the truth of @Luke 15, because @Luke 15 really involves Ephesians in the full result of it, that we have our happy, buoyant state of things in the house of God referred to there, all conducive to the help of returning ones such as is set out in the teaching.
D.A.I. So that Naomi had heard that Jehovah had visited his people to give them bread. Is that the forerunner of the movement to go back?
S.McC. Yes. Therefore the importance of settled relations between us that no moral distance should be allowed, that matters that require settling should be settled and settled quickly so that there are relations which tend to the promotion of these conditions of holy and happy felicity among the brethren.
{208}
G.H.W. Would the bringing in of the horn of oil into the tent of meeting bring in what the Spirit is as amongst the saints?
S.McC. Yes, it would point to a spiritual movement in which the Spirit of God is, making way for Christ. That is the only man that the Spirit of God will make way for. He will not make way for any other man, but Christ.
J.H. Do you suggest that the dealing with moral conditions suggested in the earlier chapters has particularly in mind the setting free for the enjoyment of the conditions suggested here?
S.McC. That is it exactly. It is making way for the wealth of Solomon's administration, especially in view of Judah and Israel being many, eating and drinking and making merry. There are thus conditions in which the truth prospers as indicated here.
C.A.I. So what we have considered in the chapter in regard to sonship in the first six verses, and then personality coming out in this way of superintending, things become regulated; is that necessary in view of this felicitous state of things being promoted?
S.McC. Well, exactly, and it is important that there should be this testimonially amongst us if the truth of the glad tidings is to prosper. Souls are going to get help. We need the enjoyment of the truth substantially with us and amongst us.
G.W.B. Hence your reference to the necessity to have things settled quickly that things might flow. Is that what you had in mind?
S.McC. That is right, and especially do we need to be helped to see the importance of putting our hand to matters. Someone was referring when we closed this morning to the fact that in two instances daughters of Solomon are referred to. Verse 11 it says "Ben-Abinadab had all the upland of Dor; Taphath the daughter of Solomon was his wife." And then later it
{209}
says in verse 15 as to Basmath: "Ahimaaz in Nephtali; he also took Basmath the daughter of Solomon as wife." We have the particular links in affinity with Solomon, not only King Solomon on the throne exercising the benign influence objectively, and affecting things subjectively throughout the whole realm, but we have these persons that are referred to -- Officers, persons of moral quality were linking on with all this in its objective way.
W.H.W. Would the two references given, give an indication that the superintendents were keeping in close touch with Solomon?
S.McC. That is what I thought in saying that there were links of affinity between them. That they were not only officially in the position, but there was a certain link in affinity with them, between Solomon and themselves.
W.H.W. Do you think these two references might have a bearing on our present day -- sisters being in the care meetings?
S.McC. Well, exactly, especially where you have matters working out in this way in regard to the administration of Solomon. "Solomon had twelve superintendents over all Israel; and they provided food for the king and his household: each man his month in the year had to make provision." And these women are brought into it, showing the important part that the sisters have in it too, while not so much is said about them, they are there.
C.A.I. So that apart from the side of sonship or what there may be in relation to Solomon officially, there is this link on a family line. The daughters of Solomon would bring in that side, wouldn't they?
S.McC. Well, they would, especially stressing the feminine side. The Lord has been helping us much as to the subjective and feminine side in recent years.
R.G.C. Would not a superintendent like this in
{210}
verse 15, choosing what is good and choice have a very powerful influence for good?
S.McC. A modifying influence, not modifying in the sense that the truth is modified, but we all know how our wives help to modify us. We can thank God for that, that we have wives, that help to modify our extremeness in certain ways, and the subjective element acts in a modifying way.
D.R.T. Would that be seen in Priscilla along with Aquila in the way they help Apollos?
S.McC. Exactly. Three times he is put first and three times she is put first.
W.H.W. As to your remarks bearing on the king's table, I think that is important, it would be far reaching with us. The superintendents not only caring exactly for Solomon's interests, but caring for the interests of the brethren so to speak. That links on, does it, with the administration that flows from King Solomon's table?
S.McC. And so it says in verse 27 "And those officers provided food for King Solomon, and for all who came to King Solomon's table, every man in his month: they let nothing be wanting." It is not only for King Solomon but for all who came to *King* Solomon's table. Notice the constant reference to the regal thought, and we need to keep regal thoughts in our minds from the standpoint of the administration in its heavenly bearing.
W.H.W. So that would be a real thought for us to have before us in relation to our local meetings -- prayer meetings and reading meetings, addresses, ministry meetings and so on.
S.McC. That is how administration would work out in effect and result. Reconciliation as it is brought in connection with the truth of the glad tidings involves unity and affection among the brethren. Now that is a point that we are inclined to miss in regard to reconciliation.
{211}
Reconciliation does not only affect me individually in the sense that all the distance is gone and I now am in the sense of God's pleasure and delight as before Him in Christ who is the point of complacency, but it involves our links with one another -- unity of affection among the brethren.
R.H. What is the scripture for that, @Luke 15?
S.McC. Well, that enters into it, but @Ephesians 2 which corresponds with @Luke 15, says, Of the Jew and Gentile in verse 14, "For he is our peace, who has made both one, and has broken down the middle wall of enclosure, having annulled the enmity in his flesh, the law of commandments in ordinances, that he might form the two in himself into one new man, making peace; and might reconcile *both* in one body to God by the cross, having by it slain the enmity; and, coming, he has preached the glad tidings of peace to you who were afar off, and the glad tidings of peace to those who were nigh. For through him we have both access by one Spirit to the Father. So then ye are no longer strangers and foreigners, but ye are fellow-citizens of the saints, and of the household of God." All that is pointing to the place that reconciliation has in the bringing of us together in the unity of affection in happy conditions in the house of God.
D.R.T. Is that what Paul is after in @Philippians 4 in the Epistle you referred to, "being of the same mind in the Lord?" I refer to the two sisters.
S.McC. Well, he has a word for them, showing the influence that sisters may have, and I think in the current crisis that we have been passing through in recent times, sometimes a great deal of reference is made to those that have led, but I think the sisters need a word as to where they have been in the conflict, what feelings have marked them, and it is not only necessary that the leaders get adjusted but the general
{212}
side to things amongst the brethren needs help too, so that we should all go on happily together.
J.H. With regard to the testimonial side, is the matter of eating and drinking and making merry, would that be a suggestion of eating Christ and drinking of the Spirit? and being in the joy of it?
S.McC. Well, it would involve an allusion to the Spirit. "The kingdom of God is not eating and drinking, but righteousness, and peace and joy in the Holy Spirit," as Paul says in Romans chapter 14.
C.A.I. In @Isaiah 56 the word is that "Also the sons of the alien ... " they have to be brought in in relation to Israel and made joyful in regard to God's house of prayer. If that is so with Israel, what should it be with the assembly?
S.McC. I think the Lord is helping us as to the Gospel that we should be more and more evangelical, on the outlook for souls in the open air and elsewhere, constantly on the outlook in view of the imminence of the translation, for the way we can help souls -- whether believers or unbelievers.
W.H.W. So would that be the reason why we have had pressed in ministry recently the heavenly side of the gospel being brought into it by those who serve?
S.McC. I think so. That is the point here because the more heavenly we are, the greater and wider is our outlook. You will remember that in the Colossian Epistle Paul says that he laboured to "present every man perfect in Christ." A remarkable statement as he comes on to church ground, because that does not mean every man among, the saints, the brethren, the people of God, it means every man, it means what it says "every man" -- he laboured in his ministry to "present *every man* perfect in Christ."
L.I. In relation to presenting the heavenly side of the gospel, what you have said as to the testimonial side seems very important. Would it be that if these conditions
{213}
are there in the way of witness the gospel would be greatly strengthened in the presentation of it.
S.McC. Well, that is the point. So that what Moses said, we want to be able to say to people "Come with us and we will do thee good," that is, we have something that we can draw the attention of persons to.
C.A.I. As to this heavenly side of things, would you say it is a matter not so much of attainment, but entering into the truth connected with what is established in the economy. The throne is supreme under the Father's ordering in love.
S.McC. Well, I think so, the man that takes the daughter of Solomon as his wife suggests that we are prepared to take on the light and truth that govern the position. We are not saying Well, it is beyond me, and I am not up to it, and I am not equal to it, the Lord helps us *all*, and it is a good thing for the young brothers and sisters to see this side, that the Lord helps us as we take on the truth.
C.A.I. So things are set before us in Christ adding the blessedness of what is in the mind of God for us as portrayed there; and what is seen there is also to be seen here.
S.McC. Well, exactly.
E.S.B. Is that why it says each man has *his* month, not *a* month?
S.McC. It is a beautiful touch that. "His month." We remember in Numbers, every prince has his day. I think God gives everyone of us our opportunity, and it is a great thing for the young brethren to see that now is their opportunity and to make the most of it. God loves to see what the month will bring out -- what the day will bring out so to say. "His month," not somebody else's month.
R.G.C. Would you say a word then as to why the provision for one day is so outlined?
S.McC. It seems to me, that the monthly side is
{214}
brought in as to the general tenor of the supply side on the part of the man, but then the "day" is brought in to show us the detailed side of the position, so it says, verse 22, "and Solomon's provision for one day was thirty measures of fine flour, and sixty measures of meal." Now this is to be noted, that the stable side in the position here is not all luxurious food, although it is good food, but it is substantial food which is needed to build up a sound heavenly constitution.
R.G.C. Are these conditions then to be constant, not to be spasmodic? Apparently this provision is for *every* day, although only one day is emphasised.
S.McC. That is it. It points to sustained conditions. That is every day, or one day, points to sustained conditions in this realm. There is not one week when there is an awful dearth and the next week where there is full and nothing lacking -- it is a sustained condition of things that is in mind here.
R.G.C. Did not one of our early brethren say that Christianity works in what we bring, not what we find. Is that the exercise to come out of this, to see what we are bringing to help in this constant supply?
S.McC. Well, that is it. That is what this teaching would help us to see, that we are given the opportunity to exploit whatever the area or region of exercise might be related to our responsibility. He has given us that to work out. Now what will we do? What first does this man that is called Ben-Geber in verse 13 -- it says "Ben-Geber, in Ramoth-Gilead; he had the villages of Jair the son of Manasseh, which are in Gilead; he had the region of Argob, which is in Bashan, sixty great cities with walls and bars of bronze." He did not come back and say to Solomon "I can't work out that territory, it is too difficult." That is the territory that was his, and our cities are the places where God has set us. Wherever we are we are to work out the
{215}
matters, wherever we have our area, and sphere of responsibility.
C.A.I. So if we are on the line of giving thanks to the Father who has made us fit and translated us into the kingdom of the Son of His love, the spirit of thanksgiving should characterise us?
S.McC. Well, exactly. There is nothing promotes spiritual prosperity like buoyant conditions in our souls. We are not ignoring the other side of the truth where the truth always brings about displacement in ourselves through pressure and difficulty and other means.
E.Br. Is this side of things -- of speaking to yourselves in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs?
S.McC. Yes. I think that enters into this chapter in a peculiar way, promoting the buoyant conditions that we have here -- "eating and drinking and making merry."
D.R.T. Would this be worked out in Ephesus? We read of the twelve there, twelve men, we read also of "reasoning daily" and it says there that they "heard the word of the Lord," it is like the food, is it?
S.McC. The word of the Lord would be regulating, the word of the Lord is mentioned on the great militant side in @Acts 19. In Corinth where we have the opening up of the mind of God it is the word of God that is alluded to.
W.H.W. Would the provisions in verses 22 and 23 be the exercises that brethren take up as we receive the ministry, and work these exercises out until there is something definite?
S.McC. That is what one is particularly thinking about and especially that the younger ones should be helped as to Mr. Darby's and Mr. Raven's and Mr. Stoney's ministry. The thirty measures of fine flour and sixty measures of meal represent the truth on the stable side in relation to what is needed in our souls. Good foundations you might say. The truth of deliverance
{216}
and the truth of union in Mr. Stoney's ministry, for instance.
W.H.W. So the thought of the king's table, you might say, fits into any local company?
S.McC. Well, it does. That is where it would work out practically, in the local company.
J.H. You speak of what is substantial. Is that to build what you were speaking of this morning -- substantial persons?
S.McC. That is it. That the things that we are talking about are not to be just fancied thoughts in our minds; pictures which delight our minds, but the truth is to affect us substantially, so that we are built up substantially with a constitution suited to the greatness of that which we have part in.
R.G.W. You can count on divine Persons seeing that this provision is available if we take on the responsibility of supplying it.
S.McC. We can count on it in the local gathering. Think of the importance of the Spirit of God when we come together to read the scriptures. We notice here that there is the measure of fine flour and sixty measures of meal. All that suggests what has come about through processed means. We know that the fine flour and the sixty measures of meal would have come through a process, but then we get for instance twenty oxen out of the pastures, *out* of the pastures, the immediate bearing as it were of the truth in freshness and in power in regard to matters.
B.D. Does this make for a balance in the ministry, so that no feature of the truth is over-stressed?
S.McC. Well, it does. And I do not think we generally realise the importance of the Synopsis -- Mr. Darby's Synopsis. A young man should read the Synopsis. Sometimes we say, well, Mr. Darby's ministry is difficult to read. It may be, but you will find that
{217}
the more you keep at it the more you will be drawn to it and the more you will be helped by it.
G.S.F. Does love enter into it? I mean the love of the truth? In Proverbs it speaks of loving wisdom.
S.McC. The love of the truth enters into it. Paul tells Timothy -- he says "thou hast fully followed up" his teaching, referring to the teaching. It is a great matter that the truth should be fully followed up.
A.M. Would you say that Solomon's provision is the aggregate of what each locality would provide? Are we dependent on that?
S.McC. Well, I think if you look at it working out locally it is the aggregate of what all the saints provide, and especially persons who are working out things in their souls.
C.A.I. So that each needs to be entering into satisfaction with happiness and joyfulness? And that would be brought into the meetings, would it not?
S.McC. It is an important thing that we should see in the locality how the principle of Solomon's provision is to be worked out, for some say "Well, we want to get fresh application of the truth." Well, that is good, and important that we make room for the Spirit, but we want to get what is linked with the truth known and enjoyed in a foundational way, too. That is what gives substance to the position.
A.T.S. With regard to Mr. Darby's writings, is it not striking that the basic foundation of everything that has come out since is covered there?
S.McC. Just so. And beloved Mr. Taylor has drawn our attention to the fact that it is important that we should read the Synopsis.
R.G.N. Is it not essential to get the true basic bearing of the truth before it can be applied to any matter locally?
S.McC. Well, it is, otherwise we may fail in rightly applying it.
{218}
G.A.A. So the Apostle says to Timothy, "Have an outline of sound words?"
S.McC. That is it. "Sound words." How important that is that we should have the truth in a sound way. Soundness is a great word in the Epistles.
G.H.W. Does this work out as linked with the king, the man Christ Jesus, who has gone up into heaven?
S.McC. That the Lord is on the throne on high, not on His own throne. Solomon sat on the throne of David his father, sat on the throne of Jehovah instead of David his father and the Lord Jesus is in that position on high, and things are working out from Him up there as our brother was alluding in his prayer. He is up there and the Spirit is down here and what is down here is commensurate with what is up there. That is a great thing to get into our souls.
A.M. Mr. Raven said "Grace is commensurate with glory."
S.McC. It is.
G.W.B. So we have the course charted for us, have we, plotted out and with all this to help us we should learn the more quickly?
S.McC. Well, we should. There is no time to be lost in view of the imminence of the rapture. The Lord's coming is near and we should all be watching, not only waiting but watching day by day because it is near.
E.S.W. Does @Psalm 16 bring out what he thinks of what he has down here? "To the saints, ... the  excellent thou hast said, in them is all my delight."
S.McC. Yes. Showing the dignity of the saints from that viewpoint.
R.G.C. What about the animals that like the heights, the harts, gazelles and the fallow-deer?
S.McC. Well, I suppose they would all represent features of food which would affect the saints constitutionally. That is, the harts and gazelles would not be
{219}
cumbersome in their movements like the ox, and the oxen are referred to. They, the oxen, fill a certain position. You remember how they come in later on to support the great administration of cleansing in the sea, but here it is a matter of the food that they present. They would build up a constitution in the saints which would result in some feature corresponding to what the oxen suggest. The same with the harts, the gazelles and the fallow-deer.
G.A.A. Would the hart represent alertness that we might be able to pick up what the spirit of God has in mind for the moment?
S.McC. That is it. Alertness and sensitiveness, involving the making room for the Holy Spirit.
D.R.T. I was going to ask, would there be a link in that way with the victuals that had to be prepared before passing over the Jordan?
S.McC. Yes. The subject of food is very extensive in the scriptures. We get food for various positions -- food for leaving Egypt, food for the wilderness, food for crossing the Jordan, and food when we have crossed the Jordan. I would think that the harts, gazelles, fallow-deer and fatted fowl, is food that belongs to the "land." That builds up the kind of constitution that can enjoy the land.
G.W.B. So that in @Song of Songs 2 we have: "My beloved is like a gazelle or a young hart."
S.McC. Well, there it is. It is not their food but it is working out in the persons, working out in the object of the lover there and I think you would see this feature in the assembly in our relations with Christ. Rebecca *sprang* off the camel. Achsah you will remember was marked by movement, in regard to the upper and the nether springs.
C.A.I. Spiritual agility would be implied and these features would be native to the land.
S.McC. Well, they are. And they would save us
{220}
from ponderous movements when it comes to this side of the truth. If we have become crystallised in our outlook our movements will become correspondingly ponderous and difficult, but if we are moving in the energy of the Spirit, making room for the Spirit, we shall be marked by grace in our movements spiritually and sensitiveness, suggested in these animals.
C.A.I. And yet with a holy liberty in it all?
S.McC. Yes.
H.B. The reference to them in the end of @Song of Songs 2 is "be thou like a gazelle or a young hart, upon the mountains of Bether," which as the footnote suggests means ravines. Do you think this quality in the saints would enable us to move where things are difficult?
S.McC. So that to rightly fill out the position we have to enjoy the truth from the heavenly side, that is what it would convey.
W.H.W. So the man from Baal-shalishah brings the right kind of food for the king's table, would you say? He comes in from the heavenly side.
S.McC. He is a remarkable man. We are told he came from Baal-shalishah, but what his reputation was, well we just do not know anything about it. We make a good deal of reputation -- persons who have a reputation, but here is a man who comes in with what is needed, and it says of him that he had "bread of the first-fruits, twenty loaves of barley, and fresh ears of corn in his sack. And he said, "Give to the people that they may eat." He represents an unknown element coming in mysteriously, somebody who has got something, and we have to make room for that among the people of God.
Rem. He comes in with food prepared for eating, does he not, but then he has also unprepared food. What does that suggest?
S.McC. It might link with the twenty oxen out of
{221}
the pastures. There might be a lot to be done afterwards, but there it is. Anyway it is quite a contrast to the great pot and the gourds that are shred into it. Our Bible readings should not become opportunities for the fancied novelties of the natural mind, because the natural mind likes to speculate and to roam in things. We can make room for the Spirit so that the teaching is sound.
R.G.W. The Lord speaks in Matthew of the householder who brings out of his treasure things new and old. Would that have a bearing on what you are speaking of?
S.McC. Well, exactly. Every scribe discipled to the kingdom of the heavens. That is, he is one who has come under training. Discipleship in Matthew involves regular training, regular education, and I think with all of us, especially the younger ones, that they want to lay themselves out for discipleship as in Matthew's Gospel. The Lord says "Every scribe *discipled* to the kingdom of the heavens is like a man that is a householder." Many young brethren want to know how to get on in the truth. They want to know how to prosper in their souls. Well, the thing is to give themselves over to what the Lord speaks of -- discipleship in Matthew's Gospel. Every scribe *discipled* to the kingdom of the heavens.
G.W.B. Would there not, too, be something in it for us all, those of us who are older that there may be a quicker prospering with us?
S.McC. Yes. The idea of being discipled to the kingdom of the heavens is not a thing coming out of the air. It is a question of what enters into your life, the forming disciplinary processes that disciplined to the kingdom of the heavens alludes to.
L.I. Is it good to bear the yoke in our youth in that way?
S.McC. Well, it is. It is an important thing that we
{222}
should not be afraid of the yoke in our youth, as Jeremiah says in the Lamentations.
W.H.W. Is all this working so delightful to King Solomon that his mind turns now to the house?
S.McC. The closing verses allude to the remarkable increase in the ministry, we might say, where sonship is in such prominence in Solomon, as in verse 29, involving wisdom and very great understanding and largeness of heart. It leads us to this verse 32, "three thousand proverbs; and his songs were a thousand and five," and all that he speaks of would suggest I think the great variety which we have in our ministry flowing out of all this.
G.W.B. Would you say something as to "largeness of heart?"
S.McC. Well, that fits in with the Church Epistles, "Love ... towards all the saints."
L.I. So is this in simple language a universal language and interest? In all that pertains to the assembly?
S.McC. That is it. We must not be narrow in our outlook. We must not be localised. We must not be parochial. We want to have a large outlook embracing all the saints.
C.A.I. How would that apply in these days? Is it limited to those we are walking with in the truth?
S.McC. No. We are holding the ground for our brethren who are not in the truth. We sorrow over the matter that they are not in the truth, but we have to work out things with those who are in the truth, that we can work out the truth with, but we carry our brethren in our hearts, at least we should.
W.H.W. So would your remarks bear on @Luke 14?
S.McC. Exactly.
W.H.W. Celebration of grace. The Lord coming out in the largeness of His thoughts.
S.McC. So that would help us greatly in our outlook in the administration, whether it involves the gospel
{223}
reaching to souls that are not yet saved, or whether in regard to souls that have been adversely affected and need help in relation to the truth.
G.W.B. Including those who have been withdrawn from? You said something elsewhere as to our attitude towards such.
S.McC. Well, the Lord is helping us to serve with the same objective as He has, and that is recovery. But of course we must not become unbalanced in the truth. We must not allow the truth to get out of balance in our minds. We want to serve persons as much as we can on a priestly basis to help them with the truth, such as you have referred to.
T.M. Would that be effected as having to do with God as to persons?
S.McC. Exactly. If you were praying for a person, and I think that anyone that approaches a person with a view to helping them should pray about them first. The only way that they can have moral power with a person is as they pray for them.
S.L. That would not be what is momentary, would it? It is what would be continuous.
S.McC. Well, it is a great thing that we should continue in prayer, especially for those who have been withdrawn from. We are not to forget them. Someone was saying to me the other day that someone suggested they should not be prayed for. Why should they not be prayed for?
C.A.I. Do you think such persons would be included in the prayer in @1 John 5, "If any see his brother sinning a sin not unto death, he shall ask and he shall give him life"? Would such persons be excluded from that kind of prayer?
S.McC. No, they would not. We find that Solomon's great prayer is a great lesson to every one of us with regard to those who may get away and be marked by famine and lack of rain and other things. He says
{224}
when they turn towards this house, the place where God has set his name, God will hear, showing what a place all these conditions had in his mind.
G.W.B. Would you say that priestly contact with such would greatly assist and set forward?
S.McC. Yes. Not social contact. We should never promote social contact with persons that have been withdrawn from. If we can help them on a priestly basis, by priestly means, then good, but everyone of us remember that it is essential that it must be priestly otherwise if they are unrepentant we may become defiled by what has defiled them.
T.R.H. Deuteronomy says in relation to the cities of refuge, that they were to make a way to it. Do you think we should keep a way open?
S.McC. We certainly should. That enters into verse 25, "and Israel dwelt safely." If there is any place where we should understand safety, if there is any place where the young people should be made to understand safety it is in the assembly. It is the only place they are safe. If there are any young people here who wonder as to whether they will be able to get through High School or through their business, if they are outside the fellowship, the thing is to commit themselves to the fellowship; they will get all the protection that is linked with the administration in that realm to see them through.
L.I. So the Lord added to the assembly such as were to be saved.
S.McC. Well, exactly.
R.G.C. And referring to the other person who is not with us, if such person confess his sin and forsake it, should he not immediately find mercy and come back into the place of safety and protection?
S.McC. Well, that is what the Lord is helping us to see. The glory of redemption is to lay hold of our souls so that we can become more and more forgiving,
{225}
not excusing evil, not passing over evil, because redemption does not pass over evil, but a willingness to act like God.
E.S.W. The whole city was moved at Naomi's return?
S.McC. Yes, exactly.
G.A.A. Referring to your remark as to prayers for persons withdrawn from, I take it you mean that we should be free to pray for them at our prayer meetings.
S.McC. Well, we do. We have young brothers and sisters who have been withdrawn from. Are we not going to pray for them? We certainly pray for them, for we want to see them fully recovered.
G.A.A. Well, I think we need help in that because I don't think it has been a practice in New Zealand.
S.McC. On what basis?
G.A.A. I am seeking to enquire for the help of the brethren here so that we may be freer to express prayer for withdrawn-from persons. I am glad you brought the matter up.
S.McC. The very last word in the book of the Revelation is "let him that hears say, Come. And let him that is athirst come; he that will, let him take the water of life freely." The way is open for persons to come back. Verse 14: "Blessed are they that wash their robes, that they may have right to the tree of life," as though the door is open for returning persons. On the other hand if persons do not want to return it says, "let him that does unrighteously, do unrighteously still; and let the filthy make himself filthy still; and let him that is righteous practise righteousness still," but the door is always open for returning ones.
A.R.G. I think we followed the ministry that was given that at the very time of withdrawing we should look for recovery. That was brought to us in ministry, was it not, and I think the brethren accepted it and are acting on it?
T.G.M. Well, if we are acting on it, we are surely
{226}
free to pray for a person, but could you help us as to how we should address them, as a brother or sister?
S.McC. Well, how would you address them?
T.G.M. I would address them in the way I felt was due, that was my feeling, am I right?
S.McC. You would not use endearing expressions because there is a reserve that has come in. You would not speak of "our *dear* brother" and "our *beloved* brother in Christ" or anything like that, but then abstractly they belong to the family of God, the link has never been broken. Withdrawing from persons never breaks the link in the family of God. It breaks the communal link; that is, the link in fellowship and communion in our practical relations with one another, but it never interferes with what is basic. We do not deliver persons over to Satan in our day. That was apostolic.
R.G.C. They may forfeit certain privileges, but they do not forfeit their status in the family, do they?
S.McC. In the family of God, no, but we could not speak of them normally in endearing terms as of the family of God, because the very fact that they are practising sin is contrary to their nature as belonging to the family of God. He that is begotten of God does not sin, so we would be sparing in our references as to terms of endearment, but they are still our brother or sister.
W.H.U. Would you pray for them as a brother or a sister, or as wanderers, those out of the way?
S.McC. Well, the only thing I can say is that in our local meeting we have prayed for them as brothers or sisters who have gone out into the world and have been withdrawn from.
C.A.I. That is why that verse in @1 John 5, "if anyone see his brother sinning a sin not unto death," is not limited to a certain position in the testimony, is it?
S.McC. Well, as I say there would be care in the
{227}
use of our expressions depending on the degree of the sin. But there are young persons of whom we must make a difference. We have persons that we constantly pray for, who have been withdrawn from.
G.W.B. Not wishing to delay, but going back to that for a moment. In certain parts the idea has been that you leave persons with the Lord.
S.McC. Yes, but then the Lord is in heaven, is He not? We are down here, we have to deal with persons. The Lord is in heaven, so the thing works out through the priests. We have to deal with persons, although we must keep the balance of the truth in our minds, "let him be to *thee* as one of the nations and a tax-gatherer." We must keep that matter clear in our minds.
H.T. @1 Corinthians 5, it does not suggest there that you call the person a brother. It speaks of him, verse 5, "him that has so wrought this: to deliver him, being *such*, to Satan."
S.McC. But read down! Come down further -- verse 11. Read verse 11.
H.T. "But now I have written to you, if any one called *brother* be fornicator."
S.McC. You see it comes in there as to the matter, but then it says, verse 13, not "the brother" but "remove the *wicked person* from amongst yourselves." That is, he has become so characterised by this thing, this element of evil, that it clothed him -- a wicked person. Nevertheless Paul writes in his second epistle to assure them of his love when repentance takes place.
J.R. Do you think there is the danger of us being governed by tradition, instead of being governed by the truth?
S.McC. Well, it may be. There is always that danger.
H.T. How would you regard this person spoken of then, this wicked person, until recovery comes about?
S.McC. Well, what does @Matthew 18 say, what does
{228}
the scripture say? What does the word of God say? @Matthew 18, verse 17: "But if he will not listen to them, tell it to the assembly; and if also he will not listen to the assembly, let him be to *thee*." That is, not exactly to the assembly, but to *thee*. That is, each one of us as responsible "as one of the nations and a tax-gatherer." "*As* one of the nations" so there is the metaphor, not that he *is* one of the nations, but *as* one of the nations.
J.H. That is on account of his present position in that way?
S.McC. Exactly.
R.G.C. What does that involve then, "as one" in your mind?
S.McC. Well, there can be no social contact or intercourse with such.
C.A.I. That is the matter of attitude towards him.
S.McC. Yes, matter of attitude towards him.
H.T. Now in praying for such, how would we address the Lord in regard of such?
S.McC. Well, how would you address the Lord in regard of such?
H.T. Well, I wouldn't be happy to say brother.
S.McC. On what basis?
H.T. Well, if there is recovery there or repentance it makes the position a little different, does it not? Would you not expect to see that? No doubt it would be right to carry them prayerfully before the Lord in view of recovery, but does it not bring in the breach upon those relationships?
S.McC. It brings in a breach on the fellowship in those relationships. @1 Corinthians 5, verse 11, says "if any one called brother be fornicator, or avaricious, or idolater, or abusive, or a drunkard, or rapacious, not to mix with him; with such a one not even to eat." That is very plain. Now he says "if any one called brother," notice that, "for what have I to do with judging those outside
{229}
also? ye, do not ye judge them what are within? But those without God judges. Remove the *wicked person*," not the brother now, "the wicked person from amongst yourselves." I mean there would be no point, in judging a sin like this, in clothing the person by speaking of what he is in the family of God, because he is clothed with the sin, yet *abstractly* in your mind you hold him as belonging to the family of God. Concretely he is this wicked person. He is clothed and covered with this wickedness, but abstractly in your mind he belongs to the family of God, but clothed with this thing, coloured by it, and there can be no communion or carrying on with him.
D.R.T. Would you differentiate between the "in Christ" position and being "in the Lord?" This is not a subject, which is exactly wasting time, because there has been a great deal said about it in this city and a lot of enquiry made as to it.
S.McC. Well, if the brethren need help, and we want to get help, we can afford to delay a minute or two longer. What is the difficulty that you have?
A.R.G. Does not the Spirit of God seem to use the word "brother" almost entirely in connection with relations one with another, and although those in relation thus with one another do belong to the family, yet the word "brother" is not introduced or emphasised in connection with the family side, is it? I thought scripture, especially John's epistle and other references in the Old Testament seem to indicate that the term "brother" has force in connection with our relations with one another; and if we have to break the relations with one another as we do in withdrawal, the force of the word "brother" ceases meanwhile. Is that right? Mr. Taylor has said "it is equal to putting to death."
S.McC. As regards our practical communion or fellowship, but certainly not as regards our abstract relations in the family of God.
{230}
A.R.G. No, I do not think anybody has thought it severs anything in the abstract line. I have never heard of anyone thinking that in this district.
G.W.B. If that is so, would you be free in a becoming and in a restrained and quiet way to pray for the "brother" and the "sister," is that so?
S.McC. Well, you certainly would.
G.W.B. So the relationship as son is not broken. Once a son always a son.
S.McC. It would seem by what is said that that is not the difficulty.
W.H.W. Does not priestliness answer the difficulty? The priest in the first place considers for God, secondly for the fellowship, thirdly for the person concerned.
S.McC. I would think that it would all depend on what is in the brother's mind when he speaks of the brother. If he has in mind the social side, the side of fellowship, or communion, then I would say it is wrong to speak that way, but if the brother is speaking of what the person is basically, as belonging to the family of God and seeking his recovery, why should he not speak of him as brother? Certainly it would not be sin to refer to him as brother in praying for such and their recovery.
W.H.W. Quite so. I think you helped us in Auckland on that very point, did you not?
S.McC. It says in regard of Lot when he was taken captive, "And Abraham heard that his *brother* was taken captive." I think it all depends on what is in a brother's mind when he is using the expression.
A.R.G. Yes. I think it is due to brethren to believe, and I personally believe, that the exercise underlying this is that the careless use of such a term undermines the very important principle of holiness and separation. It leaves certain persons in the minds of many brethren almost on the same footing as they were before, for
{231}
sometimes dreadful conduct, we have had to withdraw from them.
S.McC. Well, if a person is going on in dreadful conduct, and sin, his very conduct denies the relationship, so you would have great hesitancy in referring to him as a brother because of the conduct that marks him.
A.R.G. That is it. What gave rise to the exercise in a specific way was a case of fornication, thoroughly established without the slightest ground for disputing it.
S.McC. Well, of course, fornication may be dealt with on the principle of @Galatians 6, verse 1.
A.R.G. This was a course though.
S.McC. Well, if it was like what we have here in @1 Corinthians 5, it says "remove the wicked person from amongst yourselves."
A.R.G. Clearly. I mean the cases in the minds of the brethren clearly come in the category of @1 Corinthians 5. We get grace as you were pointing out in the 2nd Epistle do we not, when recovery is in view?
S.McC. So it would resolve itself, as we have said, in what the brother is thinking of when he says that. Is he thinking of what the person is abstractly in the family of God, or is he thinking of him according to normal privileges in fellowship and communion? If it is the latter I would say it was wrong, if the former I should not have any difficulty with it. Certainly you would not charge a brother with sin if he did refer to one withdrawn from as a brother.
D.A.I. What is the bearing of @Luke 15, the shepherd leaves the ninety and nine to go after the one which is lost?
S.McC. Well, the sheep is always the sheep in that sense. That is the primary thought. If you are thinking of the brother as the primary thought, as of the family of God, well we pray for our brethren that are in the systems around. Surely we call them our
{232}
brethren although their conduct denies the relationship.
E.S.W. At the end it says, "this thy brother was dead and has come to life again."
S.McC. Just so.
A.R.G. Would it be right to think of the abstract side more as connected in the mind of the Spirit with the children more than brother or sister? Would the abstract side, the family side, be linked more with born of God, His children?
S.McC. Well, you might get into difficulty on those lines, because the Lord says one is your master and all ye are brethren.
C.A.I. "Thou shalt not abhor an Edomite, he is thy brother."
W.H.U. Why is that term "wicked person" retained in that last verse of the 5th chapter?
S.McC. To show the right judgment we should have of the person as not dissociated from the sin. We would deal with the principle of evil or sin from which he refuses to dissociate himself; but as refusing to dissociate himself, we must necessarily deal with him, because he is covered by the thing -- the wicked person. Therefore if we are thinking of the outward course of the person and his movements in relation to the brethren, it would not do to refer to him as brother -- he is a wicked person; but if we are carrying in our thoughts what he is as of the family of God, and he still belongs to the family of God, he is our brother.
R.G.C. So that if we are burying one who has died out of fellowship like that, we would surely refer to burying the body of our brother, committing his body as our brother to the Lord, would we not?
S.McC. There would be a true regard to the whole position. In Chronicles some of the kings were buried in the sepulchres of the kings, another was buried in a separate house in the wilderness, showing that all that
{233}
would enter into a burial, that a right appraisal is given of the person's course.
T.P.M. I think what you said as to the way we speak of them, as dear brother, or beloved brother, should help us. There is no need to do that.
S.McC. Well, how could you speak of a wicked person as your dear brother or a beloved brother?
T.P.M. I quite agree with that. I think that helps very much.
S.McC. But if anyone is speaking of what the person is abstractly in the family of God, why should there be difficulty?
M.W. Of the prodigal son, when he came back, the father says "thy brother," so it would seem as if he was a brother right through, according to the way the scripture reads. He does not lose the title "brother" in the relationship, even although he is away in a far country.
S.McC. Just so.
W.H.U. That would be a self-judged brother, would it not?
S.McC. Do you mean the younger son? In @Luke 15?
W.H.U. Yes, is that the one you were referring to?
S.McC. Well, he is a repenting sinner, we can say that. He is coming back. Self-judgment is there.
J.B.I. What is repentance? Does confession and the forsaking of sin alter our outlook on the person?
S.McC. Well, it does. Repentance is a change of mind. A person has been going on in sin and he changes his mind about it. He has been justifying himself, and he recognises that is sin. His mind is changed. That is repentance.
A.R.G. Does it involve seeing things as God sees them?
S.McC. Yes.
A.R.G. That is what we were taught in my younger
{234}
days was repentance. That the soul is brought to see a thing as God sees it. Only in measure of course.
S.McC. Yes, our capacities vary. You would not expect of a younger person what you would expect of an older person, but repentance is repentance wherever it is found. Mr. Darby rejected the thought of quantitative repentance in his writings.
S.L. In @Matthew 18 the word is "if he hear thee, thou has gained thy brother."
S.McC. Yes.
J.H. Do we need a deeper knowledge of God in an understanding of His love so that we know how to act and speak in each matter as helped by the Spirit?
S.McC. Well, we do.
J.H. Not having a fixed rule exactly, but understanding God's thoughts better.
S.McC. That is right. Although I should think in regard to what has been said it would be a good deal governed by what the person has before him, because we pray for our brethren in all the systems around, some of them are going on with tremendous wickedness, but we pray for them as our brethren, as belonging abstractly to the family of God, but not available to us, and so it might be as regards one withdrawn from. We regard him abstractly as belonging to the family of God, although concretely he may be marked by the opposite we solicit God in relation to his recovery and restoration.
{235}
DIGNITY AND WEALTH IN ADMINISTRATION (3)
@1 Kings 5
S.McC. Just as the assembly occupies a great place in the mind of Christ at the present time, so all the features of administration that we have been considering would subserve the great thought of the house, the assembly as we speak of it as typified in the house that Solomon built. And great extensive operations come into view which would remind us of the Lord operating mediately through Paul by the Spirit, in relation to the extensiveness of the work, the assembly as developed in Paul's ministry. So that Paul in the 15th of Romans speaks of the extensive scope of labour in relation to his service as he says, that he would not speak of the things that Christ wrought by him in the power of the Spirit from Jerusalem round to Illyricum where he had fully preached the gospel of Christ. That was quite an extensive sphere in those days and this links on with the extensive side of the operations here in relation to the house and especially should we see how the foundational side comes into view. The house being exceeding magnifical as the Spirit of God calls our attention to it through David. Much enters into the foundational side. I think the Lord is seeking to help us in regard to the foundational side; so that we don't build a tremendous superstructure, as it were, without the foundations right in our souls. Foundations are a very important matter and ministry which bears on that side of the truth. So the bringing in of the sea and the conveyance of the timber by sea refers to one side in relation to the foundations and then the stonemasons in the mountains and the great stones and costly stones and hewn stones
{236}
all lay stress in this chapter on the foundational side of the truth. I think we might get help in seeing the greatness of the house as it is in mind and the foundations linked with it. Because 1 Kings presents the truth of Christianity, of the assembly from the standpoint of heavenly greatness. It is a vast system of things marked by dignity and greatness. We need to get great thoughts into our minds. We need to be enlarged; not to be narrowed up. We need to see what the Lord has in mind. He has nothing less than the whole assembly in mind as He speaks to Philadelphia. In speaking to Philadelphia He has got the whole assembly in mind. We must not take pretentious ground publicly and say that we are Philadelphia. We must beware of sectarianism, beware of crediting ourselves only with something that the Lord credits to the whole assembly. And the greatness of the house in 1 Kings would remind us of that. Yet in Philadelphia the promises are to those faithful to the truth.
C.A.I. When you speak of the foundational side are you thinking of these trees, cedar trees and the cypress, timber of cedar and timber of cypress, and then the stones?
S.McC. Yes, and the processes, that is, the conveyance by sea in regard to the timber and the hewing. Great stones, costly stones and hewn stones, all allude to what enters into the foundational side.
C.A.I. Would you say a little more as to what you have in mind as to the foundational side?
S.McC. Well, the Lord would bring us back to the teaching of the glad tidings as to where we are in our souls as to the very foundational features of the truth, both in our links with God and in our links with one another; the epistle to Romans and the epistle to Corinthians all entering into the foundational side.
W.H.W. Do you think in regard to the great
{237}
thought in our minds that the Lord may have had that in His mind in speaking to the Father in @John 17, "The men whom Thou gavest me," how He stresses that? And it was in their hearing.
S.McC. Yes, you mean in the thought of the men.
W.H.W. Yes, and their gathering the great thoughts that were in the Lord's mind.
S.McC. Yes, so that the Lord utters what He says in @John 17 in their hearing. How He would elevate them in their minds and thoughts in what He says to the Father, and His great outlook in relation to divine thoughts.
L.I. Can we see the foundations too as Paul would speak of them in the beginning of the epistle to the Corinthians? He says, "I have laid the foundations." Would there be something in that epistle that would help us as to the foundations?
S.McC. I thought so, "For other foundation can no man lay besides that which is laid which is Jesus Christ." That is that order of man. He refused the features linked with the first order of man. He aimed in his ministry and in his service at what was linked with the new order of man in Jesus Christ.
G.W.B. Had you in mind to say anything about the cutting of timber by the Zidonians, none being like them?
S.McC. Well, the matter of experience at cutting shows that it would reflect the care that enters into the preparation of the material for the house. Think of the Lord's care in regard to the disciples, the amount of time and service He spent on them. What a tribute to His work in the second of the Acts when the Spirit comes in and the assembly is thus formed. The nucleus of the assembly was the product of the work of Christ in preparing the material for the reception of the Spirit.
{238}
G.A.A. Is it noticeable that the building proceeds under restful conditions as we see in this chapter?
S.McC. It is very important, because there is the side of conflict linked with the Davidic side of the truth which is important, but on the Solomonic side, the thought of rest and peace is stressed. And it is very striking that all the wealth of the greatness of divine thoughts in regard to Christ and the assembly has come out from that side of things. Colossians and Ephesians were written in the prison where Paul was laid aside from all his labours and had time and opportunity to go over the truth, restfully.
C.A.I. Peace is a great feature in both those epistles, is it not?
S.McC. It is. Both in Colossians and in Ephesians a good deal is made of peace.
G.W. Does the gospel bring to light in the soul, foundations for the house of God?
S.McC. Well, it does. The gospel of God concerning His Son, brings into our minds and into our souls the elevation on which God is operating even in the glad tidings, having in mind the house from this viewpoint, the assembly in all its greatness as a divine abode.
A.I. Paul twice in the second chapter to the Galatians refers to the truth of the glad tidings.
S.McC. Exactly, the truth of the glad tidings.
A.I. I was thinking that perhaps that would be foundational.
S.McC. Well, it is, very foundational, entering into our understanding of the glory of redemption. The great foundations that are linked with the way that God has approached men in view of men being liberated from sin and Satan, set up in relation to Himself and His own great thoughts.
T.R.H. Is the end of the epistle to the Romans in just that line, "To him who is able to establish you
{239}
according to my glad tidings and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the mystery," and so on? Is that in keeping with what you are suggesting to us?
S.McC. Showing how the truth of the glad tidings is leading to this great thought of the assembly.
A.M. Would you say that the glad tidings in their foundational bearing are set forth in the work in the quarries? Afterwards we find that in the actual building there is neither axe nor hammer. Would that answer more to Ephesians and Colossians?
S.McC. I suppose it would. The fitting corresponds with @Ephesians 2, where it says, "In whom all the building fitted together increases to a holy temple in the Lord." That would correspond to the latter part you referred to. The epistle to the Romans enters into the thought of the sea. We want to see the water, the need of the water. How it is needed, the water. Romans stresses the water in regard to baptism. It involves the administration of death in a basic way.
G.W.B. Is there something for us in the thought of rafts, by sea in rafts?
S.McC. Well, there might be. I don't know just what might be conveyed in it. We have to work out the truth with others. We find that even in relation to the foundational side that we are set together with others in the working out of the truth.
L.I. In referring to the sea, you are thinking of @Romans 6, are you? But the process is different with the stones. Would that be the seventh? What did you have in mind in the two processes?
S.McC. Well, the sixth of Romans would enter into the teaching in relation to the sea, because the water comes in there in baptism, the death of Christ bearing on our deliverance from the world. All that enters into the preparation of the material for the house of God.
{240}
A.R.G. You had in mind the conveying of the materials, did you not? What is the thought in that? You mentioned it in your brief outline, did you not?
S.McC. Well, the stress on the water. 1 Kings makes a lot of the water and we need to make a lot of the water. We need to make a lot of the water side of the teaching in the truth of the glad tidings. It is one thing to know the side linked with the blood. That is an important side, the expiation of guilt. John insists in his epistle in relation to the truth of the glad tidings on the water and the blood. He says, "This is he that came by water and blood ... not by water only but by water and blood." So that we are to keep both sides in mind. But this here is not stressing the side of the blood but stressing the side of the water, involving purification through death. It involves the administration of death.
W.H.W. Would that correspond with the early chapters of the Acts where baptism comes into view and is stressed?
S.McC. It shows that as the truth of the assembly was established and proceeding in relation to the apostles¬ doctrine and teaching, much was made of baptism in the early chapters of the Acts.
A.M. To Saul it was said, "Arise and get baptised and have thy sins washed away."
S.McC. We might say, "Well, only God can wash away sins." But there is the word to Paul to arise and wash away his sins, baptism being the means, the "modus operandi" in the matter.
D.R.T. Is it interesting to see that the beloved apostle mentions names, persons in whom the foundations would be seen, in Corinthians 1? He says a good deal as to baptism in that chapter.
S.McC. He does. There is not so much difficulty in our time as to the ordinance of baptism. There are two ordinances in Christianity and only two; the
{241}
ordinance of baptism and the ordinance of the Lord's supper. And there is not much difficulty in regard to the ordinance. The difficulty is, I suppose, in the teaching of the glad tidings in relation to baptism; separation from the world, from the great sin system. We can never be rightly in the assembly unless the truth of the water from that standpoint is fully made room for in our souls.
W.H.U. Is there any suggestion in being brought from Lebanon by sea, the timber I was speaking of?
S.McC. Well, the sea is stressing the water side. We must keep in mind that the cedars have in mind the dignity of the saints from this viewpoint, as set up in the house of God. The house of God is marked by the cedar on the inside. It is the suggestion of spiritual dignity, the dignity of those who are in mind, but then the sea suggests the water process.
C.A.I. It is remarkable, would you think, that it is in such an extensive form, the idea of the sea?
S.McC. Well, it is. One was saying that 1 Kings makes a good deal of the water. You get the formal administration of cleansing suggested in the sea which held two thousand baths of water, then you get the ten lavers which contained additional supplies of water. Why all this stress on the water in 1 Kings? I believe it is to help us to see that we can only reach the great thoughts as to the assembly in the light of the type here, as much is made of the water. That is, the death of Christ in its separating and purifying aspect.
E.J.W. Would you say why Hiram makes the proposal to use the sea, rather than Solomon?
S.McC. You are alluding to verse 9. Well, Hiram comes into the subject. We have been going a little bit ahead without taking account of Hiram. He is a remarkable person, this Hiram. It says in verse 1 "And Hiram king of Tyre sent his servants to Solomon for he had heard that they had anointed him
{242}
king in the place of his father, for Hiram always loved David." Now, he represents a feature that we have to be on the lookout for. There are different features that appear in different ways like Moses¬ father-in-law, and others like him. Rahab is another one. How they come on to view in relation to the truth, suggesting, I think, that in regard to the immensity of the scope of divine operations, we are to be on the outlook in regard to where God is working and operating. Because Hiram does not belong to Israel.
R.C. Would you say that this is no secret love but it is practical and active?
S.McC. It is a great matter that our love should be practical and active. It says, "For Hiram always loved David." He represents a certain mysterious feature connected with the work of God.
C.A.I. Persons that we generally may not expect much from, but they come into view as moving toward Solomon in this great matter.
S.McC. Yes, like the man whom he sends out of Tyre to help in the forming of the vessels of brass. It says, "King Solomon sent and fetched Hiram out of Tyre." He was a widow's son of the tribe of Naphtali and his father was a man of Tyre, a worker in brass. These are peculiar elements that come to light in the building of the house in relation to Solomon. We are to be on the outlook for this kind of thing.
W.H.W. Would it be too much to say that Hiram really, in what he does, brings out what is in Solomon's mind? I was wondering whether he does not provide a link between all that God established in the reign of David with what He is going to establish in the reign of Solomon.
S.McC. Well, I think he does. Just like Rahab sets on certain matters with the spies in regard to their service. And just like Reuel or Jethro sets on certain matters with Moses in @Exodus 18. These elements
{243}
are remarkable in that way, that they bring out certain things which are taken on. You will remember, Jethro brought out the matter as to administration and Moses took it on.
E.Br. Do you think that the feature of spiritual expectancy might provide the opportunity for God to bring this into the testimony at any time. Peter, also, on the housetop getting ready for Cornelius to be brought in.
S.McC. Exactly, so that as we have been saying, we are to be on the outlook for what God may be doing in a mysterious kind of way, in others.
D.R.T. Timothy coming on the scene, with a good genealogy on his mother's side, his father a Greek. Paul finds him.
S.McC. Timothy comes on to the scene as one who has a good testimony of the brethren. Apparently he was known among the brethren.
A.R.G. Would you make it a little clearer as to how far this outlook is to extend? Have you in mind the brethren that we thankfully walk with, or have you something a little beyond that?
S.McC. We should always have in mind what God may be doing at large. The work of God is remarkable and we are not to be narrowed in our view but we are to think of what God may be doing and what God may be bringing in, in relation to His thoughts. John speaks of the great fish in the 21st chapter.
A.R.G. You sometimes find a great lover of Christ, would you say? Would it be a fellow believer that might not be walking with us? Is it going too far to say that?
S.McC. Well, there may be those who love Christ; they do not go all the way. Because Hiram does not belong to Jerusalem. He does not appear in Jerusalem, apparently. He comes up to see the cities that Solomon gave him and he does not seem to appreciate
{244}
them fully. So we cannot make too much of him, except to say that there is something there. There is a link with the testimony, there is a love for Christ in type in his love for David.
G.A.A. Would that fit in with what we have in @John 6, in connection with Andrew? He knows what is going on in connection with the little lad.
S.McC. Well, that little lad appeared. He has got something that the Lord takes on and makes something of it.
R.N. Solomon seems to realise that this element you are speaking of, of love for Christ, is essential. A little later on he says, verse 6, "And my servants shall be with thy servants." He recognizes that that element is necessary in the labour.
S.McC. So we are to take account of how the testimony, as in David, had affected others. We want to think of the bearing of the truth on others, even the bearing of the truth of Christianity on the powers that be in Christian areas. We have to give thanks for whatever influence the truth has on such around us.
C.M. I was going to ask in relation to the water; the eunuch in @Acts 8 saw the necessity of it.
S.McC. Yes. So we are to see the importance of this kind of element in Hiram. Not that we can make too much of him. But he is there as always being a lover of David. And he is linking on with Solomon, that is, he is linking on with Solomon in the sense of what he appreciated in David.
T.P.M. Has that to do with the foundation work in a particular way?
S.McC. Well, it has. Think of how the Lord could speak of the centurion in the early chapters of Luke. He says He had not found so great faith in Israel. He felt that it was not right that the Lord should come under his roof. He was a remarkable man,
{245}
showing that God might be doing outside of the realm of Israel.
A.M. The Lord said in His address to Sardis there were those who had not defiled their garments, even in that system.
S.McC. Our brethren are there and we are to think of our brethren in these systems, these circumstances. And we have to pray for them, for their emancipation and deliverance.
R.N. I was just enquiring as to the end of verse 6, whether there is any weakness in Solomon having to own, "There is not among us any experienced in cutting timber like to the Zidonians." I was only wondering as to our weakness in the preaching of the gospel and securing material. Much of what is built into the house now comes from other directions.
S.McC. Well, there may be something of that in it. I had not thought of that. We are dealing with a type. We cannot put too much into it and the question is as to the character of the house and the kind of material that is needed for it. It is not ordinary material. It is material of a specific kind and character requiring a specific kind and character of processing, and I think especially stresses the dignity of the assembly, the personnel of the assembly from this viewpoint, that so much work, so much service is expended on the preparation of it.
W.R.S. Would the stress on service here link with the idea of bondmen in @Romans 6, that you were referring to? Would that be a foundational thought relative to the assembly?
S.McC. Yes, it is to stress that in Solomon's system we have those that are available to carry on whatever is necessary to be carried on, the work. It all involves the work. The work has to be carried on and there are those that are at hand to carry it on, just as in @Luke 15, the father speaks to the bondmen. There are
{246}
those who are willing to do the work as it has to be done.
Ques. Solomon had a great valuation of the cedars, did he not? He spoke of them in the previous chapter. Would that help us to value the material that is to come forward in the building of the house?
S.McC. Well, I am sure it should, because it brings out the greatness of the saints, of the assembly in the type, that so much work and labour is expended on them in preparation for the house.
C.A.I. Basically they are great. The cedar would give that idea, would it, the timber?
S.McC. It would, so that we are to remember the basic side in the truth and the great need, especially in view of the generation coming on to fill out their part and place in the testimony, the great need that the basic side should be right, the foundation should be right.
C.A.I. Do we need to think of each one in preaching or seeking after souls, to have in our view the sons of God? "Ye are all God's sons by faith in Christ Jesus." That would be the basic side to commence with, would it?
S.McC. Yes, the preaching of the glad tidings would have in mind the securing of the personnel, the material for the house. From this viewpoint the glad tidings is not just a matter of relieving persons. It involves that, but the securing of material for the great and dignified thought of the assembly in the light of 1 Kings, a heavenly system of things.
D.A.I. Is that the idea in Matthew? The disciples were sent out to make disciples of all nations. The idea of making disciples.
S.McC. Making them. That enters into what we are saying that it is the process, the work expended on the material.
S.L. There is much material today that really is
{247}
not available to the Lord. Have you in mind that some of this material, so to speak, may be secured for the pleasure of the Lord in the present day?
S.McC. I am sure the Lord is securing it. We hear constantly of results in relation to the greatness of divine activities, in the way that souls are coming into the truth as the dispensation is about to be completed.
S.L. One was thinking of how much is unavailable to the Lord and we should carry exercise of heart as to it, should we not, feelingly?
S.McC. Well, exactly. We are to be in line with divine Persons and what they are doing in view of the greatness of the assembly. The assembly is a great matter and the securing of the material for the assembly is a great matter. They are no ordinary persons, we might say. It is no ordinary material.
G.W.B. Is there encouragement in the fact that in the securing of this material, while the Zidonians were outstanding, Solomon is able to provide thirty thousand, ten thousand in their courses?
S.McC. Well, it all suggests that there are plenty to carry on the work and we should see that. We are all to be in the work, the carrying on of the work in relation to the great divine thoughts as to the assembly. There is room for all of us.
W.H.W. Does the thought of hire, in verse 6, show the consideration of Christ for all those who are helping in this work?
S.McC. Yes, it would. He says, "And now command that they hew me cedar trees out of Lebanon and my servants shall be with thy servants and I will give thee hire for thy servants according to all that thou shalt say, for thou knowest that there is not amongst us any that are experienced in cutting timber like to the Zidonians." That is, this work requires a special character of processing. That is stressed in
{248}
this verse, and the Lord is entering into the matter in type in Solomon.
E.J.W. Do you think that was lacking in the twelve men in Ephesus in the 19th of Acts? Did Paul bring in his gospel to rectify the position? I was wondering whether the foundations were lacking, with the twelve men? They were only baptised to John's baptism.
S.McC. Exactly. There was something wrong in the teaching.
W.H.W. Would the Lord, in the working out of the type here, be recognizing the gifts that He was given, in Solomon speaking of the Zidonians in this way, in connection with this processing you are speaking of?
S.McC. The system would be under his hand, and he is drawing upon it in regard to this matter, operating through this means, in verse 6. The Lord has the means of operating in this way in view of the preparation of the material for the house.
W.H.W. So that in the 13th of Acts the Spirit says, "Separate me now Barnabas and Saul." He chose those two out of those that were mentioned, did He not?
S.McC. The feature of experience and what is best fitted for the work, is a great matter. You will remember that in @2 Samuel 18, the Cushite was to run with the news and another man comes into view as wanting to run, but he is brought to an ignominious end. He is told to stand aside, that he did not have the message. That is, it is a question of what is suitable for the work, the ones that are fitted for the work.
T.R.H. The Lord says in Matthew, "First, Peter." Does He operate in Peter's soul so that he fills out the position that He had in His mind for him, in the assembly?
S.McC. Well, exactly, and the importance of experience,
{249}
workmen that need not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth. That is the great important matter. In what we were discussing yesterday, where difficulties enter is in not rightly dividing the word of truth. There is the abstract side and there is the concrete side as to the truth.
T.P.Mc. And would you think applying the truth in that way would become experience?
S.McC. Therefore the experience of Paul in @1 Corinthians 11, the skill of Paul in the way he applies the truth as in @1 Corinthians 5, for instance. He says, in verse 6, "Your boasting is not good. Do ye not know that a little leaven leavens the whole lump? Purge out the old leaven that ye may be a new lump according as ye are unleavened." Now think of the skill of Paul, in the way that he brings the truth in in this first letter. How, even, despite what marked them concretely, with all the sin among them, he stressed the abstract side, as he says, "According as ye are unleavened." That shows the skill of Paul in his manner of operation in the ministry.
H.B. Is it similar to where in writing to the Galatians he says, "Because ye are sons."
S.McC. Exactly. That is, that we are sons before we get the Spirit. We are not constituted sons by the gift of the Spirit. It is because we are sons that God has sent out the Spirit of His Son into our hearts.
A.T.S. Would it be diverting you, to say a little more about what is meant by the straight line, cutting in a straight line the word of truth?
S.McC. We might read that verse in @2 Timothy 15. It says, "Strive diligently to present thyself approved to God, a workman that has not to be ashamed, cutting in a straight line the word of truth." And then he says, "But profane and vain babblings shun for they will advance to greater impiety and their
{250}
word will spread as a gangrene." The cutting in a straight line the word of truth involves our knowledge of the truth. And we do not mix things together, we do not run one truth into the other in a mixed kind of way, but we keep the lines of the truth straight in our minds. Perhaps you would say something about it. You have been thinking about it.
A.T.S. I was enquiring whether what is foundational would underlie it. If we were grounded in what is foundational, would it underlie the ability to cut in a straight line?
S.McC. Well, it would. That is where the importance comes in, that in our knowledge of the truth foundationally and our being built up in the truth we learn how to cut in a straight line the word of truth. We all know what apprenticeship is. We know how we have to learn at trades before we become journeymen. We have the same principle seen in the levites of old who had to serve under others before they came into full fledged levitical service. And in that they learned how to operate and to work levitically. The book of Numbers shows this.
E.B. Can you explain further what you were starting to say about testimony?
S.McC. Well, the assembly is the pillar and base of the truth. And all testimony would rightly work out from the assembly. The assembly is the base of all divine operations according to the teaching in the New Testament. And the testimony is particularly centred in the assembly, the house of God at the present time.
J.R. Would the cutting in the straight line be seen in connection with things we can remember ourselves in regard to the Lord's Sonship? You know what was commonly held in regard to the Lord's Sonship and it was brought out about the year 1929, was it not, as to the Lord's Sonship referring to Him in manhood?
{251}
Would that be cutting in a straight line the word of truth?
S.McC. Well, it is, showing that the truth as to our Lord's Sonship did not belong to a past eternity. Our Lord's Sonship belongs to His position in manhood. That was cutting in a straight line the word of truth where men were operating the truth to suit the human way of thinking in regard of the matter.
J.R. So in that way Aquila and Priscilla helped Apollos.
S.McC. You refer to @Acts 18. Yes, they took him aside and helped him in what they said to him as to the truth, a great service to be rendered.
J.R. I thought they had companied with Paul and consequently were able to adjust him in relation to the truth according to Paul.
S.McC. Yes.
J.R. Do you think it is important that family feelings and instincts should be prominent in those who serve? They appear to be prominent in the early part of this chapter we read.
S.McC. Yes, the stress on the love side in Hiram to begin with and then in verse 3, "Thou knowest that David my father could not build a house unto the name of Jehovah his God, because of the wars which were about him on every side, until Jehovah put them under the soles of his feet. But now Jehovah my God has given me rest on every side, there is neither adversary nor evil event. And behold, I purpose to build a house unto the name of Jehovah my God as Jehovah spoke to David my father saying, Thy son whom I will set upon thy throne in thy stead, he shall build a house unto my name." That is, the realm of sonship is impressed on our minds in relation to the house, it is not the militant side as in David, but the side of sonship as in Solomon, that is linked with the house in 1 Kings.
{252}
N.W. So the idea of a house necessarily involves that there are to be those who inhabit it. The ones who inhabit it are going to be the sons.
S.McC. Well, of course, in Kings the house is God's habitation, not our habitation. It is God's habitation and the saints compose that habitation.
W.H.W. I was wondering in connection with what you are saying, if verse 8 does not bring in an important feature in the willingness of Hiram to do all that Solomon says, "I will do all thy desire concerning timber of cedar ... " etc. Is that not an important feature in the working of these things out amongst brethren?
S.McC. It is a very important thing to see how the work goes forward and the willingness that enters into it. And what he says, "I will do all thy desire concerning timber of cedar and concerning timber of cypress." Now we know that the cedar had to do with the inside and the cypress had to do with the outside. The cedar alludes to the side of privilege and the cypress more to the outward side of responsibility. Or as the word has been used, if you want to use it, the testimonial side.
A.I. Does God take account of where there are desires in relation to His house and the furthering of that side? Does He grant those desires and bring things to pass in relation to it?
S.McC. Well. He does, so that we find how Paul is concerned in regard to the heavenly side of the truth, how much labour and service he spends in prayer, and God no doubt brought about Paul's desires in relation to the conditions at Ephesus in regard to all his exercises.
R.C. Would the cypress suggest then as taking up responsibility as being a fir, that you are ever ready, not green one day and dry the next?
S.McC. That is it. The cedar suggests the side of
{253}
dignity but the cypress suggests the side of freshness. And we need freshness in regard to maintaining of things.
R.C. Does sonship in that way bring in freshness as you think of Jesus saying, "I ought to be occupied in my Father's business."
S.McC. Luke stresses the side of freshness in the Lord Jesus under the eye of God, in humanity here.
A.R.G. Are we to labour then to furnish that amongst the saints, these two sides, do you think, dignity and freshness; the interior and the exterior?
S.McC. Yes, so that the whole thought is provided for. We can see the greatness of what is in mind here. It is not just one little corner but the whole position is in mind in regard to the assembly. The Lord would like to bring great thoughts into our minds. That is the whole point in Philadelphia. He has got nothing less than the whole assembly in His mind. Not a particular section where the truth is working out but the whole position is in His mind as to the assembly.
A.R.G. So that we do well to keep acquainted with the universal side of the assembly and all the movements relative to it.
S.McC. Exactly. What the Lord is doing everywhere.
C.A.I. Do you think the Lord has nothing less than all the saints in Nelson in His mind in these matters, locally?
S.McC. Well, He has. He would like to have them all in it, but they are not available. And we would like to have them all in it, but they are not available to us.
N.W. Was this the outlook of Peter and John in @Acts 4? I was thinking of the lame man who was outside. They took him by the hand and he entered in
{254}
with them. He was found there as really part of the system, was he not?
S.McC. He is on the way and he represents a good result, but the assembly is not stressed so much in that chapter.
D.R.T. Is there a beautiful cluster of cedars and cypresses in the last chapter of Romans? I was thinking too of the way labour is mentioned so much in that chapter.
S.McC. Yes. @Romans 16, shows us the kind of personnel, the kind of material that has been secured through the truth of the glad tidings, the operating of the truth of the glad tidings. What personnel they are!
W.H.W. Does verse 9 bear on the intelligent preaching of the glad tidings, in that a soul is brought to a definite point? I mean that the gospel has been so presented that he is brought to a definite place.
S.McC. A very important thing in regard to service in the gospel is that we do not leave souls at loose ends with difficulties in their minds as to just what is the divine intent. All this would signify in our minds the service linked with the securing of the material, how effective it is and how divine objectives are in mind.
W.H.W. Is there a grading of service there as well? "My servants shall bring them down ... " etc. Then, "I will convey them by sea." Hiram takes the matter on at a certain point. Was it because he knows more of Solomon than his servants do?
S.McC. The whole operation involving the securing of the material is interesting in that light, where the material reaches its final place.
W.C. After the action of the sea in verse 9, it says, "And will cause them to be broken up there." Have you anything in mind about that?
S.McC. Well, just the fact that another process comes
{255}
on to view. It says, "And thou shalt receive them. And thou shalt accomplish my desire in giving food for my household." That is, brought to a certain position and then something else comes about. "I will convey them by sea in rafts to the place that thou shalt appoint me and will cause them to be broken up there and thou shalt receive them." That is, they are coming under the hand of Christ now, typified in Solomon.
W.C. I was thinking of persons who receive baptism in its true light. How easily they are available, are they not? How they work in so easily in the building.
S.McC. Well, where you get the water having its proper place with us there will not be too much difficulty with the material. The difficulty with us is that the water side of the death of Christ has not got the place that it should have, therefore, we perhaps, make more room for the world or the man after the flesh than we should, in our souls. The water would negate the man after the flesh in me.
A.R.G. It seems indispensable here, does it not? There is no getting the material to the appointed place without the water.
S.McC. That is right. That is, we cannot ignore the water.
G.W.B. Does that not help in relation to what you were speaking of earlier, the cutting in a straight line? The knowledge of that is inflexible, is it not, it does not alter, what is involved in the water? The principle you are speaking of in relation to the water, negating everything that is of the first man.
S.McC. John's ministry would stress in our minds the importance of the water, that we cannot work out the truth of Christ and the assembly without the water, without a purified state of soul. It is emphasized in John's ministry, both in the gospel and in the epistles.
L.I. So John does not speak of the assembly formally
{256}
but is very concerned about the personnel, we have often been told, or in other words about the material.
S.McC. He stresses the kind of material, the greatness of the material that forms the assembly, and each one having so much expended on him in relation to fitting him for his part, you might say, in the system. You take @John 4, @John 9, it is all to impress us with that, is it not?
L.I. Yes, and I was thinking of the service of the Spirit, too, right at the outset, born of water and the Spirit. Would that give an indication of what divine Persons have in mind as to the water?
S.McC. All stressing the cleansing and purifying side. The water would meet that state in my soul.
C.M. Do you think we should get the gain of the present service of the Lord Jesus as mentioned in @Ephesians 5: 26 in relation to the assembly, the washing of the water by the word?
S.McC. Well, there is another side of the water that is mentioned. You might say all the ministry carries the element of it, a purifying, cleansing effect. So that we are free from the man according to the flesh, free from the world with all that is attached to it, in view of our part in divine things. We might finish with just a word as to the 17th verse as to, "The king commanded and they brought great stones, costly stones, hewn stones to lay the foundation of the house." We are reminded in this of another side, not the timber side but the greatness of the stones. As we have been referring to it, John's ministry would impress us with the greatness of the saints, individually, before they are set together in relation to the house, the hewing suggesting the moral side; the great stones suggesting, no doubt, what the saints are in the divine mind; the costly side; the side of purchase; and the hewn stones, the moral exercises that enter into the preparation.
L.I. Why does Peter refer to these stones as coming
{257}
to the living stone? Here there is a great deal of service to get them there. Is it two sides of the same matter?
S.McC. I think so. Peter refers to what is living. There is an affinity between the stones and the Stone; between the saints and Christ.
G.A.A. Do the hewn stones take us back to the foundational side again?
S.McC. Yes, all this is bearing on the foundational side. It is a great thing to keep it in mind in our part in the work, that the work involves this; the great stones, the costly stones, the hewn stones. If we got this into our souls we would be very careful about writing off any of the brethren, because look at the value they have in the divine mind.
G.A.A. Peter speaks of them as living stones.
S.McC. Yes, stressing the side of life in them.
H.B. So it says we are to remember the Rock whence we have been hewn. If each stone has been hewn from the Rock we would have respect for each and would not think of writing any off, would we?
S.McC. The Lord has been helping us to balance the great truth as to the assembly so that in making much of the assembly as an entity, we do not forget what enters into the composition of the assembly, the great components of the assembly in the personnel who form it; the great stones, the costly stones, and the hewn stones. Think of all the labour that has been spent on the saints as they form the house of God.
L.I. Would the costliness of the stone be suggested in "The weak brother for whose sake Christ died?" He was not to be set aside, was he?
S.McC. No, a costly stone, and if we knew that how it would promote priestly and shepherdly activities in helping one another. Because we have been secured at such a great cost, and the persons of the assembly are great persons, and we would serve in view of their being held in relation to these great thoughts.
{258}
G.W.B. So that is, there is some suggestion to us in the 80,000 stonemasons and 70,000 that bore burdens? Would the bearing of burdens come into that?
S.McC. Well, exactly. We want to bear burdens. We are very much inclined to leave others to bear the burdens, but each one should take up his share in burden bearing. We would maybe all like to shape the saints our way, but thank God, the work of shaping them is not exactly left to us, it is under Solomon's hand, Solomon had them. Solomon is over the whole matter.
W.H.W. Would you say the Lord draws that out in @Luke 21 in reference to the widow that cast in the two mites? He has quite something to say about her, has He not?
S.McC. He has, and the same with the unnamed woman who anoints Him in Bethany. What others would write off, the Lord is making something of, is He not?
J.R. Do you think the thought of suffering would come with the costly stones?
S.McC. Well, it does. That is, there is the side of redemption. You get it in the thought of the assembly itself. Paul says (and the thought is in his mind) to the elders, "Shepherd the assembly of God which he has purchased with the blood of his own." That is to remind us of the cost and the shepherding would involve the members. It says, "Take heed, therefore, to yourselves and to all the flock wherein the Holy Spirit has set you as overseers, to shepherd the assembly of God which he has purchased with the blood of his own." If we viewed that side and valued that side more, what care we would be prepared to expend on one another, when persons get down in their souls, to help them in view of their part in the divine system.
W.H.W. Would that thought of the great stones be set out in @Matthew 16, when the Lord says to Peter, "Thou art Peter"?
S.McC. Exactly. What a stone he was and what a place he had in the assembly.
{259}
THE BALANCE OF THE TRUTH
@John 10: 1 -- 5, 16; @John 11: 49 -- 52; @Matthew 18: 15 -- 20
S.McC. It is thought in suggesting these passages as the basis of an inquiry as to the truth this morning we might get help as to the balance of the truth, in relation to John and Matthew, John particularly stressing the family side, Matthew stressing the administrative side. These are two great lines of truth that run together, the one underlying the other; and it is important that the balance of the truth in relation to them should be maintained in our minds in a day of brokenness. The family side in John's ministry draws our attention to what is basic and characteristic, whether in the flock or in the family, known as the children of God. Matthew, on the administrative side, gives us what may characterise persons or conditions at a given time. John does not exactly stress what may characterise persons at a given time, his ministry stresses what characterises the family of God from beginning to end, what is basic in relation to their part and their place in the family of God. The brethren will recall what Mr. Darby said, ere he departed this scene to be with the Lord; he exhorted the brethren that in insisting on Paul, we must not forget John, we must cleave to John. That is an important thing because John's ministry is calculated to save us from sectarianism, and it is important that in our outlook and viewpoint in relation to the truth, we should be careful as to what would lead into sectarianism, because John would balance us on the basic side, in understanding that the sheep of Christ and the flock and the children of God involve all that God has in this dispensation. Whether they are with us, walking in fellowship, or whether they are not, the flock and the children of
{260}
God embrace everyone that belongs to God. It is a great matter that we should understand John's ministry in this light because it enlarges our outlook, especially in regard to our brethren that are held in captivity in the systems of men, so that we should be more and more, in our outlook, concerned about them, as to their place as the children of God. Of necessity, because of Matthew's side, the administrative side, since many of them are characterised by lawlessness and independence and disregard of the truth we have to view them from Matthew's viewpoint as to the concrete side, what marks them at the moment. But from the abstract and basic side in John's ministry we have to understand what they are as the sheep of Christ and as the children of God. In view of the imminence of the rapture, these scriptures have a prominent bearing in John because you will notice that in the first passage it says, in verse 4, "When he has put forth all his own, he goes before them, and the sheep follow him," the Lord has in mind, *all* His own. Then we have the remarkable prophetic utterance of Caiaphas; it is one of the unique utterances that we have in John's gospel. The Spirit of God says that he prophesied that Jesus was going to die for the nation, "and not for the nation only but that he should also gather together into one, the children of God who were scattered abroad." A remarkable statement, because the children were not scattered abroad then. It looks on to the whole dispensation, especially our time, and I suppose the full result of that will be in the rapture; for alas, many of the children of God are not available to us. Because of the administrative side in Matthew, we cannot walk with them, or work out the truth with them, but nevertheless we rejoice in the fact that, at the rapture, they will all be brought together, and we shall all go up together, not one will be missed out. Every
{261}
saint of God, every believer, however imperfect things may be or as they may seem to be now, some perhaps, not even having the Spirit, but wonderful things will be done at the rapture and all the children of God will be gathered into one and we shall all go up together. We shall in no wise anticipate those that are asleep, for the dead in Christ will be raised first and we which are alive and remain shall be caught up together with them in the air. It will be a wonderful moment, but the apprehension of John's line of things helps us in the last days, when degeneracy has set in as to the truth, and where there has been great weakening in the public position. That is briefly what is in mind in suggesting these passages.
D.R.T. Is it of interest, you spoke of the breakdown and recovery, that it was the priest that built the sheep gate in the days of Nehemiah, whereas, when you come to the fish gate, which has locks and bars, you have got what is collective as set out in Matthew? I was thinking of the sheep gate, as having no locks and no bars, in the light of recovery.
S.McC. Yes, the sheep gate no doubt, would point to the liberty of the people of God, in regard of the city and what is available there. John's ministry reminds us of the city in the Revelation, the gates of the city; whereas Matthew stresses the side of discernment, the fish good and bad, selected and put in vessels, the worthless cast away. Matthew balances us on the public side with that line of the truth.
W.H.U. You have thought to impress us with the abiding character of John's ministry, that which abides.
S.McC. That is it. It goes through to the end of the dispensation, and it is most important that John's ministry be maintained. We must not put it in the background. In insisting on Paul we must cleave to John because John comes in, his ministry comes in
{262}
when all that Paul has set up in public testimony has broken down.
L.I. Does it require love to hold this broad and wide abstract truth that John brings out as to the family of God? You have reminded us that John refers to love. Does that link up?
S.McC. Well, it does. Love runs through all John's ministry, and if we are proper assembly men and assembly women our affections will be large, our hearts will be enlarged. In our outlook we will hold the ground in relation to all the children of God, in relation to the whole flock, although Matthew's line would come in to balance us as to practical fellowship and enjoyment of things. Matthew would give us what would preserve us.
A.M. I think Mr. Darby has said we should essentially keep our feet in the narrow path but our hearts as wide as we can.
S.McC. Well, exactly. That is, that if we give up separation we are lost as to the testimony. We must maintain separation, the principles of separation. But we maintain them on the principle of largeness of heart, embracing from John's outlook and viewpoint, all the sheep of Christ, all the children of God.
G.A.A. So that it would give us to be thankful for the scope of divine operations.
S.McC. We get so limited in our thoughts and we need to see more the scope of divine operations, that the economy of love into which the Father, the Son and the Spirit have come and are operating, is an economy that is wide and extended in its operations and ramifications.
L.I. Would Paul have in mind, when he refers to holding the truth in love, John's side of the truth?
S.McC. Exactly, showing how John's ministry would link on with Paul's in stressing the love side; and when we say stressing the love side, that does not
{263}
mean that sin is palliated, that righteousness is passed over, because love is of God, God is love. It is His nature, and the working out of love among the saints would involve a right and holy judgment of conditions.
H.B. Scripture speaks of the love of God being shed abroad in our hearts, not by the Spirit but by the Holy Spirit.
S.McC. Very good. Pointing to the character of the operations in that Person, the Holy Spirit.
R.G.C. Would the prophet refer to what you have in view, when he says, "lengthen thy cords and strengthen thy stakes?" The lengthening of the cords alluding to our wideness of heart, and strengthening the stakes, our position founded according to righteousness and grace.
S.McC. It is a remarkable reference that. You will recall in @Isaiah 33 Jehovah is lifted up in Zion and the prophet says, "He shall be the stability of thy times;" then he comes right down the chapter referring to practical conditions and he says, "Look upon Zion, the city of our solemnities: thine eyes shall see Jerusalem, a quiet habitation, a tent that shall not be removed, the stakes whereof shall never be pulled up;" and then he goes on to speak of the place of broad streams in which no galley with oars shall go, nor gallant ship pass thereby. It is all leading into the greatness of, in the type, christianity as marked by the presence of the Spirit, a place of broad streams where no galley with oars will go, or gallant ship pass thereby.
W.H.W. Is @John 10: 4 helpful in what you have been calling our attention to? "He goes before them, the sheep follow him, because they know his voice." Is not all the balance in knowing His voice? I mean if that is known practically will we not be kept in balance?
S.McC. In a concrete way the sheep of Christ would
{264}
come to light as knowing His voice and following Him. Verse 3 says, "To him the porter opens," verse 2, "He that enters in by the door is the shepherd of the sheep. To him the porters opens." That is, the Spirit of God is always making way for Christ. He will not make way for these other features and elements but He will make way for Christ; He made way for Him as He came into His public ministry and He is constantly making way for Him in the ministry in view of the sheep.
R.W. Would it be right to say that the idea of sovereignty is prominent in what you have brought to light in John's writings, whereas when we come to Matthew the idea of responsibility is emphasized?
S.McC. Yes. Matthew would stress the administrative side, our responsibility as moving in the light of the assembly, to think and to act for God. Matthew stresses the glory and the dignity of the assembly in the judicial aspect; John does not give us the assembly, except in the personnel. He never alludes to the assembly formally but he stresses the personnel, the persons who compose the assembly.
G.W.B. Is it of note to observe in @1 Corinthians 13, where the apostle Paul brings forward the matter of love in its varied aspects, that he finishes up with the word "And now abide faith, hope, love; these three things; and the greater of these is love?"
S.McC. Yes. Showing the value of love to the Corinthians. Love is the great feature that serves us in every position, whether at the beginning of the dispensation or at the end, love goes through.
C.A.I. John does show the Lord in the Revelation moving in relation to the assembly in responsibility. Would you say a little as to that?
S.McC. Well, the Lord takes up the matter of the assemblies in the opening chapters of the Revelation. It is not the vital side that He is dealing with but the
{265}
responsible body here on earth. That is, persons who take up the place of honouring the name of Christ, persons who have bibles in their hands and who are baptised; the Lord is taking them up on that ground, as in Laodicea, and addresses them in that light. He holds them to their responsibility, as taking up that position.
C.A.I. He regards them in the light of the testimony in christianity, even though they may not have a vital link with Him.
S.McC. Exactly. They may not even be vitally in it at all. The Lord is dealing with the responsible body in the opening chapters of the Revelation. So in regard to Laodicea, he says, "I am about to spue thee out of my mouth." I suppose open brethrenism would be largely Laodicean, and it gives us an idea of what the Lord thinks about it. "I am about to spue thee out of my mouth." They are occupying a position, claiming to have the semblance of the truth; but they are not for Christ.
Ques. Is the Lord seen here in the early verses of John's gospel as serving His own?
S.McC. Yes. The Lord would enlarge our viewpoint as to all his sheep, as it says, verse 10, "And I have other sheep which are not of this fold: those also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one flock, one shepherd." That is, He has got sheep that are not of the Jewish fold, the Gentiles are in mind; we are in mind here in the other sheep which are not of this fold. The Lord is thinking about *all* the sheep, and there shall be one flock not two flocks, but one flock, one shepherd. This merges into the truth of Paul's ministry of the body, the organism in the body.
T.R.H. What you said of open brethrenism would be on the Matthew line and not on the John's.
S.McC. On the line of Matthew we could have
{266}
nothing to do with what marks such persons linked with such a system, but on the line of John we think of our brethren as the sheep of Christ and the children of God abstractly. Concretely they are marked by different features and we are thinking of the great bearing of divine activities, the Lord dying, that the children of God scattered abroad might be gathered into one.
C.A.I. So that what you have spoken of in regard to Laodicea being spued out of His mouth is one side. The other side of things is that He is going to gather every one of His own.
S.McC. What he refers to there, Laodicea, is the profession, not the vital side. There are godly souls in all the systems around us. Some of us have known what it is to leave these systems with a broken heart, with tears, because of the links between us as children of God. But oh! the awfulness of the system, the terribleness of it, as infidel to Christ!
W.H.U. On John's line we would be ready to serve individuals that we meet, ready to serve them at any time.
S.McC. You are available to serve souls, like the Lord going out of his way to the woman by the well of Sychar; not that you would go into the systems of men, the Lord can go where we cannot; we are limited by Matthew. The administrative side limits us in our links so that we cannot marry those that are linked with these associations because it is contrary to the administrative position; nor can we have social links with such, because it is contrary to the administrative position.
W.H.U. I suppose we have to recognise that John deals very largely, almost exclusively, with that which is normal, while Matthew deals with a very great deal that is abnormal.
S.McC. Well, he does. John deals with what is normal but in view of abnormal times. John's ministry
{267}
is written for abnormal times, while he is drawing our attention to what is normal in the sheep of Christ and the children of God.
Ques. Do we only detect what is genuine in persons just as they are answering to the voice of Christ?
S.McC. That is right, as they are subject to the truth, to the voice of Christ, speaking in whatever way He may speak. We can discern in what they say to us and how they move, what kind of link they have got. It is a great thing, of course, to be able to link on with souls in whatever knowledge they may have of divine Persons in view of helping them, not in view of going on with what they are thinking about, or what they are going on with, but linking on with the work of God, with a view to their extrication.
W.H.U. Do you think we should be very careful and anxious to become acquainted with what is normal, otherwise we have no standard to judge by, have we?
S.McC. Now what do you mean by that?
W.H.U. I mean that in John we get the mind of the Lord and the mind of the Spirit presented to us, and if we have that we have a standard so that we can judge things as to abnormal matters.
S.McC. Yes, that is what Mr. Darby meant in saying that in insisting on Paul, do not forget John. You see, to put Paul forward and put John in the background is not according to the truth. It is not cutting in a straight line the word of truth. We must carry John in insisting on Paul, because John writes when Paul's ministry and what it set up has broken down publicly.
A.M. Would you say John gives the kind of spirit in which things are to be carried out, the spirit of Christ, the spirit of grace so that while cleaving to the divine principles that are laid down in connection with the assembly, yet the spirit of grace is to characterise us?
{268}
S.McC. Well, exactly. John would help us as to that side and Matthew would balance us in the severity that there is in his gospel, and John would balance Matthew in relation to that severity, so that, if persons are withdrawn from on the administrative side, one or two do not say, "Oh well, we have got a little more grace than the rest of the brethren, we will link on sympathetically with them." That will never do. Matthew regulates us on the administrative side, and John regulates Matthew, as it were, so that the balance of the truth is maintained between the two.
Ques. Would the balance of the truth be seen in the virtuous woman where it says, "She seeketh wool and flax," the wool speaking of the warmth of love and the flax speaking of fine linen which is the righteousness of the saints?
S.McC. She is a woman of great balance. She is a remarkable woman, the virtuous woman, suggesting of course, the assembly. And the assembly is a great vessel, an intelligent vessel, like Abigail, she knows what to do.
Rem. Do we get the two lines in Philemon, in the way that Paul acts with Onesimus? He expended love on him, and he says that he is serviceable to thee, and to me also; I was thinking of the way Paul acted with him; he acted in John's line.
S.McC. The epistle to Philemon is a wonderful epistle because it shows what a great man Paul was, and how he was prepared to concentrate his interest and his service on an individual soul. The man that writes the epistle to Philemon and speaks in such tenderness about Onesimus was the man that wrote 1st Corinthians, the man that wrote Ephesians and Colossians; and yet his interest is concentrated on a runaway slave, a remarkable thing, and his reinstatement with his master; not any longer in the flesh as a bondman but a brother bondman, a brother beloved.
{269}
D.R.T. Does Paul, the aged, suggest the assembly in the day in which we live; it is the end, as it were, of the long years of experience? Are those features that come out there to mark the assembly in our day, do you think?
S.McC. Well, I should not like to think of the assembly as aged. I think the assembly as indwelt by the Spirit does not grow old. Perhaps on the public side there may be something of what you suggest in things, but I should not like to apply the thought of aged to the assembly.
T.R.H. Would you suggest that John's ministry reaches morally what Matthew secures administratively? I mean that Judas is early designated in John, "Have not I chosen you, the twelve, and one of you is a devil," and he goes out in the power of love. Matthew would bring that same matter to light administratively, that would be the public side.
S.McC. Very good. I think that is interesting and especially to see how long the Lord goes on with Judas. The Lord knew who Judas was but He allows the thing to come out. You know we are so anxious sometimes to ferret things out. Mr. Taylor once said in an important matter that the Lord will never help us on the lines of seeking to discover evil. He will help us in dealing with evil as it expresses itself, but he will never help us on the line of trying to find it out, that is, to search persons and to search their circumstances. The Lord helps us in dealing with evil as it expresses itself, and that comes out in John's ministry. The Lord goes on a long time with Judas, until it comes out.
G.W.B. Is there not a grave danger of our interfering with what divine Persons may be doing, if we think, as you suggest, that the idea is to ferret out as over against what is disclosed?
S.McC. Well, we do not want to stand in the way
{270}
of what divine Persons are doing, and we are helped as we deal with evil as it becomes manifest and expresses itself.
L.I. So that at the end of John's gospel, Peter is proved, is he not, but would you say that is the Lord's work in a sense? He does that as the advocate to bring things to light in Peter and to adjust him.
S.McC. That is a very good contrast in relation to what we have been saying, but if matters are to be proved we would leave the Lord to do the proving. We are not to do the proving; we are to leave the Lord to do it. Then, of course, the Lord took up Peter when he went the way he did with the others leading in the movement that brought them back to the fishing. The Lord took Peter up to fully adjust him in view of the beginning of the Acts.
W.H.U. If we attempt to do the proving, are we not working on suspicions instead of working upon facts?
S.McC. Well, exactly. The Lord can read people's hearts, we cannot; hence the importance of the balance between Matthew and John, because if we took John we might say, "Oh well, it does not matter what is done to a person; we will go on with them and try to encourage them," but that will not do, you see. Matthew comes in to regulate us on the administrative side, and if a person is withdrawn from we hold him abstractly in our minds as belonging to the sheep of Christ and the family of God, but Matthew would impress us with the fact that evil must be dealt with and Matthew's side would regulate us in social links and relations.
A.M. The great thought of recovery would underlie the actions, would it not?
S.McC. You mean in Matthew?
A.M. John's ministry would help us on that line, would it not, and so in connection with feeding the
{271}
multitude in John's gospel it says "Gather up the fragments, that nothing be lost."
S.McC. In other words, in the operation of the judicial side in @Matthew 18 what is in mind is the recovery of the person, the restoration of the person, because sin cannot go on unjudged. It must be judged, and if a brother has his attention drawn to sin and he refuses to judge it, he does not hear the brother, and the brother takes two more and he does not hear them, and it comes to the assembly, and he will not hear the assembly, the assembly must deal judicially with the matter; but it is dealt with in view of the recovery of the brother.
G.W.B. Linking on the chapter as a whole, is there not a danger of our just taking the verses without recognising the importance both of the beginning and the ending of the chapter?
S.McC. Well, we have to take the truth in its parts, and in the verses that we read the assembly is acting judicially in the matter, and if the person does not judge his sin, then he is to be unto us as one of the nations and a tax-gatherer. That is, the administrative viewpoint, not exactly that he is a brother, although that underlies the whole position in John's ministry, but he is as a heathen, as one of the nations and a tax-gatherer. From Matthew's viewpoint that is what he is, but from John's viewpoint he belongs to the sheep of Christ, he belongs to the children of God; we hold him in our prayers in that relation, so that the truth is balanced.
W.H.W. Then, are the last three verses of @John 9 important in regard to what you are saying? Is it a matter of being able to see? I was struck with them as you were speaking. The Lord says in verse 39, "For judgment am I come into this world, that they which see not may see, and they which see may become blind," and then "the Pharisees who were with him
{272}
heard these things, and they said to him, Are we blind also? Jesus said to them, If ye were blind ye would not have sin; but now ye say, We see, your sin remains." Now is the Lord not suggesting there that if we are blind He will make us to see? If we take the ground of seeing, of being able to see, then we remain in our sin.
S.McC. A very basic principle with John, that the Lord helps us if we want to be helped. He says "if any one desire to practise his will, he shall *know* concerning the doctrine." That is the ground on which John would put things.
R.G.C. Would @Ezekiel 34, that great shepherd chapter, bear on John, and @Ezekiel 43 bear on Matthew?
S.McC. Very good, but the brethren generally may not know what you are referring to in @Ezekiel 34 and @Ezekiel 43, although I know what you are referring to, but it would be good if you just state what it is.
R.G.C. I thought in @Ezekiel 34: 22 allusion is made to what Caiaphas says, "I will save my flock, that they may no more be a prey," and as regards the shepherd activities we were referring to, "I will seek the lost, and bring again that which was driven away." On John's line that is our attitude, is it not, seeking the lost, but in @Ezekiel 43 he says there, does he not, "And if they be confounded at all that they have done, make known to them the form of the house." If there be those who are concerned about their part in "departing from iniquity" we make known to them "the form of the house," and we proceed towards them.
S.McC. Very good. Ezekiel brings in the law of the house.
R.G.C. So that bears on what you are saying, does it not, as to the concern to maintain holiness?
S.McC. It bears on @Matthew 18, so that on the line of John's ministry we think of those who are not with
{273}
us, and we are with divine Persons in regard to their salvation and recovery, and we would pray to God for them as belonging to the sheep of Christ, and as belonging to the children of God as our brethren in that light; but on Matthew's line the administrative side would regulate us in our social links and intercourse. That is, "to thee as one of the nations and a tax-gatherer." That is, from Matthew's viewpoint we can have nothing to do with them socially as still in that position.
Ques. Not even if he were a relation of yours?
S.McC. Not even if he were a relation, although of course if it were a child, I mean a young child in the house, brought up in the house, he would still be subject to his father's care; but as regards persons that are apart from the house and related, the truth bears on them just as it does on others.
G.A.A. Could you help us in the matter that we were looking at a moment ago? In the matter of application for fellowship, where the brethren may feel uneasy about a case where they feel there might be secondary motives in applying for fellowship. Are we entitled to look into motives?
S.McC. What do you mean by a secondary motive?
G.A.A. Well, they may have given expression to remember the Lord on the one hand and yet the brethren may feel they wish to come into fellowship having other things in mind.
S.McC. Would the brethren have proof of it?
G.A.A. Well, possibly.
S.McC. Well, the thing would be to help the person to have pure motives. I remember hearing about a brother in a certain place, a policeman, who had an interest in a sister and wanted to marry her. The sister told him she could not marry him because she was breaking bread with the brethren, the Lord's people, and he was not even converted, and that he would
{274}
have to be a believer and would have to be breaking bread before she could ever enter into any link with him or anyone like him. He came to the brethren and asked to break bread and the brothers that he spoke to were very wise and asked him why he wanted to break bread, and he said because he wanted to marry that sister. Well, the brothers of course, could immediately see that something needed adjusting, but instead of rebuking him or setting him on one side, they took him in hand and preached the gospel to him and served him so that his motives were purified, and he became a good brother.
G.A.A. Thank you, that helps the point.
G.W.B. Going back to what you said a few moments ago as to relations, would you perhaps say a word to us in the case of a husband and wife, how it would affect that in a broad way?
S.McC. How it would affect the husband or wife?
G.W.B. Well, if a husband was withdrawn from, the behaviour of the wife, or vice versa.
S.McC. Well, the husband is her head whether he is withdrawn from or not. Withdrawing does not alter the fact that the husband is the head. The man is the head. Even the unconverted man is the head of his house and if a sister has a husband who is unconverted she does well to recognise that he is the head in the house, although when the truth comes to bear on matters, her conscience in relation to God must be paid attention to.
G.W.B. So exemplary behaviour on her part would suit her.
S.McC. Well, exactly.
C.A.I. What about the word in @Matthew 18 in regard to "listening?" If he will not "listen," and then to "them," and then the "assembly."
S.McC. The point is to gain your brother. You do not want to convict him merely. That is involved, but
{275}
you want to gain him, you want to save him, and all the operations have that in mind.
C.A.I. So that the feelings and spirit that John would promote with us would underlie and enter into all that proceeds in @Matthew 18?
S.McC. Well, exactly. And some persons may feel they have been severely dealt with, but John's line underlies it all. Just as Joseph has to speak roughly to his brethren because of their unrepentant condition, so with us the love side in John's ministry, our relations with one another as the sheep of Christ and the children of God underlie all that, but Matthew would insist on the righteousness and therefore may seem severe.
G.W.B. Would the matter of "hearing the assembly" make way for a word of appeal in an assembly meeting?
S.McC. Why, certainly. The person should be there, the person against whom the charges are laid should be there, and the voice of the assembly should bear on them.
L.I. Reference was made earlier in the meeting to the Lord in the midst of the assembly in Revelation, but He is there as girt about the breasts with a golden girdle. The affections are there and the feelings are there, but there is a girding. Would that enter into @Matthew 18?
S.McC. Well, it would. That is why abstractly in the light of John your soul longs for them, your heart and your affections long for them. Matthew helps you to gird yourself in relation to the truth, because righteousness is involved, and we have to deal with evil.
W.H.U. We have longings after those who perhaps are out of the way. Is that why we get in John that remission comes first, and in Matthew binding comes first, when it is a question of administration?
S.McC. Very good. That helps to see the two sides of teaching in the Gospels. Now in regard to what we were saying on Saturday, we might be simple and
{276}
plain about these matters, because it is a time for getting help and we are here to help one another. In regard to speaking of persons withdrawn from as a brother or a sister, we must keep in mind John's ministry. It is important that we do not devaluate the currency. In a country, when the currency is devaluated it may involve what is serious, and thus in the light of Matthew we must not devaluate the currency. We must hold the expressions belonging to the truth on that proper level, and not devaluate things. Therefore it is important that if persons are referred to as belonging to the family of God it is because we are thinking of them abstractly along John's lines, not concretely in the light of the administrative side of Matthew, where sin is marking them and they are withdrawn from.
Ques. Would you say that the constant reference to the abstract truth in 1 Corinthians, while Paul speaks of the administration side there, would show that balance that he had in serving brethren at Corinth?
S.McC. Well, exactly. He is constantly seeking to bring them to the abstract side, for although they had allowed such evil in their midst, such evil as was not even named amongst the nations, yet he recalls them to the abstract side. He speaks about purging "out the old leaven, that ye may be a new lump according as ye are unleavened," even with the very dealing with the matter he is insisting on the abstract side.
Rem. So that even in the beginning of the Epistle he begins by going over what they were as sanctified, does he not?
S.McC. Well, exactly.
R.G.C. Would you mind saying a word about the question of "being such?" Would "being such" mean that the person goes on with a flagrant course, or could he "be such" by one act? Take for instance a thief.
{277}
S.McC. Being such, would be a course, do you not think? It is not just an act by itself. It involved capital sin here in @1 Corinthians 5. It is a course of wickedness pursued so that it characterises a person, so that Paul does not say a word about repentance in the whole chapter.
R.G.C. I think that is important.
C.A.I. He does not speak about a man being drunk, he speaks about a "drunkard," does he not?
S.McC. Well, exactly, or a fornicator, or avaricious, or idolater, or abusive; it is what is characterising the persons.
R.G.C. And well known to be such.
S.McC. Well known to be such -- "reported" as he says, and established by fact.
R.G.C. So that a "fall" would not constitute that, would it? A person may suddenly fall into sin, be caught as it were.
S.McC. No, you could not class that as a "course." That might come under the heading of @Galatians 6: 1. Of course full consideration would be given as to all facts in the matter, as to how great the degree of the thing is, because there are degrees in sin. We cannot classify all sins under one general heading. There are degrees in sin.
L.I. So that in a case such as @1 Corinthians 5, the procedure of @Matthew 18 would not apply. Is that right?
S.McC. Let us hear something more. Let us get what is exactly in your mind at this juncture.
L.I. Well, what is in my mind is this. If there is a course of sin such as @1 Corinthians 5 and the person is still going on with it and attached to the sin, there is no suggestion of repentance with Paul as you said, and does the scripture in @Matthew 18 not come in for consideration?
S.McC. Well, it would have to come in as to the
{278}
mode of operation, would it not? That is, that it would have to come to the assembly? The assembly is the great vessel that can deal with such a matter. In that light it must come to @Matthew 18, do you not think?
L.I. Well, what I really meant was one brother going first and seeing this person and then taking one or two besides. That part of the procedure was in my mind.
S.McC. I see what you mean. Well, of course, @Matthew 18 always affords light as to how to proceed with matters, but if a case of flagrant evil comes up in the assembly, there is always power in the assembly in the presence of the Spirit to deal with evil at any moment that it arises.
W.H.W. You may deal with it quickly, summarily.
S.McC. If it was such a case of evil where dishonour and disgrace was public, then the brethren would not have to wait another month before the next care meeting, but would proceed to look into it.
W.H.W. Yes, I think we have acted on that in one particular case.
W.H.U. But before the assembly deals with it, I suppose a care meeting would be called, though you would not wait for the monthly meeting.
S.McC. Well, I suppose the case would have to be looked into and the facts laid out. The assembly does not investigate. The assembly meeting is never investigative. The assembly meeting is conclusive and executive.
R.G.C. You need two or three witnesses who have interviewed accused?
S.McC. So that in that way @Matthew 18 would enter into the matter, just as a matter of procedure.
T.H.R. Is it not the basis for every assembly meeting? I mean in relation to what is judicial. Is @Matthew 18 not the basis for the assembly coming together?
S.McC. It is in the particular relation we are referring to.
{279}
L.I. There is just one point I would like to get clear. Supposing there is a serious case of evil and perhaps two are sent to investigate it and supposing the person "heard" at that point, would the matter cease just as it does in @Matthew 18, or would it have to go to the assembly in view of forgiveness?
S.McC. Well, it might have to go to the assembly. We must not leave out the assembly if it is the character of sin that requires the assembly to deal with. If it is a capital sin it must be brought to the assembly.
L.I. Well, we are glad to get that clear because there has been a suggestion that it may not have to, and one is thankful for your word.
S.McC. If it is something, the character of sin such as we are speaking of, it would have to come to the assembly to be dealt with, because none of us must assume to deal with what the assembly should rightly deal with.
C.A.I. That is, according to @1 Corinthians 5 is not the apostle bringing to bear upon the saints in Corinth a thing that was amongst themselves and that there is a matter of the leaven being purged out of the company?
S.McC. That is, apparently, the company must have been leavened. It is a terrible thing when we think of it, and the action involved that in the dealing with the man they were to purge out the old leaven. Purge out the leaven linked with the evil.
Ques. Would the leaven involve that it was in the minds of the saints and that it was known?
S.McC. It would seem at Corinth, by all appearances and the facts presented in the Epistle, that it affected them. They were not mourning over it. They were doing nothing about it.
A.I. So that "a little leaven leavens the whole lump."
S.McC. Well, it does. That is obvious. That is what the passage says.
G.W.B. So does that bring forward the solemnity
{280}
of the necessity for an assembly meeting and the necessity of each one eating the sin offering?
S.McC. Well, exactly. I think we should keep in mind this thought of devaluating the currency. That in regard to speaking about persons in some of these systems, we should not devaluate the currency. That is, we should not put them on the level that those that are in fellowship are on, as to Matthew's side, but as to John's side we hold them abstractly in the light of what they are as the sheep of Christ, and the children of God. At the rapture we will all be set together, brought together by divine power and we will all go up together, and we can well afford to pray for our brethren around us. There are many of them, and many of them are getting released. We should pray for them and we should serve them in any way we can without compromising the truth. Do not let us return to them. "Return not thou unto them," Jehovah says to Jeremiah, "let them return to thee," and we should be ready to serve them.
T.R.H. You cannot devaluate the currency if you are on the gold standard.
S.McC. Well, that is the point. You are not on the gold standard here, are you?
Rem. No. We are not.
T.R.H. The principle is there, is it not?
S.McC. Yes.
W.H.W. Does the ability to handle the truth abstractly enable the one who serves to rightly represent God in difficult positions amongst the brethren?
S.McC. In Philadelphia the Lord has nothing less than the whole assembly in His mind. The only ground that we can take is in departing from evil in @2 Timothy 2 on moral grounds and moving in the light of the assembly and acting together in the light and according to the truth of the assembly. And we have divine Persons with us in it. The authority lies there.
{281}
WISDOM -- THE HANDMAID OF LOVE
@1 Kings 8: 1 -- 9, 22 -- 28; @1 Kings 10: 1 -- 9
S.McC. We were noticing in Nelson last weekend the dignity and greatness of the position that comes into view in relation to Solomon. He sets out the great thought of sonship, and the whole system of things in the opening chapters of 1 Kings in relation to Solomon's regime, suggests in type the greatness and magnificence of christianity from the heavenly viewpoint. It is important that we should understand the greatness of christianity as presented in Christ in the assembly from the heavenly side, because we are formed generally by what engages us; and one thing to be noted too in relation to Solomon is this great feature of wisdom which seems to mark the position established in relation to him. I think that we need to understand this feature more. There would be a difference between light and wisdom. I think that the more sonship is apprehended according to the mind of God as characterising the dispensation, the more the resource linked with wisdom will be seen in operation amongst the saints in the solution of all the administrative matters. The legal system would train the legal mind to think along certain lines and would like precepts to guide and a book of definitions in administrative matters; but in Solomon's regime we are impressed with the dignity of sonship, with which is linked this great feature of wisdom. Wisdom is the handmaid of love, and where you get sonship apprehended and enjoyed among the saints and love operating, we may expect this quality of wisdom in the local gatherings in the working out of the truth, especially on the public and administrative side. You will remember that in chapter 7, verse 13, it says, "And king Solomon sent and fetched Hiram out
{282}
of Tyre. He was a widow's son of the tribe of Naphtali, and his father was a man of Tyre, a worker in brass, and he was full of wisdom and understanding and knowledge, to do all kinds of work in brass." I think it would be apparent to the brethren that there is help needed in the works of brass, for while Solomon's regime involves remarkable dignity and glory, yet the works of brass contemplate the moral question, the working out of things on the moral side. Solomon did not give the man a blue-print or a chart to operate by; it says of the man that he was full of wisdom and understanding and knowledge to *do*, that is, not to lecture or write a book on the subject, but to *do* all kinds of work in brass, especially alluding to the vessels that were in the court. I think we need to see this quality appearing on the Solomonic side where sonship is so prominent and casting its influence over the whole realm. Where it is apprehended and enjoyed among the saints, and all the liberty and the dignity that goes with it, we should expect wisdom in operation.
D.A.I. Is this consistent with the poor wise man who delivers the city?
S.McC. Well, that quality of wisdom would be seen there, in the way that he operates. Wisdom is particularly referred to, with him.
J.R. Is it striking that at the beginning of chapter 2 where David said to Solomon, "Thou art a wise man," he gives instructions in connection with Shimei and the others? I wondered if you would connect that with the works of brass in a moral way.
S.McC. Well, they are connected. The moral question enters into the works of brass. They seem to have a great place in Solomon's system, especially the abundant provision for the administration of cleansing, in the sea and in the ten lavers. I thought we might see first of all, in the first section that we read, the great place that Solomon has, the matter of assembling
{283}
to him which seems to be stressed so much. Then we see the place that the ark has, the paramount concern being in the opening verses as to the ark being in its place. Then in the middle of the chapter we note the great concern of Solomon and the provision that he, as a type of the Lord Jesus Christ, would seek to make, for all that might come into the dispensation, covering every matter in his intercessory service. Then in the last section we see the way the work of God appears in such as the Queen of Sheba represents, especially her appreciation of wisdom, to which she refers. She had heard of Solomon, and it says, verse 7, "The half was not told me: in wisdom and prosperity thou exceedest the report that I heard." Then the end of verse 8, "Who hear thy wisdom." All this stresses the great feature of wisdom. The end of verse 6 too, "It was a true report that I heard in mine own land of thine affairs, and of thy wisdom." I think that wisdom is an important quality to take account of in relation to Solomon.
R.G.C. Is the thought in their being assembled, their coming under his influence? In @2 Chronicles 10, those who came under his influence were those that gave the right advice, were they not? "And king Rehoboam consulted with the old men, who had stood before Solomon his father while he yet lived."
S.McC. You notice the great place that he seems to have. I suppose Solomon is a type of Christ in one way and the ark is a type in another way. It says in verse 1, "Then Solomon assembled the elders of Israel, and all the heads of the tribes, the princes of the fathers of the children of Israel, unto king Solomon in Jerusalem, to bring up the ark," then in verse 2, "And all the men of Israel assembled themselves to king Solomon at the feast in the month Ethanim," and then in verse 5, "And king Solomon, and all the assembly of Israel, that were assembled to
{284}
him;" it is remarkable that we should have so much made of this thought of 'assembling to him.'
R.G.C. Perhaps you would say a little more as to what is involved in "assembling to him."
S.McC. I think it involves what you were referring to, the strengthening in our minds of the importance of Solomon, in the way in which he is presented here.
C.A.I. Would it be according to 1 Colossians, the Father translating us into the kingdom of the Son of His love, then the greatness of the Son enlarged upon?
S.McC. He becomes a rallying point, a focal point -- a great thing to notice in relation to the truth from this viewpoint. Colossians being a critical letter, dealing with the saints in a critical position, it is important that Christ should be projected on to the view in spiritual ministry, with a view to the saints being helped over that critical juncture.
C.A.I. So that it is not just to meet our individual setting in responsibility with liberation and deliverance as in Romans, but to help us when we come to take up collective exercises among the saints assembly-wise, as Colossians would bring before us.
S.McC. So that you get the word in Colossians, "Let the word of the Christ dwell in you richly, in all wisdom teaching and admonishing one another." Colossians is to stress this matter of wisdom; especially as the saints are shut up in Christ. They are complete in Christ who is the Head. Human wisdom must be shut out. Christ is the One who is to be apprehended as Head and no doubt for the assembly, that enters into the teaching here. The movements are governed by Christ in type in this way, as giving direction.
C.A.I. Paul says to them, "That no one may delude you" and so on. There were certain things that we may be deluded by but not if Christ is in His place before us.
{285}
S.McC. Well, exactly, so that this portion would especially stress Solomon as the assembling point. We need to be delivered from man, from man's way of thinking and doing. The enemy would constantly divert us through man's way of thinking, whereas the headship of Christ is to characterise matters in the assembly.
F.McC. So in Chapter 3 in connection with the saving of the child alive it says, Israel "Saw that the wisdom of God was in him."
S.McC. A remarkable statement in that relation, the way it comes to light, not first of all in what he writes but what he does, his way of operating. I think that this quality of wisdom is a great one, it enters into creation. In the mediatorial operations of God in creation, it entered there, wisdom was there, but is seen now in a prime way in the great vessel that is in mind, in the type here, in Kings, in the assembly.
W.H.W. Would you say wisdom is a feature that enables us to use knowledge?
S.McC. Exactly. It is a resource, a feature of divine resource that enables us to apply light in regard to given circumstances, to work out light in regard to given exercises and circumstances.
W.C. The all varied wisdom of God, it speaks of, worked out in the saints.
S.McC. Yes. @Ephesians 3 refers to that in relation to the assembly. Constantly matters arise which become a challenge to us as to the working out of light that we have had. Well, that is where wisdom would come in.
W.H.W. So that James speaks of the necessity of it, "If any one of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God."
S.McC. James would be very practical about the matter and about matters in general; and you feel especially in regard to the side of working out things practically, we need to seek this feature of wisdom more and more.
{286}
A.M. "Who has been made to us wisdom." Christ is available in that way, our resource at every point.
S.McC. It is interesting how Paul begins the Corinthian letter with reference to Christ in that way; He is "made to us wisdom, from God, righteousness, and holiness, and redemption." So that the saints are fully furnished from Paul's viewpoint, in the local position.
Ques. Does Paul, bringing in the cross in @1 Corinthians 1 do away with the wisdom of this world? The wisdom of the wise according to this world, the cross would meet that, would it?
S.McC. The truth of the cross is to exclude and to eliminate the wisdom of men. There were those that were developing their own wisdom at Corinth and the word of the cross was brought in to put out of court the natural mind, because the place where our Lord was crucified was Golgotha, the place of a skull.
W.H.W. Have you in mind in assembling to Solomon, the people had a sense of the necessity of coming into the gain of this wisdom?
S.McC. That is what I thought that the repeated allusions to the assembling to Solomon would suggest to our minds the importance of making way for Solomon in this light, and what marked Solomon, especially as we take account of the books of Proverbs and Ecclesiastes, the wealth of wisdom that lies in Solomon in relation to practical matters.
L.F. It is not without significance that we have the woman of worth at the end of Proverbs.
S.McC. It is a natural sequence to what comes out in the teaching in the book, that there is one that comes on to our view in whom the resources of wisdom would be expressed on the feminine side. They are presented in Solomon on the masculine side but they come to light in the woman of worth on the feminine side. On the masculine side, in what is presented in Christ, there is no difficulty; where the difficulties come in, is in the working out of the things in the assembly.
{287}
C.A.I. In @1 Corinthians 15 where Paul refers to the distinctions of glory, the glory of the heavenly, the glory of the earthly, he brings in to view the heavenly One and says, "Such also the heavenly ones." Does this indicate that our assemblies need to be in the recognition of the heavenly?
S.McC. Because the heavenly side in the type is stressed in the teaching throughout here; and the more we understand the heavenly side of the truth in Ephesians, the more we shall be helped to work out the Corinthian side.
G.W.B. Would you say a little more as to what you said earlier, as to wisdom being the handmaid of love.
S.McC. Well, I think that we shall find that where sonship is enjoyed among the saints, and where love is free, in its movements and operations, you will find the handmaid right by in wisdom.
D.R.T. Is there a power of attraction lying behind their assembling to him?
S.McC. Well, that is important to notice in relation to ourselves. You get Solomon's service stressed in the first verse of the 8th chapter, involving the elders of Israel, the heads of the tribes, the princes of the fathers. It is a great thing that these elements should come under Solomon's influence, and Solomon sees the prime effect of their so coming. Then it says in verse 2, "And all the men of Israel assembled themselves to king Solomon at the feast in the month of Ethanim." Now the seventh month is to be noted as we have perhaps noted before. It is the climax of the agricultural year, which as the brethren in this area would know better than I do, has to do with the crops. It is the month of the feast of tabernacles when the fulness of the harvest is reached and the enjoyment of it is in mind. So you find that all the men of Israel assembled themselves to King Solomon at the feast in the month of Ethanim, that is the seventh
{288}
month. We find the men of Israel answering to the light or the direction presented in verse 1, and then the state of the saints coming up in relation to their movement in verse 2.
Ques. Would this assembling be in relation to the purpose of God regarding Solomon -- Christ as Son over God's house?
S.McC. Well, the purpose of God would underlie the whole position in Kings in regard to the house; but I think in verse 2 the feast in the month of Ethanim is a question of how the saints are getting on in their souls. How are the saints here and elsewhere getting on in the truth? It is the state that marks the saints which the agricultural year suggests; that is, the yield and development on the subjective side among the saints.
C.A.I. What kind of crops we have?
S.McC. What kind of crops we have; that is an important thing.
D.A.I. It is an important consideration in view of the bringing forward of the basket of first fruits.
S.McC. Well, it would be. The service of God is sustained by the richness of the agricultural year; but then the practical conditions among the saints are prospered through what enters into the agricultural year.
W.H.W. You mean that there has been a spiritual ministry now, what has been the result? -- it comes to light in the seventh month.
S.McC. That is what the seventh month would raise with us. We have been going over the wonderful character of the ministry in the earlier part of the book; but the seventh month brings us up another side, that is, there has been much sowing as we know in these closing days of the dispensation, we have been under a remarkable ministry as to the service of God, as to Christ and as to the Spirit and as to the assembly. Now what kind of crop is coming about? That is the question the seventh month would raise.
{289}
G.W.B. Would Gideon have something of this in mind in threshing wheat in the winepress?
S.McC. Well, he was concerned about the people of God, that the food supply might be preserved from the hand of the enemy, and God honoured him for it.
W.C. The object of this gathering you referred to in Solomon was to bring up the ark of the covenant. Would you help us as to that?
S.McC. Well, I think it is the grace of the system. The ark of the covenant stresses the great resources of grace in the system and it is important that we should understand the position from that viewpoint too, "Thou therefore, my child," Paul says to Timothy, "be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus" that is what characterises the position in the last days; not only that on our side we depart from iniquity but we are strengthened for it in our constitutions on the principle of being strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus. That is the ark of the covenant, that has a governing place here.
R.G.C. So that James helps in this thought of wisdom being a handmaid of love. He describes the wisdom from above, it is first pure then peaceful, gentle, yielding, full of mercy and good fruits and so on. Is this the kind of wisdom we want to operate, especially when we come together for care meetings?
S.McC. Exactly. So this word in verse 3 is to be noted. Now we have not previously had a word about the priests, in the first two verses there has not been a word about the priests; but notice how it reads in verse 3, "And all the elders of Israel came; and the priests took up the ark." I take it that the priests suggest those, in the type, who have the Spirit and in whom the principles of wisdom would be seen operating, as having the Spirit and capacitated to think and to act for God. So they come in to the position without, as it were, a word. You see in verse 1 it is
{290}
Solomon assembling the elders of Israel, and all the heads of the tribes, the princes of the fathers, to bring up the ark; but when you come to verse 3 it says, "And all the elders of Israel came; and the priests took up the ark," showing how intelligence is operating, not as in the new cart, which provided such disastrous results in David's time, but the priests immediately move in and it says they took up the ark.
Rem. The priests¬ lips keep knowledge and at his mouth they seek the law.
S.McC. They had knowledge of the law, they knew what to do and they knew how to do it. Luke stresses the priestly side. You will remember it says of the women they saw *how* the body of Jesus was laid. That is the way things were done.
Rem. Further down the Levites were also brought in, the latter part of verse 4.
S.McC. Yes, that is an added feature; it says, "And they brought up the ark of Jehovah, and the tent of meeting, and all the holy vessels that were in the tent: the priests and the Levites brought them up." As we proceed in the chapter, the truth takes on greater fulness.
W.H.W. Is that working out in type the thought in Colossians, "ye are complete in him"? I was thinking as coming to Solomon there were the elders and the elders know their place. They do not interfere with the priests in their place and the priests know their place.
S.McC. That is how it works out. So that the assembly becomes a wonderful realm in that way under the influence of the headship of Christ. Persons are functioning without one interfering with another, matters are proceeding in an orderly way. The month Ethanim, the seventh month, especially stresses a good state amongst the saints, that is promoting these kind of movements. It is a basis for these kinds of movements.
{291}
W.H.W. There would be room here for the thought of "seeing your order" too would there not?
S.McC. We have it in Colossians. What a great delight to Paul to look out upon the Colossian saints and think of them in that light.
L.F. If we think of our weekly history here we think of the saints characteristically gathering or assembling together to break bread. Would that come in here with the thought of assembling to Solomon?
S.McC. Yes, that would come into the position because it is seen in a special way in the Lord's day morning, the first day of the week. But one is not thinking of it particularly in relation to a special meeting, although it enters in a peculiar way into that time, because the Lord's Supper is the fountain-head of all the gatherings; the service of God flows out of it; the preaching of the word of God and all the meetings during the week flow out of it. One is speaking of the teaching here in a general way where the ark is being brought into its proper position in the house of God; that is, Christ is being brought into the position that is rightly His. The ministry that is directing towards this end is linked with Solomon as the King.
C.A.I. You referred to the thought of grace in connection with the ark, would you say some more about that.
S.McC. Well, I think the covenant brings in the fixed purposes of God to bless. The covenant reminds us of that, the Lord brought them out from Egypt and they were brought to Himself and at Mount Horeb He unfolded the disposition of His heart toward them. He brought in what was in His mind and heart to them in the ministry of Moses there; and the ark of the covenant stands peculiarly linked with that side of things.
A.T.S. So would the title, "in Christ Jesus," have special force in that connection, in a day of brokenness?
{292}
S.McC. Yes, it would seem to characterise the whole of 2 Timothy, would it not? In nearly every chapter there is an allusion to it.
W.C. In verse 4 it is referred to as the ark of Jehovah, would you help us as to that?
S.McC. The ark of Jehovah is specially stressing its relations with God, not so much its relation to the people; the covenant brings in the people, it is obvious that God would make no covenant in relation to Himself. The covenant bears on the people but the ark of Jehovah represents peculiarly what Christ is to God.
C.A.I. Would it imply the embodiment of all those thoughts and feelings in the heart of God towards us expressed in the person of Jesus?
S.McC. Exactly. And the tent of meeting is brought up with it and all the holy vessels that were in the tent; the priests and the Levites brought them up. They are not instructed or told to do it but they do it showing the intelligence that enters into this movement. They are not going to leave one thought behind, all the wealth that has gone before is gathered up and brought into the position.
D.A.I. Is it done without any set order or form, but done through instinct or through spirituality?
S.McC. I should think more spirituality than instinct because when we come to headship it involves intelligence in the saints, that is spirituality, making room for the Spirit. Instincts would, of course, enter into it too, basically, but I think the importance of the feature of wisdom is that the saints are affected intelligently, and they know what to do, they know how to bring in divine thoughts, those that are needed at the right time, and in the right circumstances.
G.A.A. In connection with this matter of things having to be done and Solomon being the focal point, I was wondering if the verse in @Matthew 25 might fit in with what you have in mind; it says, "And the King answering shall say to them, Verily, I say to
{293}
you Inasmuch as ye have done it to one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it to me." Would that fit in with the line of thought that you have?
S.McC. Say something more as to what is on your mind.
G.A.A. Well, I thought the point seems to be that things are to be done, and the true Solomon being the gathering point; so that I thought that scripture would emphasise what can be done as under the Lord Himself.
S.McC. Yes, it is very interesting in that section; the sessional judgment is before us there. It is making way for the introduction of the world to come with all that is linked with it on the Solomonic side; and of course the treatment of the messengers would be their treatment of Christ; so that the Lord is the focal point you mean, in the matter there.
F.W. I was going to ask a question as to "all the holy vessels"?
S.McC. It shows the importance of having *all* the truth in our minds, not just part of the truth. It says, "And the tent of meeting, and all the holy vessels that were in the tent"; now that represents all that stood related to the ministry of Moses. It is not called the ministry of Moses here but it is all that stood related to the ministry of Moses and it is brought forward and fits into the position that we have here -- the priest; and the Levites intelligently doing what is required.
T.R.H. So that while Leviticus and Deuteronomy would give us divine principles in their orderings, would wisdom make these divine principles function in a sphere of divine grace?
S.McC. Well, that is exactly what is in mind. Wisdom is the great feature that we need, as to how things are made to operate. Light opens up the mind of God to us as to the truth, and as to principles; but wisdom is essential as to how the truth is to operate,
{294}
and that is the difficulty with us; I mean there is no lack in the truth. We have all the ministry and we have all the light as to the truth and principles; where the difficulties constantly come in is on the line of wisdom, as to how to make the truth operate.
T.R.H. Paul called for it in Corinth. One wise man he called for.
A.T.S. I do not want to divert but I wondered if you would say a word as to the quality of spiritual understanding in connection with what you are saying. The three are mentioned in Colossians; wisdom, knowledge and spiritual understanding. You have been speaking of wisdom in relation to knowledge or light; but how does the other quality fit in with things in the working out of matters administratively. The thought of spiritual understanding, how does it fit in with the working out of things. What does it mean?
S.McC. You remember the reference in Ephesians to the being renewed in the spirit of your mind. Spiritual understanding I think links with that and with what our brother was saying as to what is instinctive, not with the early instincts in the believer in regard to the moral question as in Romans, like Jacob taking his brother Esau by the heel; but more what is instinctive on the principle of "We have the mind of Christ," that is we have the thinking faculty. It is one thing to have the thoughts, but having the mind of Christ means that we have the faculty. I think spiritual understanding links with that kind of thing. Wisdom is the resource but understanding links with the faculty. We have got the right way of thinking and working out the truth.
L.F. Would @John 20 help us? The words say there "As the Father sent me forth, I also send you." Then he breathed into them. I was thinking of the manner in which things are done and the ability to do them.
S.McC. I see, the ability to do them. The Spirit in that way helps us as to spiritual understanding;
{295}
it is a quality in the saints which is a great feature marking both the Colossian and the Ephesian letters.
G.W. Is it that wisdom is profitable to direct in this matter?
S.McC. Wisdom is resource, understanding is not quite resource in that setting. Understanding involves our apprehension. Wisdom does not exactly involve our apprehension; it enters into the working out of what we apprehend.
W.H.W. In assembly matters does the resource of wisdom mean that the brethren are never held up?
S.McC. Exactly. That is the point in wisdom. Wisdom means that we are not baffled, we do not reach an impasse. Wisdom being the handmaid of love, there is always a way through in working the truth out.
Rem. "To one ... the word of wisdom," it says.
S.McC. Well, that is what there is in the assembly, what is under the Spirit's hand, that may be something that is needed for the particular moment, because, in the assembly, in the mystery involving Christ and the assembly we have the wealth and fulness of wisdom. A remarkable thing, as it says in Colossians "In which" not "in whom" but "In which are hid all the treasures of wisdom and of knowledge." Knowledge means the understanding of the divine mind but wisdom involves how it is going to work out.
D.R.T. @Proverbs 1: 2 -- 3, "To know wisdom and instruction, to discern the words of understanding, to receive the instruction of wisdom." Wisdom is instruction in the working.
S.McC. Well, it is.
W.H.W. Do I understand that you have in your mind that any local company has this wisdom, it is available to them irrespective of whether there is a gift of wisdom in that company or not? That is a different thought, is it not?
S.McC. That is another side. It is a question of
{296}
what is in the assembly. The great resources that are linked with the assembly, from the Colossian viewpoint, in which (that is the mystery) are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.
G.W.B. Would this preserve us in a matter arising that is difficult, from doing what someone may think, instead of waiting on the Lord that the truth might be brought to bear in the power of the Spirit, as giving an answer to the question in mind?
S.McC. We should understand how to make way for wisdom flowing from Christ in His headship, typified in king Solomon. We should make way for that amongst us so that it may operate in the solution of matters.
G.W.B. Is not our difficulty that we are too prone to lean on what someone may think?
S.McC. Well, that is native to all of us.
W.H.W. Wisdom is said to have treasures.
S.McC. Yes, they are to be brought out.
C.A.I. Understanding would come in, in the recognition of the headship of Christ and all that is there in Him. As we have understanding in that connection there would be the availability of the resources that can be brought to bear on any matter.
G.A.A. The sisters would have a valued part in this drawing out, would they not?
S.McC. Certainly. That is the great value of the assembly in the light of Colossians involving the brothers and the sisters. It says of the mystery in that epistle that in it are hid all the treasures of wisdom and of knowledge. So that as the saints stand related to one another and to Christ in a dependent way, you would expect some of these treasures to come out.
B.I. In our difficulties would you encourage us to be restful in waiting on the Spirit in regard to a word of wisdom. We are furnished as well in this locality as we would be anywhere.
S.McC. Yes, from the standpoint in which we are
{297}
speaking of it. Of course that would not preclude help through gifts of government that the Lord may have in His own provision set in the assembly. It does not militate against that, in fact it makes room for that to operate, but we should be concerned to see the resources that there are in every local company, to work out matters for themselves.
Rem. So that basic to this Christ is made unto us wisdom.
S.McC. Yes. Paul says in 1 Corinthians that God has made Christ wisdom unto us, but the difficulty with us comes in the understanding of that, the working out of that.
C.A.I. What would you say as to Paul's combat as he refers to it in @Colossians 2 as bearing upon this matter of wisdom? He combats to the end that their hearts might be encouraged, being united together in love. Does combat imply that there are forces that are working against us in this respect?
S.McC. He finishes chapter 1, verse 29, "Whereunto also I toil, combating according to his working, which works in me in power. For I would have you know what combat I have for you, and those in Laodicea, and as many as have not seen my face in flesh; to the end that their hearts may be encouraged being united together in love, and unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding, to the full knowledge of the mystery of God; in which are hid all the treasures of wisdom and of knowledge. And I say this to the end that no one may delude you by persuasive speech." That is, Paul is seeking to draw their attention to the greatness of what there is in relation to the mystery, Christ and the assembly. Especially what there is down here among the saints, the treasures of wisdom and of knowledge and that this matter involves combat on the part of Paul because the enemy is always seeking to deflect the saints from Christ in His headship.
{298}
G.W.B. Would what you are bringing before us help us to reduce, maybe, the length of some of our care meetings?
S.McC. Well, it would, because there is understanding and there is wisdom; we have to see that these things belong to the assembly. It is not that we call them in as if they were outside the room, they are there among the brethren, in the brothers and sisters, they are there in the body. The body is an organism replete with these qualities. The thing is to make room for the headship of Christ that through that kind of influence these resources may come out.
R.G.N. This all emphasises what you were referring to earlier -- the assembling. We seem to deprive ourselves so often of these resources through lack of unity.
S.McC. That is where the difficulty comes in. This word assembling is a dignified word in christianity. Paul brings it up in a very dignified way to adjust them in the way they came together. We need to see the dignity that attaches to the position as we assemble together.
G.W.B. Does what you referred to in Colossians, "being united together in love," bear upon that?
S.McC. That is the great point. We have wonderful light as to the body; where the difficulty comes in is working out the truth of the body practically. Moral distance comes in between us in our localities, it is remarkable the estrangement that comes in sometimes between brother and brother, and sister and sister, and vice versa. The body is to correct that kind of thing, so that we might be set together organically, especially under the influence of the headship of Christ.
G.W.B. True love would not tolerate that distance, would it?
S.McC. Nor would the working out of the headship of Christ, the influence of king Solomon amongst the saints, allow it.
G.W.B. The Lord speaks to his disciples in John
{299}
15, "This is my commandment, that ye love one another, as I have loved you."
S.McC. Exactly. Now it says in verse 6, "And the priests brought in the ark of the covenant of Jehovah to its place, into the oracle of the house." This is to be noted; why the oracle should be brought in here is because divine speaking would be in mind. The oracle suggests the ambit of divine speaking, and that is an important thing, in this section, because all the truth is to be in our minds. The Spirit is here to guide us into all the truth. The seventh month suggests the completing of things, on the agricultural side, and the oracle suggests all the truth, the whole mind of God.
W.H.W. Difficulties come in when we have not got the whole truth. It has been said that the truth is the only ground that we can stand together on.
S.McC. Therefore the importance of whole thoughts -- being in our minds. One of the things Mr. Taylor has stressed through the years is that we should have *whole* thoughts in our minds, that is, whole thoughts as to the truth, and whole thoughts as to the assembly.
R.G.C. Does this involve the oracle, being marked by accuracy, acting according to divine principle?
S.McC. That is, it is the mind of God here, not the mind of man. The mind of God, accuracy in the truth.
G.W.B. Would that then suggest that having the whole truth, as you say, in relation to any matter, it would have the necessary result of setting the saints together, whereas part of the truth may have the opposite effect?
S.McC. Paul is prepared to accept what the Corinthians did, he refers to acknowledging them in part, he is prepared to go on with that, but he labours to get them on to the ground of the whole truth.
D.R.T. Do we see something of that in @Acts 15, in the way wisdom dominated the situation there, Peter standing up and the mind of God is made known.
S.McC. The principle of the oracle is there. Then
{300}
it says in the scripture before us, and I think it is beautiful, after the reference to the oracle in the most holy place it says "under the wings of the cherubim; for the cherubim stretched forth their wings over the place of the ark, and the cherubim covered the ark and its staves above." We are reminded of the balance of the truth in this way, the cherubim being symbolic beings, referring to care and protecting interest, especially as to what the ark suggests. I think that should be known constantly, the element of what is suggested in these symbols. The cherubim stretch forth their wings over the place of the ark, notice that "over the place of the ark, and the cherubim covered the ark, and its staves above." It is as if there is this great element of judicial care, a judicial mind. I am speaking of a judicial mind in the sense of a mind that is affected by the Spirit to protect the truth, to protect the person of Christ.
W.H.W. Would we get a suggestion of that in a spiritual way in what the apostle says in @Colossians 1, when he outlines of the features of the greatness of Christ?
S.McC. I think we do. I think we see in the Colossian epistle the cherubim, as we have it here, stretching forth their wings over the place of the ark and the cherubim covering the ark and its staves above. I believe that can be written over the Colossian epistle.
W.H.W. It brings in the idea of the majesty of Christ.
S.McC. That is it. We should never lose sight of that. The majesty of the Person of Christ, so that every one of us, brothers and sisters, would constantly be marked by the cherubim feature in order to counteract any alien influence that might affect our minds.
G.W.B. What did you have in mind in regard to the place of the ark you referred to?
S.McC. Well, it is interesting to see that the cherubim stands related not only to the ark, but to the place
{301}
of the ark; that is the place that Christ should have among the brethren in the assembly. There would be divine care exercised as to the distinctive place that is His, as we have referred to it in Colossians, His headship.
T.R.H. Paul's corrective epistles would be somewhat on that line, would they not, being cherubic in character, to preserve the place of Christ in the assembly.
F.McC. We have thought of the staves as the means by which the ark was carried. Do I understand that you are speaking of them on the line of protection as well, or is that the cherubim?
S.McC. "The cherubim covered the ark, and its staves above." I think there is a beautiful suggestion in that, it is the holy care that enters into the gospels. Matthew, Mark and Luke and John too; the holy care that enters into the protecting of what was linked with the movements of Christ in testimony here.
W.H.W. It would enter into @Acts 5 I suppose in Peter speaking to Ananias and Sapphira.
S.McC. Yes, it would. The movement forward of the testimony as we have seen it in the Acts. Now I thought we might just allude briefly to the prayer. It is a remarkable prayer and I think it should affect our souls how, in type, we are reminded of the service of Christ in covering the dispensation, that whatever may come into it in the way of breakdown and failure, provision is made for it. It says in verse 33, "When thy people Israel are put to the worse before the enemy, because they have sinned against thee, and shall turn again to thee, and confess thy name and pray, and make supplication unto thee *in this house*; then hear thou in the heavens, and forgive the sin of thy people Israel, and bring them again unto the land that thou gavest unto their fathers," then you get in verse 31, "if men have sinned," then you get in verse 41, "And as to the stranger also," then verse 44, "If thy people go out to battle." It would seem as if
{302}
every feature is covered in the outlook of Solomon in regard to what comes into the dispensation.
D.A.I. Would Daniel have this substantially in his soul when he opened his window towards Jerusalem?
S.McC. His doing so shows the great place the assembly as typified in Jerusalem is to have in our minds in all these matters. It is a prime matter. It is not just praying but as it says, "and shall turn again to thee and confess thy name, and pray, and make supplication unto thee *in this house*," that is, the stress is on God in the position into which He has come in His house, the assembly as it is in our day.
Rem. In the answer that God gives He pledges Himself?
S.McC. So it says in verse 28, "Yet have respect unto the prayer of thy servant, and to his supplication, Jehovah my God, to hearken unto the cry and to the prayer which thy servant prayeth before thee this day." An understanding of Solomon's service in this prayer would infuse into us the spirit of consideration for all these matters that enter into the dispensation whether a breakdown publicly, or things that affect us locally.
A.T.S. In a certain sense does the Lord cover the dispensation in @John 17?
S.McC. That would be the great link with this chapter, with this prayer. The Lord is covering the dispensation in His intercessory service there.
C.A.I. Moses does not just rise to this because of what he is typically, do you think? He refers in a time of testing to the people being rebels.
S.McC. Moses, of course, refers to a side of things that breaks down; but now this is the glory side of things. We have the heavenly side of things in Solomon and provision made for the whole dispensation. I think it is a touching reference to the intercessory service of Christ, in the type. You remember how He said to Peter, in regard to his difficulty, "Simon, Simon, behold Satan has demanded to have you, to sift you as wheat;
{303}
but I have besought for thee that thy faith fail not; and thou, once thou hast been restored, confirm thy brethren." We do not think enough of the intercessory service of Christ.
W.H.W. Would we be able to read into verse 33 and the other two or three verses following it a suggestion that if there were a real difficulty that was baffling the saints, instead of having innumerable care meetings, to stop the care meetings and have prayer meetings?
S.McC. And cry to God for help for the wisdom needed in the matter.
C.A.I. God would make us joyful in His house of prayer.
S.McC. He would.
G.W.B. I was wondering in relation to what has been said whether @Joshua 9 would bear on it. In that instance they failed to inquire of Jehovah. Would we be much preserved in matters that are difficult if we did what has been referred to and turned aside and inquired of the Lord?
S.McC. Well, I think it is important that we should see the need of bringing divine Persons in. We should never reach an impasse in the assembly; if we do, well, it should raise a question with us as to our state because the Spirit of God is with us and the Lord is with us, so that there would be the ability to go through with every matter, not to be held up by an impasse. An impasse is really the fruit of some alien activity.
F.McC. I was just wondering if Peter in prison would be something like that, but unceasing prayer was made by the assembly to God concerning him.
S.McC. Well, that shows again the importance of prayer. I do not think we make enough of prayer, both privately and publicly. Mr. Raven said in America that if he had his time to live over again he would pray more.
{304}
R.G.C. Do we get that in chapter 10, the Queen of Sheba goes to Solomon even with enigmas? What are these enigmas?
S.McC. Well, she has a lot of them, you know. Sometimes the brethren have a lot of them. Bring Solomon in, that is the point. Come to Solomon, Solomon is the one that has the answer. I mean Solomon represents Christ in His headship, in that way, particularly in regard to this feature of wisdom. Wisdom is a particular feature of the operation of headship among the saints.
T.R.H. The last section that is spoken of here is the breakdown of the children of Israel in captivity. The word is that they pray in relation to the land and to the city and to the house and to the settled place of God's dwelling. Do all these features come in in relation to difficulties, so that these things stand, and the settled place of God's dwelling is not disturbed?
S.McC. So that these dignified thoughts should come into our minds. Solomon stood before the altar. I think we are to learn from that; what the altar represents as standing before it. The difficulty with most of us, I suppose, is, speaking for oneself, that we want to stick to our point and are more prepared to justify our point than to allow the wisdom of Christ, in the operation of his headship, to have its way in the assembly.
Rem. Does the altar suggest that we may have to lay down our lives?
S.McC. That would be the idea. The principle of the altar represents sacrifice and surrender. The Lord surrendered even to death, allowed Himself to go the whole way, but yet laying the basis for the shining out of God through it all.
Rem. Do you think there may be, in the working out of this, a danger of having our minds made up about a matter, prior to coming together?
S.McC. Especially if it excludes the operations of the headship of Christ among the saints.
{305}
A.T.S. In regard to the Queen of Sheba, does what she did suggest how the headship of the Christ may be available to the individual believer?
S.McC. Oh, I think so. I think Colossians puts it on that line; every one of us is put on the ground of responsibility as to it as it says, chapter 2, verse 6, "As therefore ye have received the Christ, Jesus the Lord walk in him, rooted and built up in him, and assured in the faith, even as ye have been taught, abounding in it with thanksgiving. See that there be no one who shall lead you away as a prey through philosophy and vain deceit" and so on, and then he says, verse 19, "and not holding fast the head, from whom all the body." Holding fast the head involves each of us making room for the headship of Christ.
R.G.C. Had James been doing that in @Acts 15? He has been with the true Solomon and said "Brethren, listen to me."
S.McC. So he had moral authority.
W.H.W. We have been speaking a good deal of wisdom connecting it with administrative matters, but does it not primarily link up with leadership in regard to the service of God?
S.McC. I suppose that is where it is seen in result, in the greatest way. That is, the Queen of Sheba was impressed by the ascent, the going up, wisdom entering into that matter.
D.R.T. That is the seventh month really, is it not? Fruitfulness for God.
S.McC. Think of what God will have in the assembly, that choice vessel for His own heart's pleasure, in the wisdom that shines in the assembly. There is wonderful wisdom in the creation, but there is wisdom in the assembly involving the knowledge of redemption and other things that move the feelings of divine Persons.
C.A.I. She appreciates the One who is the Son of the Father's love.
S.McC. Exactly.
{306}
DIVINE ADMINISTRATION IN EPHESIANS (1)
@Ephesians 1
S.McC. This letter, as the brethren know, brings before us the greatest thoughts in the divine mind in relation to the saints of the present dispensation. The ministry in this epistle has in mind that our thoughts might be elevated and enlarged in relation to the immensity of the scope of divine operations, proceeding from Christ in heaven and working out in the power of the Spirit here. While we generally accept, as a matter of doctrine, that the Lord is in heaven; having been raised from the dead and carried up into heaven as Luke tells us, we need to make way for the greatness of this actually in our minds; the greatness of the position linked with Christ as Man in heaven, and from that position things being administered, as we have reference made in this chapter, the whole realm of the testimony being in mind in relation to what is working out from Christ in His position as Man in heaven; the centre of all divine administration, and the administration having particularly in mind in this dispensation, the assembly, although the administration in Ephesians would go far beyond our dispensation. The Lord Jesus when here was administering, He secured the nucleus of the assembly in the disciples, the Spirit coming down in @Acts 2, and forming the assembly. The men that were theme, the personnel, were the fruit of Christ's service here, and then He will administer in the day to come, when the fulness of times will be reached. Things will be headed up in the Christ. He is administering now, as known to faith, in the present dispensation, in heaven, with the whole realm of the testimony in mind, and
{307}
the whole scope of the truth in mind, that we might be brought into it through that administration, involving of course, as we shall see later, the work of the ministry, and each one of us having part, because the saints come into it, each one of us receiving grace, according to the gift of the Christ. It will be obvious that we cannot cover the whole chapter with all the details, and it is suggested as a basis of enquiry this morning, that we keep before us the greatness of the saints in relation to divine counsel and then the greatness of the administration contemplated in the body of the chapter, and then the great position in heaven, in which Christ is viewed, and in relation to which the assembly is with Him, as it says, "Gave him to be head over all things to the assembly which is his body the fulness of him who fills all in all." He is given to be head over all things to the assembly, the assembly having part, as we have often noticed, in this wondrous working out of divine thoughts, in all their dignity and greatness.
P.B. This is all that the Father does, in the chapter?
S.McC. Well, it is to be noted the way that in verse 3 God is referred to as "the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ," whereas in verse 17, He is mentioned as "the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory," bringing in the fulness of the thoughts that are in mind in the operations that are contemplated in this chapter.
C.A.I. Would you say a little more in regard to those two references?
S.McC. I suppose the one, as we have been taught, particularly stands related to the thought of sonship, its greatness and dignity as it applies to the saints. It applies, of course, uniquely to Christ, but it is applying to the saints in this section of the word, and then the particular Allusion to the dignity of Manhood as seen in the Lord Jesus Christ, the "God of our Lord Jesus
{308}
Christ," a particular reference to what manhood is to God in this glorious setting.
C.A.I. Your allusion to the greatness of the thoughts in divine counsels would bear particularly upon the first reference, would it?
S.McC. That is the way it stands, the "God of our Lord Jesus Christ" is brought into the operating section of the chapter, whereas the "God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ" is brought before us in the section that refers to Him as the source of all our blessing.
A.C. How do we come into the good of this? I am referring to a verse in the 4th chapter of Ephesians which enjoins us to grieve not the Spirit.
S.McC. Well, prayer has a good deal to do with our coming into it, but one's concern is first of all, not that we should be engaged with how we come into it, but that we should let the Spirit of God bring into our minds the greatness of divine thoughts, apart from whether we come into them or not. We should allow the infiltration into our minds, in the power of the Spirit, of the glory of divine thoughts.
C.F.I. So the ascription of praise in verse 3 helps; it is full of the thought of the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Would He not stand out as magnified in our gaze in that very reference?
S.McC. He would. The whole bearing of the great thoughts that are in mind in this chapter would lead to a worshipful spirit on our part, not exactly in thinking of what we have got, marvellous as that is, in the teaching, but in taking account of things from the topmost view, what God Himself is, in His own glory and greatness operating from Himself and for Himself.
C.S.K. So that this section is a doxology on the part of Paul in relation to the "God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ" because of what He has done?
S.McC. Exactly. He is viewed as God in this way
{309}
in relation to the greatness of these thoughts that apply to the saints of the assembly at the present time. I do not think that we shall ever be in the testimony effectively or shall ever be able to administer effectively, unless we understand how to appreciate and apprehend what we have here.
T.R.H. So do the last two verses suggest the power of that administration as secured in the assembly?
S.McC. Yes, allusion is made to the greatness of the power of God, especially bringing into our minds the greatness of resurrection. Resurrection is a remarkable thing in the ways of God; while the assembly's place is based on ascension, and she is a heavenly vessel, a heavenly family, stress is laid in the closing verses of the chapter on the unique power linked with resurrection.
W.I.B. So that the thought is accentuated, is it not? The surpassing greatness of the power, working in the might of His strength?
S.McC. It is not only referred to, but it is enlarged by the adjectives employed to impress our minds with the greatness of the matter on hand.
D.B. Would the verse in @1 Corinthians 8 somewhat bear out this "To us there is one God, the Father, of whom all things and we for him; and one Lord, Jesus Christ, by whom are all things and we by him?"
S.McC. Yes, that brings before us the economy, the divine arrangement into which divine Persons have come in view of the administering of these thoughts, and the working out of them that we have in this chapter.
M.R.J.M. When we think of the greatness of the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ and then think that He has chosen us, does it really make us wonder that we should be in this choice?
S.McC. Well, it does, and it should set before our souls, the greatness of the saints in sonship, that each
{310}
one of the saints has come under the divine eye as it were, in this regard.
G.R.D. Would you say something as to why the apostle begins with sonship and then goes on to the thought of man as you spoke of it? Is sonship a place of dignity, and answering to the affections of the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the other bearing upon representation more?
S.McC. So that the greatness of God's power in resurrection is working out in relation to the public testimony. In fact, resurrection is the greatest witness to God's power in the public testimony, while ascension is more the hidden and inward and secret side, understood by the assembly, as a unique family standing in relation to the position in ascension.
E.B. Does that emphasise the fact that conditions proper to sonship involve Christ at the right hand of God; while He entered into it when here, the full thought of sonship involves Christ glorified?
S.McC. Yes, as to us, in view of our coming into the position. Christ at the right hand of God is the great measure and standard. The Lord was unique in sonship here (John's Gospel stressing it) in the position He came into in the bosom of the Father, an Object of contemplation to those that were around Him.
W.J.B. So that His resurrection added nothing to Him personally. It did not increase or enlarge the thought of sonship in Him personally, did it?
S.McC. That is the important thing to see, that sonship in Christ as John presents it, the position into which the Lord came, was unique and marvellous, and whatever came about in His going into death and being raised from the dead, it added nothing to the intrinsic value and blessedness of sonship seen in Him as Man here below. He is the same on high, only the condition is changed. He is now in a condition of manhood according to the purpose of God.
{311}
C.F.I. So that "I ascend to my Father and your Father." Ascension has brought the saints into the place, has it?
S.McC. Yes, and the condition, the body of glory that our Lord has taken, bears upon our part and place in sonship, because we are going to be conformed to it. Sonship in actuality, involves that our bodies are transformed, conformed to the body of glory of Christ above.
C.S.K. It was necessary, was it, for the Lord to take this place of exaltation in order that we should be brought into it in the family to which we belong?
S.McC. And in view of administering in the whole realm of the testimony, in regard to the great thought of the assembly, and what is in mind in this dispensation in the one family. There is only one family in this dispensation. There are not two families, there is only one family, and all the administration is working out at the present time in relation to that one family, the assembly.
C.S.K. Would you say why the heavenlies are emphasised so much in Ephesians?
S.McC. To bring into our minds the thought of elevation, the thought of altitude. It is a great matter having in view especially all that is current in the profession around us, in the way the standards of the truth have been lowered, that our thoughts should be elevated, and Ephesians is especially stressing the thought of elevation.
M.R.J.M. With Israel it was natural blessings in earthly places. Verse 3 immediately brings in spiritual blessings in heavenly places in contrast.
S.McC. Well, exactly, to impress our minds with the character of our blessings that are referred to here in Christ.
F.W. Why is the emphasis on "before the world's foundation" and "beforehand?"
{312}
S.McC. To show how what we have here takes precedence over all that is linked with things in this world. Hebron was built before Zoan in Egypt, as we have often noted; the purpose of God takes precedence of all that is in the scene through which we pass.
C.F.I. Was the exalted place of Christ in manhood in divine counsel before the foundation of the world?
S.McC. Well, it was. As to condition, it is essential, in view of the saints coming into it, that the full thought in regard to Manhood is seen in Christ as exalted, but as we were saying, it does not add *intrinsically* to Christ's sonship which was seen so uniquely here below, "the only begotten Son who is in the bosom of the Father." @John 1: 18.
C.F.I. I was thinking of the references to Christ, "Every spiritual blessing in the heavenlies in Christ" and then "chosen us in him" and "taken us into favour in the Beloved." All seems to centre around that Person, does it not?
S.McC. We could never be united to Christ here below. There are two thoughts that run through Ephesians. That is sonship and marital relation, sonship referring to the saints in their individualities, and marital relation referring to the assembly as an entity on the feminine side, as united to Christ. Well, we could only be united to Christ on the other side of death, we could not be united to Him here below.
G.W.B. Does what you have said give point to the Lord's word to Mary in John, "Touch me not for I have not yet ascended?" Chapter 20: 17.
S.McC. Exactly, so that our links with Him as of the assembly, are not with Him as Man here in the days of His flesh. The full thought and the purpose of God is reached in Christ in heaven, and we are united to Christ in heaven.
C.A.I. So that the divine thought for the saints is
{313}
nothing less than sonship as seen in this blessed Man in heaven.
S.McC. And it is important that we should see that there is nothing exceeding the greatness of sonship. The marital thought does not exceed sonship in greatness, the thought of sonship represents the greatest of divine thoughts in regard of the saints.
T.R.H. Do we see the thought in type in @Genesis 24, "my son" stands out in all his greatness and what follows is the bride secured for him.
S.McC. Isaac represents Christ as the heavenly man officially. He is a peculiar type of Christ as presented in Ephesians. In relation to Sarah's tent, it serves to show us and amplify in our minds that the Lord is operating in relation to the whole realm of the testimony. Israel was in it once, but now the assembly is in it and the Lord is operating from heaven in relation to the scope of the testimony here, the Spirit in the assembly corresponding with that.
C.A.I. I think it would help if we could have something more in regard to the thought of sonship as applying to the saints, being a greater matter than even the thought of the assembly in its marital relations.
S.McC. Well, it is important that we should see that nothing transcends sonship in the saints as to blessing, because sonship brings out the peculiar nearness of the saints to God. The marital side is the peculiar links of the assembly with Christ.
W.J.B. Christ as Man?
S.McC. Christ as Man, not as God. It would be blasphemous to link the marital side with God, because we could never be united to God, we are united to the exalted Man.
C.A.I. Does sonship in that way involve our personal relations with God?
S.McC. Exactly, and sonship is to colour the whole
{314}
administration in the realm of the testimony. It is peculiarly linked with the Father here in Ephesians, the "God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ who has blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenlies in Christ." Sonship involves relationship.
P.B. Does the 5th verse help us in that, "having marked us out beforehand for adoption through Jesus Christ to himself?"
S.McC. Exactly, showing that the great point that would be in mind in sonship, is in its standing related to God, but presented in this way, in the One whom we know as the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
G.R.D. Would you say a word on the thought of being associated with Christ in this matter of sonship? Does it link up at all with what was just remarked, "through Jesus Christ to himself," and then, "taken us into favour in the Beloved?"
S.McC. Well, all that points to the greatness of sonship in this position. The introduction of the Beloved brings a peculiar focal point to our minds in the teaching, that sonship has a peculiar place in relation to the mediatorial position. We have got the Spirit of God's Son in our hearts.
C.S.K. Is the glory of that order of Man emphasised here?
S.McC. Well, it is. The order of man would be particularly in mind in the reference to the God of our Lord Jesus Christ.
F.W. I did not follow what you were saying about the Beloved. Would you say that again?
S.McC. Well, I think it is a focal point, a point in relation to which the affections of divine Persons and of the saints move and they converge upon that point, the Beloved. It is Christ in the unique attractiveness of His manhood, being a focal point both in regard
{315}
to divine Persons, the Father and the Spirit, and also in regard to the saints.
C.F.I. Does the individuality of the saints stand out in relation to sonship? We are viewed severally in this way, are we not? I wonder if we may have lost, and perhaps not just realised it sufficiently in having perhaps not made enough of sonship. We have viewed ourselves more in relation to the assembly in a feminine way which would be the saints viewed in a corporate way, and perhaps something has been lost in the individual touch.
S.McC. Well, I think it is important to see the great place that sonship has in that relation, because sonship brings out our nearness to the Father, and our peculiar links with Him in intimacy, each one too having a distinctive place, a distinctive impression of Christ and of God in that relation.
D.B. Would you say that sonship is the great thought of God's pleasure for men?
S.McC. That is what we were saying earlier, that there is nothing as far as we are concerned that transcends the greatness of sonship, as to our blessing. If we think of God in the most extended thought in which we may think of Him, in the fullest thoughts in which we may think of Him, and our relations in manhood in that glorious setting, it is manhood in sonship.
W.J.B. And it is to the praise and glory of His grace that we are taken into favour in the Beloved?
S.McC. Things are working out in this great and dignified way, the glory of His grace, the riches of His grace, the good pleasure which He purposed in Himself, and then further down, to the praise of His glory. It is all maintaining in our minds the high level of the administration that is operating, centring in Christ in heaven, working out according to the purposes and counsels of eternal love.
{316}
M.R.J.M. Is it because God has found so much pleasure in sonship in Christ, that He has taken us in? Galatians seems to suggest that it is taken in. Sonship is given to us, the Jew was under bondage, and the Gentile had right to nothing.
S.McC. Well, we come into it as it is extended to us in that way from Christ. Sonship is no afterthought of God. Sonship was a blessing marked out for men before time.
C.A.I. Do you think there is a danger of our limiting the thought of sonship to status, whereas does it not really involve the intimacy of holy affection and relationship, the Spirit being given to us to enable us to enter into it on our side?
S.McC. Sonship in its grace and dignity is to cover the whole position in whatever we do, in the realm of the testimony. Whatever we do, however we act, it is to be coloured by the uniqueness of sonship as seen in this dispensation.
W.J.B. So that the great fact of sonship lies behind priestly service in the worship of God?
S.McC. That is the truth, and it lies behind priestly service in administrative action. In the Old Testament it was foreshadowed in the type, that the family side underlies the thought of priesthood, otherwise it would be out of balance. The arbitrary character of the law is tempered in the priesthood by the basic side in the family.
A.J.C. Do we get the greatness and glory of sonship always maintained? Although we may not attain to it, is the standard always preserved?
S.McC. Whether we come into it or not, it is there. There are others that may come into it, we do not make the thing, as it were, it is there in the divine mind, and it is important that the standard should not be lowered.
{317}
G.H.R. Is the good pleasure of His will really involved in that standard?
S.McC. According to His good pleasure, first of all, verse 9, which He purposed in Himself. As if this matter of sonship as we understand it in the light of these expressions would have a commanding place in our thoughts. What a serious thing it would be to fall beneath the level of it, to fall beneath the dignity of it, and to interfere with the liberty of it. I think that is what the Lord is stressing on the eve of the translation, that the saints might be set free in the greatest and most distinctive of the blessings in the dispensation -- sonship.
E.A.S. Is that why Paul, in the third verse, starts off with "Blessed be the God ... " his sense of the greatness of it?
S.McC. So that the grace of it flows into the realm of administrative operations here below, in the way we regard one another, and serve one another. It is the grace of this, flowing into the administrative position in the realm of the testimony, that is to affect us.
A.McK.H. Would you say a word as to why the thought of redemption comes in here?
S.McC. Well, I think it is important to see how redemption comes in, specially stressing its position "*in whom* we have redemption." I think it would stress what beloved Mr. Taylor has referred to in the course of his ministry as the "glory of redemption." It is the glory of it, the position of it here, in whom, in the Beloved, that exalted Object of divine affections, that redemption is presented.
C.S.K. In the 8th verse, speaking of "the riches of his grace which he has caused to abound towards us in all wisdom and intelligence;" does that suggest that it is really open for us to enjoy it in the power of God?
S.McC. That is the point, being the handmaid of
{318}
love and suggesting the feature of resource; these expressions bring to us the way that the truth is working out whatever the difficulties may be, redemption implying what enters into the history of those who are referred to as the sons.
A.I. As Paul says in Colossians, "the Son of his love," and he goes on to say "in whom we have redemption." I was thinking of "the Son of his love" as connected with the Beloved.
S.McC. Very good. The Solomon side is stressed there in Colossians. It is an expression intensifying the thought of affection and love, showing that the blessings are not arbitrary, they are the outcome of the working of divine affections.
C.F.I. Would the contemplation of this thought, "Taken us into favour in the Beloved," help us in the enlarging of the divine affections made known in sonship; to think of One who is the Beloved, who fully answers to that love?
S.McC. Yes, and Ephesians is good for keeping the standard before us. We think of the full responsiveness of sonship seen in Him, what it was intrinsically in the days of His flesh here, but what it is now in the new condition and position according to the purpose of God which He is in, in heaven.
P.B. Would it be right to say that the standard of sonship is seen in manhood as it is in Christ? He is unique in sonship and we are brought into sonship in the order of manhood seen in Him, through redemption?
S.McC. Redemption is the great means by which we come into these great thoughts. It lies at the basis of everything, and therefore we should never forget the glory of redemption. It is a feeling note in the chapter that would touch our innermost affections.
A.C.I. Are we sons by adoption and by faith?
S.McC. We are sons by faith in Christ Jesus, not
{319}
sons by birth. The Lord Jesus came into sonship by birth. We are not sons by birth, we are sons by adoption. We are all God's sons by faith in Christ Jesus. We should keep in mind towards the end of the chapter what Paul alludes to in verse 15, "Wherefore I also, having heard of the faith in the Lord Jesus which is in you, and the love which ye have towards all the saints." That is the whole realm of the testimony is in mind, and divine Persons are seeking to enlarge us as to the *whole realm* of the testimony. This is not just linked with some of the saints, but involves all the saints, the whole thought of the assembly. The Lord stresses it in Philadelphia. We must be careful lest we imply that Philadelphia is only those walking in the truth, because, in Philadelphia the Lord has the whole assembly in mind, and Ephesians would intensify the thought of all the saints in our minds. There are promises in Philadelphia to those walking in the truth.
W.H.W. Would verses 15 and 16 have a reference back to verse 9, "according to his good pleasure which he purposed in himself?" I was thinking of all the saints in verse 15. You were just saying the whole realm of the testimony is in mind. I was just linking verse 9 with what God purposed in Himself. I suppose there was none other great enough to share with Him, but now that is coming out.
S.McC. That is it, so that in the church epistles, love for all the saints is stressed, and I believe that on the eve of the rapture the Lord is helping us to be enlarged in our thoughts in view of the completing of the assembly in the rapture.
G.H.R. Perhaps you could say something more about Philadelphia.
S.McC. Well, the tendency would be for us *to limit* what the Lord is saying there to a few and to think that as walking in the path of separation in the truth,
{320}
that *we* are Philadelphia, and that would never do. That would be pretension. The Lord is thinking of the whole assembly in alluding to Philadelphia, and not a few, as we have been taught.
J.B.T. How would it work out in a practical way, "all the saints"? We can understand it as it is written here to the saints at Ephesus, but how would it work out today in a day of brokenness?
S.McC. Well, you hold them in your affections. Perhaps you have never met the saints in London or in New York, but you hold them in your affections, not just the brethren in this city but in every part of the world, all the saints are held in our affections.
C.S.K. So that laying hold of the truth in relation to the saints in this way at this present time, will prevent us from drifting into sectionalism and sectarianism?
S.McC. It helps in the working out of the administration in the realm of the testimony, that we have large thoughts, that we are marked by large thoughts in our minds. We do not hold the truth loosely. We hold the saints in our affections.
W.J.B. It gives us a liberal and generous outlook on the brethren?
S.McC. Exactly. We were saying the other day that Matthew would regulate us on the administrative side, but John would enlarge us on the family side as to all the saints. Caiaphas prophesied that Jesus was going to die to gather together in one the children of God scattered abroad and I think in view of the translation we should have them in our minds and in our prayers.
C.S.K. Should we always hold the brethren or the saints of God on this level, not viewing them below it?
S.McC. We shall never be able to serve them rightly unless we do. There may be conditions come in concretely
{321}
which might deny what we are referring to, but you always hold them abstractly in this light.
M.R.J.M. Are you thinking of the liberation of those that are tied up in the systems of men too? I was only thinking of the height of privilege that we enjoy, from this chapter; we would long that others may be brought into it too.
S.McC. Exactly. We hold the ground for them. They are not available to us to work out the thoughts with us.
{322}
DIVINE ADMINISTRATION IN EPHESIANS (2)
@Ephesians 2
S.McC. I think the Lord would help us in relation to the eyes of our heart, so that they might be more and more enlightened in relation to this great unseen order of things centring in Christ as Man in heaven. The Spirit would serve us in bringing more and more into our minds the richness of what is involved in the working out of the administration as presented in this epistle in relation to Christ in heaven and the effectuation of the purposes and counsels of divine love in the saints. We need to give ourselves over entirely so that the fulness and richness that is linked with the place of the assembly in these counsels of love might be better apprehended and appreciated by us. We might refer a moment to the end of chapter 1, also keeping in mind the chapter we have read. The greatness of the work of God from Pentecost to the rapture is contemplated at the beginning of chapter 2, the historical and sacrificial side comes in from verse 11; the introduction of reconciliation, involving both Jew and Gentile reconciled in one body to God by the cross; then the great order of things in the realm of the testimony here below, the household of God, the habitation of God in Spirit. All this serves to bring out the dignity of the saints of the assembly, as being the particular objects of this administration, centring in Christ as Man in heaven and the Spirit here below in the assembly. It is a heavenly order of things, not seen by the natural eye but seen and known by faith.
R.G.N. Would you say something about the expression "the eyes of your heart"?
S.McC. The allusion would be to the affections entering
{323}
into this great matter, the heart being particularly linked with the thought of affections. The spirit of wisdom and revelation involves the way our minds are affected as in this realm, and the eyes of our heart involving that our affections are entering into it. There is the side of light, intelligence, and there is the side of affections, both entering into this great matter of God's inheritance in the saints.
P.B. Emphasis being laid on "So that ye should know what is the hope of his calling?"
S.McC. It is interesting that the first prime feature that is mentioned is sonship. That is, the hope of his calling would be sonship in a heavenly way; it is heaven and the great thought of sonship that is in mind in the hope of God's calling.
C.A.I. Would "the eyes of your heart" carry the thought of enlightenment in the affections that go with sonship?
S.McC. Well, I think so, because as to the great matter of sonship, while it is presented as a gift in the glad tidings, to be laid hold of by faith, God sends out the Spirit of His Son into our hearts, showing how we are to be inwardly affected by it.
W.J.B. Would it be right to say that, "being enlightened in the eyes of your heart," means that we really cannot see these things save as in some measure we are changed morally?
S.McC. Well, exactly. The work of God in all its greatness, as viewed in Ephesians has in mind this great change, morally, in the saints, which enables them to take in and appreciate the richness of these thoughts that we have as to the saints of the assembly.
I.B.T. "The hope of his calling" -- hope usually looks forward, but this seems to be a backward look. Would you say something about it?
S.McC. Well, the hope of His calling involves heaven and sonship. Sonship in actuality involves that our
{324}
bodies will be completely conformed to Christ's body of glory. Well, they are not conformed yet, so we do not have sonship in actuality, because it involves the body of glory; so the *hope* of His calling is referred to, because sonship is linked with heaven in the saints of this dispensation.
A.McK.H. Is that what is referred to in the "earnest of our inheritance?"
S.McC. That is, we have an income. The earnest suggests that we have an income to sustain us in the present time in relation to these thoughts of spiritual grandeur while waiting until we are actually, as to our bodies, brought into them in their fulness.
W.J.B. "Awaiting adoption, that is the redemption of our body," @Romans 8: 23.
S.McC. So that sonship in actuality involves full correspondence to Christ, according to what He is now is as Man before God.
R.G.C. Is inheritance connected with sonship?
S.McC. I should think it is, "What the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints." It would particularly allude to the distributed glory among the saints in relation to all the spiritual impressions that are put upon them through the work of God.
C.F.I. Do we not need to think of that side more -- "the riches of the glory of his inheritance"? It is really in view of what God is securing. Do we not too quickly go to the side of what we are securing?
S.McC. An important thing to see, that the Spirit through Paul is drawing us over to the divine side in relation to the saints, and what divine thoughts are about the saints. It is striking that Paul should be in prison, as if God orders his circumstances so that, free from the arduous toil that his services entailed for him, he might be able, under the Lord's hand and with the Spirit's help, to expand in his thoughts, in
{325}
his ministry, in relation to the glory of the saints from this viewpoint.
C.S.K. Would the princes in Numbers, as bringing forward their offerings each on his day, be representative of the saints, as being the inheritance of God in that way? "Let my son go that he may serve me."
S.McC. You mean that the wealth in the princely offerings would represent somewhat, the principle of this?
C.S.K. I just wondered that. They are representative of the saints of God, as being for Him, are they not, as having something to present to Jehovah?
S.McC. What wealth there was there! Although I suppose in fulness what we have here brings us to the Canaan side.
Ques. Is there the thought here that we are quickened in relation to these things?
S.McC. Well, the work of God comes on to our view now in what you refer to. The work of God in its entirety, embracing all the saints from Pentecost to the rapture. It is the totality of the work of God presented in the opening verses in @Ephesians 2.
Ques. Does the administration of the fulness of times, cover the whole period of time?
S.McC. The administration of the fulness of times is a reference to the millennium. In the millennium you will have this particular working of administration, so that all that every age was intended to yield in the way of a quota in regard of God, is gathered up and set out in display under the hand of Christ in the administration of that day.
P.B. What is the difference between that and the 22nd and 23rd verses of the 1st chapter? How are they linked? "And gave him to be head over all things to the assembly which is his body, the fulness of him who fills all in all."
S.McC. Well, it is to bring out the greatness of the assembly; that the assembly shares with Christ in the
{326}
greatness of the administration that is linked with Him. It says, "And gave him to be head over all things to the assembly," that is, she is with Him in this great matter of the administration that is proceeding from Him.
C.A.I. Would you say something as to the assembly being the fulness of Him who fills all in all?
S.McC. Well, we have a remarkable allusion to the greatness of Christ in that He fills all in all, and to the greatness of the assembly in that she is said to be the fulness of Him who fills all in all.
A.J.C. Is the greatness of the glory of God seen in that He secures this in a scene where Satan has challenged the rights of God?
S.McC. Exactly. That is, it is not here viewed as in eternity, although the administration will go right on throughout all eternity, in its essence and intrinsic value. We have here before us the greatness of the present moment, the assembly viewed in divine thoughts as the complement of Christ, and capable of sharing with Him in the blessedness of the administration that is committed to Him.
G.A.A. Is what we have looked at and spoken of in verses 17, 18 and 19, acquired on the line of praying? I was thinking of the word, "would give you" in verse 17.
S.McC. "That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, would give you the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the full knowledge of him;" this is to be noted. Paul seems to sense the readiness of divine Persons to help the saints in this great order of things, this heavenly order of things, especially in view of *all* the truth. Ministry is given in view of *all* the truth being arrived at; the full knowledge of Him.
W.J.B. It seems, in this prayer, he desired that the saints might have light; in the next prayer in the third chapter it seems as if it is power, would that be right?
{327}
S.McC. Exactly. So that the prayer in the third chapter touches more the state in the saints; and the intensity of his attitude is more emphasized in that he bows his knees.
W.J.B. I thought this ministry that we are looking at now is objective, that the saints might have an impression of the greatness of God's thoughts; the subjective side being emphasized in the third chapter.
S.McC. So that it is important that we should apprehend fully, on the objective line, the immensity of the scope of these great thoughts that stand linked with the administration of Christ in heaven at the present time, the assembly being the chief item, we might say, in regard to that administration now.
A.McK.H. We have the thought of riches in the terms "the riches of his grace," "the riches of the glory" and "being rich in mercy." If we were formed in the apprehension of that, would we come out in those features?
S.McC. We would. So that as we apprehend the greatness of this heavenly order of things, in which we have part, by faith and the Spirit, we should be marked by richness. We would not be marked by poverty but by richness, in our operations, whether in regard to grace or mercy or to glory.
C.A.I. Is the power important? It seems to have a large place here. "The surpassing greatness of his power."
S.McC. Yes. It is to impress us that it is not merely academic. While we say it is objective, it is not objective in the sense of being merely academic. "The eyes of your heart" means that there is a certain state of inwardness linked with this objective apprehension of the greatness of divine thoughts -- power entering into it.
W.J.B. An apprehension of divine power, whereas in the 3rd chapter that power is to operate in us.
{328}
S.McC. "According to the power which works in us," chapter 3, verse 20. In chapter 1 God is before us "in the might of his strength in which he wrought in the Christ in raising him from among the dead;" and the same power extends to the saints in this anticipative way. That is contemplated in the second chapter, where the full and total result of the work of God is before us.
R.G.W. Would you say a word as to the expression "the fulness of him?" Is it the substantiality of Christ in expression?
S.McC. It alludes to the glory of His Manhood. While it is said of Him that He fills all in all, a reminder to our hearts of His deity, the assembly is not the fulness of deity, but the fulness of the exalted Man and that would allude to all that comes out in relation to His Manhood.
P.B. We have the fulness of the earth in scripture.
S.McC. If you think of the fulness of the earth, you think of the trees, the crops, of all that comes out of the earth in its productive power. Well, the fulness of Christ as Man alludes to all that has come out in Him as Man. The gospels would help us as to it.
D.B. Does the fact of the two expressions being put together, suggest the nearness of the assembly to Christ?
S.McC. Yes, and the nearness of the assembly to deity. While she is not said to be the fulness of God, or the fulness of deity, she is the fulness of the exalted Man who fills all in all, a beautiful reference to His deity, but linked with His position as the exalted Man.
C.S.K. Does this imply that the assembly as such is over all things, too?
S.McC. She shares with Christ in this great matter of the administration of all things, in the light of Genesis, chapters 1 and 2. It says in verse 21 of @Ephesians 1, "But also in that to come; and has put
{329}
all things under his feet;" now the assembly is not one of the things that is put under His feet. She is not put under his feet. She is with Him in the administration of all the things that are put under His feet.
C.S.K. Is there another allusion then to the greatness of the place of the assembly?
S.McC. What an exalted place the assembly should have in our minds from this viewpoint.
T.R.H. Is power the great thought in this section, the, power of resurrection, the greatest power in the universe, which is working to secure all this for God's pleasure? The power is great enough to secure it.
S.McC. So that our minds and hearts should be affected, by this great matter of the power operating in resurrection. You get two expressions in verse 19, "the surpassing greatness of his *power* towards us who believe, according to the working of the *might of his strength*." They should bring into our minds the greatness of what is involved in the resurrection.
W.I.B. @Psalm 18. "Then the earth shook and quaked, and the foundations of the mountains trembled and shook, because he was wroth ... . And he bowed the heavens, and came down," and so on. "He reached forth from above, he took me, he drew me out of great waters."
S.McC. That would intensify in our minds as set out in type in David's history the great mighty power of God that has operated in the resurrection realm. It will operate in relation to every family. Every family will be affected in some way by the power operating in resurrection. But this ministry is concentrating our attention now on the application of that power to the saints of the assembly.
G.H.R. Is it of interest that this chapter deals with the two great thoughts of sonship and of the assembly?
S.McC. Well, it is. We get both the masculine side
{330}
and the feminine side, first the side of sonship, then that linked with the assembly as united to Christ in the heavenly realm. She is not united to Christ here below, but is united to Christ as the Centre of the heavenly domain.
T.R.H. Would Matthew's gospel as the assembly gospel give us the impression of resurrection power, in regard of the angel?
S.McC. It says that he sat upon the stone. In one gospel the stone was removed, but in Matthew it is said of the angel, that he came and rolled away the stone and sat upon it and his look was as lightning, and his clothes white as snow. I think the apprehension of this resurrection power helps us two ways, both in regard to our part and place on the upward line in the service of God, and on the lower and outward line in testimony before men.
C.A.I. Does this matter of power enter into the 6th verse of the next chapter, as raising us up together? Would that be the present operation of power?
S.McC. Yes, we are to know something of the way that this power is operating in us now, quickening coming in in verse 5, "Has quickened us with the Christ and has raised us up together and has made us sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus." The assembly now is the immediate object of the application of the power that we are referring to.
C.S.K. Does this suggest that this power mentioned here that was manifested in Christ is operating in relation to the saints now? The operations of it began in relation to Him.
S.McC. And by faith on our side and with the help of the Spirit, we are able to apprehend anticipatively this great act; because it is evident that we are not raised up together as to our bodies, we are still here in flesh and blood; what is contemplated in @Ephesians 2 is the totality of the work of God in
{331}
the dispensation. We anticipate it by faith and as having the Spirit.
G.R.D. Is the beginning of chapter 2 a reference back to the personnel, the saints viewed individually?
S.McC. Yes, as to the matter of moral history. When we come to the assembly in the light of divine purpose, it is a sinless institution. It has no history of sin, but when we come to the members, we find that there is a history of sin that has to be dealt with in view of our being set free in relation to the greatness of the assembly as in the divine conception.
G.R.D. Would that include the latter part of verse 6, "Has made us sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus." Does that involve the thought of sonship again?
S.McC. Well, it does. It involves sonship in the saints and a restful position. The light of it as affecting us would help us.
P.B. So that it refers to that which has been done and it abides, therefore quickening is a permanent thing.
S.McC. Quickening is a permanent thing. Resurrection has to do with the external side, but quickening has to do with the inward side, although we must keep in mind that quickening in @Romans 8, verse 10, refers to the action of the Spirit in relation to our bodies; but here the inward side would be in mind.
C.A.I. The operation of this power in relation to us involves our elevation into another order of things, an entirely heavenly order.
S.McC. That is the point, and you feel that is what we need help in regard to, that we should see that these things are not beyond us, that in faith and in the resource that we have in the Spirit, there is power to enter upon this elevation, and to lay hold of what is linked with this remarkable order of things in relation to Christ's administration as Man in heaven.
{332}
J.B.T. Is this quickening, in verse 5 subsequent to verse 8, where it says, "ye are saved by grace, through faith?" Is the quickening subsequent to salvation?
S.McC. What is chronological does not enter into the first part of @Ephesians 2. It presents the totality of the work of God viewed apart from a point in time. It is just the greatness of the work of God by itself, and the salvation referred to in @Ephesians 2 is not a question of our sins, or of the power of the enemy. It is a question of being saved entirely -- our place in heaven being involved in it.
W.J.B. Would it correspond with the use of the word "salvation" in @Hebrews 2, "The leader of their salvation"?
S.McC. Yes, and with what was referred to this morning as to Christ being perfected, meaning in that relation, that the full position is reached by Him as Man in accord with the purpose of God.
W.H.W. Would the totality of the work of God in chapter 2 be commensurate with the thoughts of God in chapter 1?
S.McC. That is, we are in the presence of divine Persons and Their operations, and as has often been said, the approach is equal to the revelation. The high level of the operations in chapter 2 corresponds with the high level of the conceptions in chapter 1.
C.F.I. "The great love wherewith he loved us" would be the love and purpose that we have in chapter 1.
S.McC. Yes, and yet the reference to His being rich in mercy shows how divine love adapts itself to the need of the members of the assembly in relation to that which held them.
M.R.J.M. Is that calculated to give us right feelings in relation to divine Persons? "God being rich in mercy." Where would we be if it were not for His mercy?
{333}
S.McC. The whole ministry here is, intended to affect us inwardly, so that all our inward parts are charged by the richness of what enters into divine thoughts as laid before us in the ministry here.
C.S.K. So that we should be holding the truth in love as in the 4th chapter.
S.McC. So that what we are considering is not just academic, it is not just a picture objectively, but quickening would involve the saints as made to live.
P.B. "Quickened us with the Christ, and has raised us up together and has made us sit down together."
S.McC. The raised up together, means all the saints together. Now this should help us as to our relations with one another, and as to what is immediately before us in the rapture, that we shall all go up together, there will not be one left behind. The working out of the administration in Ephesians involves that, that we are all together, and we should think of one another practically, more in this light.
W.J.B. We get a similar use of the word "quickening" in Colossians, do we not, where it says, "You ... he has quickened together with him?"
S.McC. Yes, and what is to be noted, is that in Colossians the resurrection comes first, quickening comes second. In Ephesians quickening comes first and resurrection second. Now we are to notice the change of order in these two epistles. In Colossians, where we are not viewed as off the earth, resurrection is the prime thought, as the great testimony to the power of God, and it is mentioned first. It says, @Colossians 2, 12 and 13, "Buried with him in baptism, in which ye have been also raised with him through faith of the working of God who raised him from among the dead. And you, being dead in offences and in the uncircumcision of your flesh, he has quickened together with him." But when we come to Ephesians; quickening is the prime matter, because we are on the heavenly
{334}
side in Ephesians. So this mighty operation puts us into accord with what is in view in the heavenly teaching of that epistle.
A.I.C. Would the truth of this give us greater liberty in the service of God?
S.McC. Well, that is the point, and free us from tension. I think if there is anything that we need to learn in the service of God it is relaxation, if we might be permitted to use the expression, to be free from tension, and these operations have that in mind.
W.J.B. Would David, as he sat before Jehovah be an instance?
S.McC. Exactly. "Raised us up together and has made us sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus." This would have an effect upon us in going on together, and working out things together.
C.A.I. Would the seventh day of the operations in @Genesis 1 enter into it?
S.McC. Yes, involving the rest of God.
A.McK.H. Paul says, "For this reason," in chapter 3, as though he sums the whole thing up, he has a reason for bowing his knees.
S.McC. So that the greatness of the saints should affect us, because I think the basis for working out everything administratively in our local gatherings is our apprehension and appreciation of the saints in this light.
C.S.K. Is it the divine thought that we should be able to enjoy divine relationships in restfulness, regardless of anything else?
S.McC. We are to learn, as being with God, to magnify His work wherever found. This would help us to see it in its greatness among the saints.
C.S.K. What I meant was that we cannot enjoy divine relationships merely as individuals. It is collective, is it not?
{335}
S.McC. We cannot enjoy this by ourselves, we need the brethren.
M.R.J.M. So does not verse 18 of chapter 1 involve our coming into our inheritance with the brethren before God comes into His?
S.McC. What verse were you referring to?
M.R.J.M. Verse 18 of chapter 1, "The riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints" would involve our coming into ours first of all in right relations with the brethren?
S.McC. Well, God's enjoyment, we might say, is bound up with what we are to one another in relation to His own great thoughts.
W.H.W. What is involved in "Has made us sit down together?"
S.McC. Well, I think, that it is not just an arbitrary exercise of divine power. Love enters into the operation of making us to sit down together as if it is essential that we should sit down together in relation to these great thoughts.
W.H.W. Does a sense of the riches of His mercy help us in these things in the working of them out together?
S.McC. Well, it does.
A.J.C. Would we be helped in the spirit of restfulness you referred to as having to do with God?
S.McC. We have in verse 10 "For we are his workmanship." Think of that expression. We like to speak of workmanship in relation to things here. Much is made of workmanship; but think of the saints of the assembly, as being God's workmanship; as if God is in this chapter bringing forward the saints and saying "That is what I can do." We are *His* workmanship!
D.B. Does the expression, "the Father of glory," bear on all this?
S.McC. It does. It is another enriching expression, showing how great the realm is that we are in.
{336}
G.A.A. It speaks of sitting down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus. Is that the atmosphere in which we sit down together?
S.McC. No other family in the universe of God will ever have the status that the assembly has. The assembly will be known in the universe of God in all her uniqueness because of her status.
G.R.D. Does the reference to the past history in the beginning of the chapter come in to magnify what God is able to do? In spite of what is referred to in the first three verses He is able to reach the full thoughts in His purpose.
S.McC. It is to throw into relief, over against that dark background the greatness of these conceptions of divine love, and the operations of divine Persons, in effectuating them.
A.J.C. Would it involve that all the glory is for God? God has to do with everything, has He not?
S.McC. Exactly. The thought of His workmanship is that we have been created in Christ Jesus for good works. Now we have to understand what these good works are. Where do we see them and find them? They must be there somewhere. God has created us in Christ Jesus for good works. They refer to what we find in the gospels in relation to Christ.
C.A.I. Are you thinking of the various activities of Manhood that appeared in the Son of God as here?
S.McC. Yes. Think of the good works that came to light in the working out of Manhood in all its moral glory in Jesus here under the eye of God, in the place of testimony here before men.
M.R.J.M. So that it is said of Him as serving in Sonship in Mark's gospel, "He does all things well."
S.McC. Matthew would help us in relation to the good works on administrative lines. Luke would help us on the lines of the Gospel. Think of the Lord and the woman in the 7th of Luke, and think of Him
{337}
in relation to other parts of that gospel, the help He was to souls in distress. "How God anointed him ... who went through all quarters doing good, healing all that were under the power of the devil, because God was with him." @Acts 10: 38. We are to walk in these good works, and to do good wherever we can.
R.G.C. @Luke 10: 37 -- "Go and do *thou* likewise."
S.McC. That would be the point; the good works would involve what is worked out and expressed in Manhood in moral glory in Jesus in the gospels.
Ques. Is that in mind when he says that God has before prepared them?
S.McC. Yes. "Which God has before prepared that we should walk in them." They have been before God in Jesus and now we should *walk* in them, so it would be a great responsibility to us to walk in the good works of Jesus as presented in Luke, the anointed Preacher, alleviating distress wherever it could be alleviated, assuaging the grief of humanity as it came in in regard to the widow of Nain and others.
T.R.H. Would it be covered by "To do thy good pleasure my God is my delight and thy law is within my heart?"
S.McC. All that would enter into it basically.
G.P. Would the appreciation of the person of Christ come in? The Lord says in Mark of the woman, "She has wrought a good work as to me," @Mark 14: 6.
S.McC. That is an excellent illustration of a good work, that we should walk in. That is, in walking in that kind of work we will be concerned as to honouring Christ, not man after the flesh, but Christ.
E.B. Would there be a moral order in the way the matter is presented? First we have "made us to sit down together" -- the acme of the thoughts of God in regard to us. We are to take that in, in faith, and by the Spirit. Then, down here, we are to come out as
{338}
an expression of the movements of that Man when He was here. We must be conscious of our place up there before we can come out in expression of Him here.
S.McC. Yes. We can only fill out our part in responsibility in the testimony rightly as we come out from heaven.
C.A.I. Do you think that is how it was with Jesus? The blessed heavenly One was here, a Man from heaven, was He not? Is it not to be so with the saints now that what was seen in Jesus is to be seen in them?
S.McC. Yes, because these good works would not be for heaven. They would be for what is down here in the testimony, linked with the administration working out from Christ in heaven.
C.S.K. Is this the answer to God's original thought that man should be here as representative of Him?
S.McC. Yes, and it gives us the balance in the truth again, that it is not all an objective matter. The whole section brings in the close link between what we are objectively, in the light of divine thoughts, and what we are to be in testimony.
W.H.W. So that would you say the feeding upon Christ in His manhood here, would build us up in the manhood that would enable us to walk in these good works?
S.McC. That is the whole point, and I think we need to repair to the gospels more. We go back to the gospels and are confirmed in the truth, especially as contemplating and feeding upon Christ's manhood as presented there.
M.R.J.M. Is it right that there is not a feature of manhood that is according to God that is to be displayed in the saints here but has been found first in Jesus in Manhood here?
S.McC. It would be all set out in Him as Man and
{339}
we are called upon to walk in these good works, which God has prepared that we should walk in them.
Ques. Does this work out in the first chapter of the Acts, the things that Jesus began to do were to be continued, were they not, and they were?
M.R.J.M. And have we this advantage now that we know that Man as glorified? Mr. Stoney said, "We must be with Him where He is to be for Him where He was."
S.McC. So God would remind us about these good works. Our objective view in relation to heaven is to be balanced in the way we take up a suitable position here below.
A.T.S. Would you be free to say something about the good works as presented in John's gospel?
S.McC. Well, they are interesting, if we take account of them, as in chapter 10 for instance, where the Lord Jesus refers to the way that He came in by the door, and the porter opened to Him, and the way He served the sheep. Then earlier in the 9th chapter the way He served the blind man in whom the works of God were to be manifested.
G.P. Would these good works affect the service of God? By one Spirit we have access to the Father, but do these good works in testimony affect the service of God?
S.McC. So that the position in the assembly is a solid one. It is not just abstract, but there are those concrete good works which are in expression. The first part of the chapter has in mind what is abstract and anticipative, especially what is anticipative, but verse 10 brings us to what is concrete, what we are to walk in.
C.S.K. Do you think we might well challenge ourselves as to activities we may contemplate, whether
{340}
they would come under this list of good works? Is it like Christ, is it like God for me to act so?
S.McC. That is right. That would be the right reaction with us affected in this way. The thought of reconciliation comes up in the second section. The great truth of the work of Christ bringing in reconciliation, which involves unity of affection between Jew and Gentile, and involves unity of affection between us in our relations with one another; all this brings up what is pleasing to God.
W.H.W. Much is made of being "brought nigh" in this section and certain things being removed.
S.McC. It is important to see that, because reconciliation involves, as we were taught many years ago, that the distance is not bridged, it is removed, and in the place of the distance there is nearness; the point of complacency being in Christ.
C.F.I. "And might reconcile both in one body to God by the cross." Is that word "by the cross" of great importance there?
S.McC. It is. It should touch our spiritual emotions, and I think we should be helped to see reconciliation from this viewpoint, because the enemy has wrought in recent time to divide the saints, to bring about wounds and distance. We want to see what is involved in this, the importance of reconciliation in this regard that the enmity has been dealt with and that where enmity was there is nearness, and we are standing together in unity of affection.
R.G.C. Do we have the thought in @Isaiah 58, 12, "And thou shalt be called Repairer of the breaches, restorer of frequented paths?"
S.McC. A remarkable title that is given in that section, and you will remember what precedes it about what people are saying, the removal of wrong language. We might just look at it now that it comes up, Isaiah, chapter 58, verse 5, he speaks of the fast
{341}
and the affliction of soul, is it "that he should bow down his head as a bulrush, and spread sackcloth and ashes under him? Wilt thou call this a fast, and a day acceptable to Jehovah? Is not this the fast which I have chosen; to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the thongs of the yoke, and to send forth free the crushed, and that ye break every yoke?" and then it says, verse 8, "Then shall thy light break forth as the dawn, and thy health shall spring forth speedily; and thy righteousness shall go before thee, the glory of Jehovah shall be thy rearguard. Then shalt thou call, and Jehovah will answer; thou shalt cry, and he will say, Here I am. If thou take away from the midst of thee the yoke, the putting forth of the finger and the unjust speech, and thou proffer thy soul to the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted soul: then shall thy light rise in the darkness, and thine obscurity be as mid-day;" then it says, verse 12, "And they that come of thee shall build the old waste places: thou shalt raise up the foundations that have remained, from generation to generation; and thou shalt be called, Repairer of the breaches, restorer of frequented paths." It is an interesting chapter as bearing on what we have here, our practical relations with one another.
P.B. So it is not merely outward unity here?
S.McC. It involves unity of affection.
C.A.I. In the 15th verse of @Ephesians 2 it says "having annulled the enmity in his flesh."
S.McC. How great the barrier was. It was what you might call an insuperable barrier, a barrier that could not be surmounted, but by the cross -- a touching allusion to the instrumentality that has been divinely employed. By the cross there has been removed this great barrier between Jew and Gentile; so that they are set together, not just in light, but in unity of affection.
C.S.K. Would it rather suggest that if such a great
{342}
barrier could be removed as between Jew and Gentile, the extremes brought together, any difference by nature can be overcome in this way?
S.McC. That is the whole point. So that, as we were saying the other night, there should be no thought of an impasse reached among the saints, whether in our relations with one another as individuals or in our relations corporately, as together in the assembly; there should be no such thing as an impasse.
C.F.I. How do we take home this teaching of the cross to help us to arrive at unity? Is it that each one of us takes home to himself, that man has been exposed and terminated in the death of Christ, and that man is myself?
S.McC. I take it home to myself and see how that man has been ended, terminated judicially in the cross, and if God does not make any room for him, I am not going to make any room for him.
W.J.B. Do we have to watch our prejudices that may be very strong?
S.McC. Yes, because that is the thought in this section. It is a matter of strong religious prejudice between Jew and Gentile; what you might call almost an insuperable barrier, as far as men are concerned.
A.McK.H. That is not only the literal Jew but the characteristics of the legal man, is that right?
S.McC. Well, that is how it would work out with us now. It involved literally, Jew and Gentile, but it would work out with us now that all that is linked with that side of things is removed by the cross, so that we might dwell in nearness to one another and to God. Because it goes on to say, verse 18, "For through him," that is Christ, "we have both access by one Spirit to the Father." I think that is a delightful reference flowing out of adjusted relations between Jew and Gentile.
{343}
C.S.K So that there is one new man which shuts out everything that we might be by nature.
S.McC. It is again showing how the testimonial side is in mind, because the term "one new man" would have no force in heaven; it has force down here, and refers to what is coming out testimonially as the result of the work of God and the work of Christ.
C.F.I. Then would, "in one body," be the inward side?
S.McC. That would be it, stressing the organic links between us, "in one body."
J.B.T. In the epistle to the Romans, we get reconciliation by His death; the death of Christ. Is it significant here it is by the cross? There is a difference, is there not?
S.McC. Well, there is. The death of His Son in @Romans 5, refers to divine affections entering into this great matter of the removal of the distance between us and God, so that we should be before God in all the complacency that Christ as Man is in before God; whereas, here because of the Jewish side, the religious side, the cross is brought in. In Galatians what Paul insists on, in dealing with the Jewish mind is the cross.
W.J.B. Is that because it is a most shameful matter?
S.McC. Yes. We sometimes think, according to standards of human propriety, that Corinthian sin is the most degrading, but we want to see that what is most heinous in the sight of God is religious and ecclesiastical evil, as comes before us in Galatians.
G.W.B. Following "the new man" we get "making peace." Earlier it says "He is our peace," something that is really made, is it?
S.McC. Yes.
W.H.W. Do we see here in verse 18, really what divine Persons have done in view of the Father's pleasure?
S.McC. We have been speaking of the mediatorial
{344}
system, and the operations that have proceeded from God. We might think now, as to what goes in to God, "For through him (that is Christ we have both access by one Spirit to the Father." A beautiful reference to the unity between Jew and Gentile in this matter of the approach. And then we might finish with an allusion to the holy and happy state of things that the chapter closes with, fellow-citizenship, the household of God, and the assembly increasing to a holy temple in the Lord, and the Gentiles built together for a habitation of God in the Spirit. What fulness enters into these references in regard to the position in testimony!
{345}
DIVINE ADMINISTRATION IN EPHESIANS (3)
@Ephesians 3
S.McC. We should be helped in considering this chapter, in keeping in mind the Lord functioning as Man in heaven in regard to the great administration that is proceeding from there, in relation to the whole realm of the testimony, and having in mind the full scope of the truth. We shall see, as comes out in this chapter, the great place the assembly has, and the greatness of divine thoughts that are linked with the assembly in this particular setting. Paul, you will recall at Ephesus, stressed the fact that in his service and ministry among them, he had not shunned to declare to them the whole counsel of God, reminding us of the scope of the truth in relation to his service and ministry in Ephesus. Resident, as he was, three years among them, serving in patient and devoted service from house to house, showing how extensive his labours were, admonishing each one, as he says in @Acts 20, showing how all the saints were in his mind in his service in that locality. And what we should keep before us in our inquiry this morning together, in a subject and dependent way, is his own distinctiveness first, then the way that the assembly is brought in in relation to the thought of the mystery, and then the greatness of the realm of mediatorial operations as in verses 14 to 19; then the great end in the assembly where the worship of God is particularly before us, God in the most extended way we can think of Him, involving Father, Son and Holy Spirit, and answering glory issuing to Him in the assembly, as viewed in the 21st verse. The position of Paul in the prison is to be noted, detained as he was through circumstances,
{346}
no doubt in view of the fulness of the truth coming out. We are thus reminded that circumstances in themselves do not necessarily hinder the outflow of divine thoughts; it may be as under the Lord's hand they may be used in view of the fulness of the truth coming out. The latter part of the second chapter, particularly leaves our minds with an impression as to the greatness of the assembly as the family or the vessel that would be intelligent in regard to every divine thought. For the holy temple in the Lord, in its full result involving the world to come, would show what a vessel of intelligence the assembly is, as F.E.R. said many years ago, the library of the universe. She is the great light-bearer of the universe and the greatness of the present moment in the Gentile assembly, the habitation of God in Spirit, leads Paul to proceed with this great parenthesis in the 3rd chapter, where the greatness of his ministry is stressed.
I.L. What had you in mind in drawing attention to Paul's labours in @Acts 20?
S.McC. I think it is to show us, that the matter of this coming into the truth in relation to the spiritual and heavenly side is not an easy matter. It involved much for Paul in his ministry and service -- much in the way of arduous labour and toil, and yet so prospered by the Lord as it was.
C.A.I. Have you in mind the Lord operating from His position in heaven in relation to Paul's prisonership now?
S.McC. Well, exactly, that it is all part of the functioning of this great administration which has its centre in heaven. The Spirit here in the assembly, commensurate with the position in heaven where Christ is as Man, functions in that position, in relation to the administration which involves the unfolding of all the truth in regard to the counsels of God in this dispensation.
{347}
P.B. So in the first chapter of Ephesians and the 2nd and 3rd you have a climax in relation to the assembly?
S.McC. Yes, and it is to be noted that in each of the first three chapters they close with unique references to the assembly. All the chapters which are dealing with the doctrine of the truth, in regard to the purpose and counsels of God, end with unique references to the assembly. When we come to the hortatory part of the epistle, we do not get the same references to the assembly, but we specially get it where the doctrine of the truth is being opened out.
C.S.K. In this 3rd chapter the apostle almost makes a second salutation. It is certainly different from the beginning of the first, now referring to himself as the one in bonds, or the prisoner of the Christ Jesus. Is there a suggestion in this that what peculiarly sets out the mystery here will be in conflict and in suffering?
S.McC. I think so. It involves that the truth of the assembly from the standpoint that we are considering and looking at it, comes out of circumstances of pressure. Yet on the other hand they are circumstances in which the servant, as free from the arduous nature and character of his service, can take account of the full scope of the truth, and is used of the Lord to bring it to us.
E.B. I think our attention was drawn to the disposition on the part of the Lord Jesus when in the garden of Gethsemane, the way He disposed of the disciples, taking with Him the three, under circumstances of the greatest pressure. Is it to be wondered at that He disposes of His servants, although it may involve them in great pressure, so precious are the matters in hand?
S.McC. So that the difference between chapters 3 and 4 has been often noted; in chapter 4 it is what Paul has accepted in his own soul in regard of the circumstances into which he has been brought, the prisoner
{348}
in the Lord. But in chapter 3 he is viewing it from the standpoint of how he has been detained in view of the nations coming into the truth as to the mystery.
C.F.I. Would the result be seen in verse 4, "Ye can understand my intelligence in the mystery of the Christ?" Is it a great thing that one has this intelligence?
S.McC. Well, it is indeed. Whoever of us may not know too much about it, here is one man that can speak; as we have had pointed out before, his intelligence, "my intelligence in the mystery of the Christ," a remarkable allusion of Paul's to himself, not in any egotistic way, but as restfully understanding his part in the administration of the mystery.
T.R.H. Does this administration from heaven largely take shape in Paul's ministry?
S.McC. In its fulness it does, but we must not leave out the twelve -- the Lord reserved Paul for the completing of the word of God, involving the knowledge of the mystery -- Christ and the assembly as uniquely presented in this epistle. This is peculiarly linked with the Pauline ministry.
E.N.C. Might the activities of the Lord towards the assembly and through the assembly in the present time practically be described in this term, "the administration of the grace of God?"
S.McC. Well, it shows, does it not, that in regard to Paul's service in bringing out the great truth as to Christ and the assembly, that the administration of the grace of God entered into it. We might have put in there, had we been writing it, the administration of the glory of God; but the administration of the grace of God shows us what a dignified feature grace is, as entering into this matter in view of the revelation of the mystery.
F.W. Would you say, why the thought of the nations is made a good deal of in this chapter, "Prisoner
{349}
 for you nations" and "they who are of the nations should be joint heirs" and then "announce among the nations?"
S.McC. Well, I think it is to project on to our minds, on to our view, the greatness of the present time of faith, in which the Gentiles play such a large part. Just like Joseph exalted in Egypt, the great realm of administration that proceeds from him, so faith would understand the great position of Christ in heaven functioning as Man, the administration proceeding, bringing out the truth of Christ and the assembly, proceeding in relation to the nations, the Jews being brought in too, "joint partakers of his promise in Christ Jesus." It enlarges our minds as to the immensity of the scope of this administration.
W.J.B. Do verses 10 and 11 in the next chapter illustrate how the administration works?
S.McC. Yes, we shall see that this afternoon; the way that administration enters into chapter 4 in a subsidiary way involving the gifts, so that the truth might be set on and enforced, in relation to the saints.
R.G.W. The administration is a more extensive thought than the ministry.
S.McC. The administration that we are alluding to, proceeding from Christ in heaven, goes right on into the millennium, and in result goes into eternity. It is concentrated at the present moment in the functioning of Christ, as Man in heaven, in relation to the great thought of the assembly; every prophetic line held up, as it were, to make way for the greatness of the assembly at the present moment.
W.J.B. Is the great substance in administration, love?
S.McC. It is. Love enters into administration, the operation of it, the working out of it, and so in Ephesians, right through from beginning to end the feature of love is stressed.
E.W.C. Is this administration from heaven directed
{350}
towards the formation and establishment of the mystery of the Christ?
S.McC. It is operating towards our enlightenment in regard to the mystery. The mystery is disclosed, unveiled.
J.B.T. The revelation was first of all given to Paul, then it says it was revealed to the prophets and apostles. Would you say a word?
S.McC. It says in verse 5, "which in other generations has not been made known to the sons of men, as it has now been revealed to his holy apostles and prophets in the power of the Spirit, that they who are of the nations should be joint heirs, and a joint body, and joint partakers of his promise in Christ Jesus." Well, we can see how Paul makes full room for the ministry of the twelve. Peter, the apostle for the circumcision, is used by God to open the door for the Gentiles, for the nations to come in. He subserves, as it were, in this great administration proceeding from Christ in heaven -- the great thought of the truth of the mystery being brought in through Paul.
C.F.I. Are the features of the mystery given to us specifically in verse 6, "Joint heirs," "joint body" and "joint partakers of his promise in Christ Jesus?"
S.McC. Exactly. What a triumph that is of divine grace, that the nations should be brought in as joint heirs, and a joint body, and joint partakers of His promise in Christ Jesus by the glad tidings. How great that is, as you think of what has been surmounted and overcome in regard to the barriers.
W.H.W. Does the thought of revelation in verse 3 indicate it is a matter that is in the hands of the Spirit and can only be understood spiritually?
S.McC. Yes. Paul is alluding to the distinctiveness of his ministry, "that by revelation the mystery has been made known to me." He did not receive it from men, his glad tidings was not from man, nor by man,
{351}
he received it directly from heaven, the Lord operating from heaven and the Spirit operating here below. We have to understand in that way the link between the Lord on high and the Spirit down here.
P.B. It speaks of the revelation of the mystery which has been given to Paul, and then he speaks of "ye can understand my intelligence in the mystery of the Christ," and then in verse 7 "according to the gift of the grace of God given to me, according to the working of his power." Is that all leading up to the administration of the mystery in relation to the unsearchable riches of the Christ?
S.McC. It shows it is not a question of what is academic with Paul, "according to the working of his power," power enters into the matter of the truth, as it is coming out here, "The gift of the grace of God given to me according to the working of his power." Notice how he is amplifying the thought of grace in bringing in the truth of the mystery and what was distinctive to his own commission.
C.A.I. So that the knowledge of the mystery in revelation given to him was one thing, but this grace, the making of it known in the power that was in that, was another thing.
S.McC. So that the ministry involves what is authoritative from God, and involves divine power entering into the matter of it being made effective.
M.R.J.M. Is this the undoing in the apostle's mind of all the previous Jewish teaching that he had, and the establishing of his heart in grace in the revelation of the mystery, consistent with it?
S.McC. As if these two thoughts must be apprehended and understood in relation to the great truth of Christ and the assembly. The administration of the grace of God and "according to the gift of the grace of God given to me" -- it seems to run alongside of the
{352}
understanding and apprehension of the truth of the mystery.
C.F.I. Why does Paul use this language in relation to himself "to me, less than the least of all saints"? How do you arrive at that, the unfolding of these great thoughts?
S.McC. I think it is a remarkable reference to the kind of man that he was. He had been speaking in the verse immediately preceding, "according to the working of his power," and then he proceeds to say "To me, less than the least of all saints," showing what the man was substantially in regard to the truth; "to me, less than the least of all saints," what lowliness was there; while he had the truth of the mystery officially. The commission was given to him in regard to Christ and the assembly, yet he is marked by what is so unofficial, and there must be something in it for us to learn.
C.F.I. Is it that the understanding of the mystery and the great thoughts of God really laid hold of will work out on the line of reduction, as to ourselves?
S.McC. That is what I would understand, that the more we progress in the truth as to Christ and the assembly, the more we will be marked by the spirit of Paul in the way he regards himself; on the one hand apprehending his dignity as a minister with a definite commission from Christ; on the other hand feeling the lowliness becoming to the position, recognising who he was and what he was.
R.G.C. Does Peter emphasise that when he says He giveth grace to the humble?
S.McC. He does. Mr. Taylor, many years ago, in the readings on Paul personally, and officially, in Galatians, made the remark, speaking of Paul going up to Jerusalem and making acquaintance with Peter, and the informal unofficial way in which he proceeded in meeting the crisis then existent, as to being dexterous
{353}
enough to avoid what is official. I think that is one of the great needs in all our localities, spiritual dexterity, in avoiding what is official. So that things just do not get into the hands of one or two officially; things have to be done, and persons have to do them, but we should use spiritual dexterity to avoid officialism.
P.B. The unsearchable riches of the Christ are seen in one like that.
S.McC. Well, it shows the greatness of his ministry, what he had in mind, and our thoughts need to be enlarged more and more as to the greatness of the truth in Paul's ministry.
C.A.I. So that if he is less than the least of all saints, on the other hand he had such a sense of the greatness of the saints?
S.McC. Well, exactly. That is his own apprehension in regard to himself. We would not make him less than the least of all saints; that is what he has arrived at in his soul in regard of the magnitude of the administration, working out from Christ in heaven, in which he has part, the magnitude of the thing is affecting him, so that he speaks of himself thus, but we would not make him that.
W.J.B. Would it be that also he had a sense of what he had been as it shows in @1 Corinthians 15? "Not fit to be called apostle, because I have persecuted the assembly of God."
S.McC. It would seem he never lost that. Right through to the end it seemed to remain with him -- the magnitude of the grace shown towards him as he took account of what had marked him as an insolent and overbearing man in his unconverted days.
W.J.B. So that although he had the fullest sense of forgiveness, it is remarkable that he still retained an impression of his past that he kept all his days.
S.McC. Exactly, and you feel that he is a model for us in that regard, so that we should learn from
{354}
such a one as Paul in regard to the way that he refers to himself here, never losing sight of the authoritative commission that he had, not in any sense lowering its dignity, but as to himself, personally, constantly maintained with him, the spirit of lowliness, as he thought of what grace had done in relation to him.
C.S.K. Did Paul's own ministry work out in himself, first of all, as he put it out amongst the saints? I was thinking as this administration of grace moves in our souls we will esteem the saints greater, will we not?
S.McC. Well, I think that is the lesson for us all. There are a great many of us here that have part in a little way (not that we would make much of it, any of us, because our part after all is very little when we think of Paul and the others), in the working out of the truth, and he is a model for us, especially for those that serve and minister, that officialism should be avoided as much as possible, and there should be a concern to set out the truth, not merely from an academic standpoint, but by being exponents of it.
C.S.K. Did Paul have in view the last verse of this chapter; is that what he was working toward?
S.McC. He did.
W.H.W. Is it a little bit like John the Baptist? In the first chapter of John, he says, "Voice of one crying in the wilderness." He was no more than that.
S.McC. John the Baptist, in that way, in John's gospel, is a model for those that serve. He came out from God, "there was a man sent from God, his name John," and that is his credentials, that is his moral authority, that he came from God, and that is the authority of any minister, that he comes out from God; it is moral authority, based on his relations with God.
W.J.B. Those that are with God will discern it, will they not?
{355}
S.McC. They will, so that there is an affinity between the minister and those ministered to in discerning where ministry is coming from.
A.McK.H. Is it a consciousness too of being sent? Paul speaks of himself as the apostle of Jesus Christ by God's will.
S.McC. We were referring to that somewhere along the way -- the importance of this matter of being sent, especially with those that serve, that we do not go of our own volition. We do not go because the brethren ask us to go. We may get lots of invitations, but it is a question of where the Lord wants us to go, where He would have us to go, and being sent by Him.
G.H.R. Would the thought of the chapter in 2nd Corinthians that we had in Wellington, where it says that death works in us, and life in you, fit in with this?
S.McC. Yes. So in verse 13 he says, "Wherefore I beseech you not to faint through my tribulations for you, which is your glory," a corresponding reference to what we have in @2 Corinthians 4 -- death working in the apostles and the ministers, and life in the saints. Tribulation working in the minister here and glory in the saints.
W.J.B. Not to faint -- not because of their tribulation, but because of *his* tribulation.
S.McC. It shows how they were thinking of him, and Paul is taking account of it, giving them this word.
M.R.J.M. I was going to refer to @Acts 20, where he says, "But I make no account of my life as dear to myself, so that I finish my course, and the ministry which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the glad tidings of the grace of God." I thought of the apostle, knowing that the Holy Spirit testified in every city bonds and tribulations awaited him. I wondered if that is the way divine Persons (you spoke of circumstances
{356}
at the beginning), harness us as it were, and keep us in a position of humility and dependence, which gives power to the ministry.
S.McC. And the matter of Paul being detained in the prison, the Lord ordered it in view of the opening out of all the truth in its fulness, in relation to the mystery. Oftentimes in regard to service, if the service becomes onerous, and the toil arduous in it, it may detract from the truth in its fulness coming out. It is important that we should see that; it is essential as the Lord said, "Come ye ... apart ... and rest a little."
W.H.W. Is it interesting to see that this "less than the least of all saints" is set over against "the unsearchable riches of Christ?"
S.McC. I think so. It would seem as though the magnitude of what has been committed to him seems to make him so insignificant, alongside the greatness of the saints as the objects of the administration.
F.W. Would you say a word in relation to that remark, as to verse 10, "in order that now to the principalities and authorities in the heavenlies might be made known through the assembly the all-various wisdom of God?"
S.McC. Well, now he is moving to bring on to our view the greatness of the assembly in the working out of this administration, that the all-various wisdom of God is to be made known through the assembly. The heavenly intelligences looking on and taking account of the dignity of the administration working out through the assembly.
F.W. What does that mean? We might think of it as administration working out amongst ourselves. What is the force of the heavenly intelligences looking on?
S.McC. Well, we know they are interested in what is transpiring in the assembly, they do not have part
{357}
in it, they form another class by themselves, but they are looking on, just as in @1 Corinthians 11, the angels are looking on in regard to the position of headship, taking account of the man and the woman; so here they are looking on, taking account of the administration as it works out in the assembly.
C.S.K. Does it show the greatness of the assembly's place in that way in administration with Christ? We might have thought that we would learn through them but they learn through the assembly.
S.McC. It brings out the quality of what is in the assembly, the greatness of what is working out in this family, unique as it is, in the universe of God.
C.F.I. Would you help us as to the way Paul speaks of God here in the section we are now in, "hidden throughout the ages in God" and "the all-various wisdom of God, according to the purpose of the ages" or the note says "eternal purpose;" is purpose properly connected with God? I was thinking of chapter 1 where the Father is prominent, "The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us." Would this give a fuller presentation of the thought of purpose as centred in God?
S.McC. Well, it does, and it would save us from saying that counsel and purpose are *only* linked with the Father, which is not the full truth. While @Ephesians 1 enlarges on counsel and purpose as linked with the Father, it is all anticipative. The name of Father by which He is referred to there is the name by which He is known in the economy of love and grace, and the full thought of counsel and purpose is linked with God in this way, so that the hymn that we have in the book is quite in keeping with the truth, "The Persons of the Godhead In wondrous concord planned." Some have a difficulty about that hymn. Why should they have it, in the light of this that we have here?
{358}
C.F.I. So that chapter 1 would have in mind the working out of counsel operatively, would it?
S.McC. Yes, involving the administration that we are speaking of, and the economy in which the Father is supreme.
T.R.H. Does purpose stand in relation to God and does the working of it out in counsel stand in relation to the economy?
S.McC. Well, let us read the 1st chapter, verse 11. It says, "in him, in whom we have also obtained an inheritance, being marked out beforehand according to the purpose of him who works all things according to the counsel of his own will." The purpose has to do with the originating of the matter, the divine will entering in, while counsel has to do with the way it works out -- "works all things according to the counsel of his own will, that we should be to the praise of his glory."
C.S.K. Would you say why in @Acts 20 in speaking to the Ephesian elders he says, "for I have not shrunk from announcing to you all the counsel of God?"
S.McC. Well, I think he is stressing the whole realm of the truth. He does not say the whole purpose of God, but the whole counsel of God, because the thought of richness and wisdom enters into those counsels.
W.J.B. Is the thought of counsel connected with the effectuation of the purpose?
S.McC. Exactly, as it says, "*works* all things." That is, the thing is working out according to the counsel of His own will -- a remarkable thing.
W.J.B. Counsel takes account of conditions in the effectuation of His purpose.
S.McC. The will of man does not enter into it. The responsibility of man does not enter into that side, it is the counsel of His own will; God knowing as He would the end from the beginning, having in mind all
{359}
that would come in, and taking account of how things would work out.
C.A.I. Do you regard it as difficult to limit to the Father this expression in the 1st chapter, "him who works all things according to the counsel of his own will?"
S.McC. Well, of course, the Father is the great subject there, but then we know that creation was through the instrumentality of the Son, but it is God who created all things. He that built all things is God, although we know that as to the Son, the creation exists through His instrumentality and also exists as His creature, but that does not preclude the thought that it was God who built all things. There is only one God, there are not three Gods; God is One.
W.J.B. It says in Job "by his spirit the heavens are adorned."
S.McC. Exactly, and then the Lord says in John's gospel, "my Father worketh hitherto and I work," so that all three divine Persons are involved in the matter of creation.
W.H.W. I was wondering if verse 14, the apostle's prayer, does not help in relation to our brother's question.
S.McC. Well, it does, and what flows out from that; the mediatorial operations, beginning with the Father who puts His own impress upon every family. That shows us the supremacy of the Father, the great thought of the Father's supremacy; then the Spirit coming into view and then the Christ in regard to the operative side. All that would help us as to how the counsels are made effective in the saints.
E.N.C. Do the 14th and 15th verses bring in how the assembly stands in relation to the Father?
S.McC. Exactly. It is the Father who puts the impress on every family. But what is to be noted here is that while in the 14th and 15th verses Paul alludes
{360}
to the various families, as he proceeds he causes every family to recede from our view, in order that our thoughts might be concentrated on the family of families -- the assembly.
A.McK.H. Is that why it is hidden throughout the ages -- the one pearl, the uniqueness?
S.McC. Yes, the uniqueness of this family in which the truth of the mystery is working out.
C.F.I. That would be emphasized in verse 16 "in order that he may give you," the emphasis on the "you."
S.McC. That is it. He refers to all the families in verse 15, but then in verse 16 he says, "in order that he may give *you*." That is, the saints of the assembly, "according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with power by his Spirit in the inner man;" no other family knows the Spirit or has the Spirit in the way in which the assembly has.
G.P. Why is it that these wonderful thoughts are given to us in the form of prayer?
S.McC. To impress us that when we come to the higher and heavenly levels of the truth, we must resort to this kind of thing. It is needed in order that we might come into the truth.
L.I. Does the ministry only take us so far in that way; however well the servant may serve us, it requires this matter of prayer to bring us into the full divine thoughts?
S.McC. So that the state of the saints comes up here, in regard to this prayer. The matter of inward strengthening, as it says, "that the Christ may dwell, through faith, in your hearts." We are not yet in heaven, we are in the great range of these mediatorial operations, by faith apprehending the immensity of the scope of them; Christ in heaven, yet dwelling in our hearts by faith, the Spirit operating within, in inwardness,
{361}
strengthening us in relation to the greatness of the matter on hand.
W.H.W. Is this principle not illustrated in the 17th John, the Lord in addressing the Father is able to say much more than He ever said in speaking to the disciples?
S.McC. Yes, exactly.
G.R.D. Would verse 12 have some bearing on this prayer, "boldness and access in confidence by the faith of him?"
S.McC. Yes, it is a remarkable touch in the body of the chapter. You notice he is referring to Christ Jesus our Lord "which he purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord, in whom we have boldness and access in confidence by the faith of him;" what has been alluded to in regard to @John 17 would help us in relation to this verse. No doubt the disciples would be affected by the access of Christ to the Father, the glory and the dignity of it. And it is in Christ that we have this boldness and access in confidence by the faith of Him.
R.G.W. Would you say a little more as to the Christ dwelling in our hearts, is it a separate matter from the indwelling of the Spirit in us?
S.McC. It is the Christ, personally. The great divine Operator in relation to this vast domain with which is linked the fulness of God, the outshining of God; that we are as near to God as we ever could be as creatures, in the presence, as we have often heard, of infinitude, yet not lost in it, but through the service of the Spirit and the steadying influence of Christ, held in it in relation to all its glory.
A.E.P. Would you say a word as to verse 19, in connection with the thought "be filled even to all the fulness of God?" Just what does that involve?
S.McC. The revelation of God in Christ, the out-shining of God in Christ. It says "that ye may be filled
{362}
*to* all the fulness of God." It is objective. It is not that we are filled into it, we are filled *to* it. This epistle has full and matured thoughts in mind; and in the outshining of God in Christ, we have an answer in the assembly in relation to it, in that the saints are filled to all the fulness of God.
P.B. This links up with @1 Corinthians 15, God all in all, would it? As filled to it?
S.McC. Well, it would link in with it. I think we need constantly to keep in mind the largeness of divine thoughts, that we should not be narrowed in our outlook in relation to the saints of the assembly. We should keep in mind what divine Persons have in mind in relation to all the saints.
R.G.C. Is it linked up with @Ezekiel 47, "waters to swim in"? We enjoy these divine thoughts with all the saints?
S.McC. Yes, they are essential, you might say, to the enjoyment of these thoughts that we are speaking of.
A.McK.H. Do you mean the saints of other families? All the saints?
S.McC. It would refer exclusively to the assembly. The saints of the assembly, as it says, "that ye may be fully able to apprehend with all the saints." That is, the saints of the assembly, "what is the breadth and length and depth and height; and to know the love of the Christ which surpasses knowledge." The saints of the assembly are brought into this great position of advantage, the nearest family to God, as it were, in the universe of God.
P.B. I am not clear as to what I think you said "that ye may be filled even to all the fulness of God," being objective. Would you open that up?
S.McC. Well, we are filled to it. It is the answer in the saints to the outshining of God in Christ. The fulness of God, does not refer to God in the abstract conditions of deity, but refers to God as shining out
{363}
in Christ and the saints are filled to it. Showing what an answer there is in the present family that is the subject of divine operations.
C.S.K. Is that the answer to the revelation that has been given?
S.McC. Yes.
E.B. You referred to Christ as the divine Operator. Would you say more about that?
S.McC. Well, I think we want to understand Him more in that light, that He is the One to whom we owe things. We have been speaking about His functioning in heaven; while the Lord has sat down at the right hand of the greatness in the heavens. He is functioning as Man in regard to this great immense administration which is centring in the assembly at the present time, and it is through His operations that we come into the truth.
C.S.K. Is this that is now before us in the end of this chapter, to fit us for the administration, so that we might be in it in intelligence, and in power and love?
S.McC. And that all the working out of the administration has in mind the dignity of the worship of God, the service of God in the assembly; so it is "But to him." Now notice that that "him" comes in after "all the fulness of God," "But to him" involves Father, Son and Holy Spirit, God in the three Persons as revealed. The full revelation of God involves Father, Son and Holy Spirit. And it says, "But to him that is able to do far exceedingly above all which we ask or think, according to the power which works in us." That is, it is not just academic, it is substantial, working in us, "to him be glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all generations of the age of ages. Amen."
{364}
DIVINE ADMINISTRATION IN EPHESIANS (4)
@Ephesians 4: 1 -- 16; @Ephesians 5: 25 -- 29; @Ephesians 6: 10 -- 13
S.McC. In considering what is proceeding from Christ as Man in heaven, functioning as He is in relation to the great administration working out from that point, we come to the great subject of the ministry in this 4th chapter and it will be noted how the thought of system enters into it. I mean, in using the word system, that things are not operating haphazardly, but on the principle of definite calculation, with definite ends and objectives in mind, the gifts bringing in the subsidiary side of the administration of Christ in heaven. The power that is linked with the position of the Lord in heaven is working out in this administration through the gifts, involving what is called the work of the ministry, having in mind the perfecting of the saints and the edifying of the body of Christ, until we all arrive at the unity of the faith, a great objective in mind. Then the thought of Christ as the Head and the body follows that, and then in chapter 5 the constant and abiding activity of the love of Christ in His care for the assembly, the great working out of the administration in a hidden and secret way in the service of the love of Christ for the assembly. In chapter 4 the power, in flowing from Christ on high, would bring in more what is testimonial. The 5th chapter brings in the hidden side of Christ's active love in caring for the assembly. Then the closing word in regard of the conflict, in answer to all the light that has been presented in the epistle, as Paul says "Be strong in the Lord and in the might of his strength." Then the verse we finished with, "and having accomplished all things, to stand." That is, as
{365}
Mr. Darby points out, to carry through and put into execution all that is purposed and called for in spite of opposition. These are the thoughts we should keep before us in our inquiry, pursuing an orderly inquiry but making room for the Spirit to help us in the filling out of the truth.
The chapter we began with opens with a definite appeal to the saints "to walk worthy of the calling wherewith ye have been called, with all lowliness and meekness, with long-suffering, bearing with one another in love; using diligence to keep the unity of the Spirit in the uniting bond of peace," a needful word, dear brethren, in relation to all that we have been considering together, that there should be the need on our side of holy concern as to these features that Paul refers to here.
G.H.R. Would you say a word as to Paul being a prisoner of the Lord here as over against the prisoner of the Christ Jesus?
S.McC. I think it brings in here that he is in full acceptance, in a subject way, of the position. He is not chafed in his spirit, he is not irritated as in the circumstances; he is in the circumstances involving such limitations for him, in full acceptance of the position, as subject to the Lord.
P.C. No doubt the thought of "prisoner" entered into the appeal.
S.McC. Yes. We are to remember the circumstances in which he was.
G.R.D. Is the thought of sonship brought forward into this verse "the calling wherewith ye have been called" in its bearing on the testimonial side?
S.McC. Yes. It is the walk here, our walk, "to walk worthy of the calling wherewith ye have been called." The dignity of our calling would thus be indirectly alluded to, and we are to walk worthy of it. That is, it is a question now of what we are in our walk.
{366}
C.A.I. Would Paul's own personality, his own distinctiveness and personality and features that were with him in the 3rd chapter now bring that to bear upon us so that these features, lowliness and meekness and such things should be found with us in our personality?
S.McC. Yes. "Bearing with one another in love, using diligence to keep the unity of the Spirit in the uniting bond of peace." These features would come into view in relation to the keeping of the unity of the Spirit in the uniting bond of peace.
W.H.W. Does the prisoner of the Lord bear on the captive position, which under the Lord's hand, opens up a free way for the Lord to function in the way in which you have spoken?
S.McC. Yes. That where there is subjection to limitations, such as we have to face in our time, the Lord is allowed a free hand to move in relation to what He is carrying on in His functioning on high.
G.A.A. Would the apostle's word carry weight, and would these features have marked him?
S.McC. Well, they did. We were referring to some of them this morning, "less than the least of all saints." What lowliness was there, what meekness, the meekness and gentleness of Christ; not asserting in any way his own will but prepared to stand with his back to the wall in relation to the truth.
W.J.B. Like the Lord, prophetically spoken of in @Isaiah 50, he says, "I was not rebellious: I turned not away back."
S.McC. Yes. That is meekness in its true character. It says, later again in the 53rd chapter, "He was led as a lamb to the slaughter," suggesting in the lamb the figure of meekness that was there, yet facing all that was involved in the suffering.
M.R.J.M. Would this be the filling out of verse 10 in chapter 2, "For we are his workmanship, having
{367}
been created in Christ Jesus for good works, which God has before prepared that we should walk in them"?
S.McC. Yes. The teaching of chapter 2 rightly comes into chapter 4 because chapter 3 is really a parenthesis.
C.S.K. Does it suggest that without the features of lowliness and meekness we will never arrive at the unity of the Spirit nor the unity of the faith? I was thinking of the service, the ministers you speak of in the service, is that the first thing that comes into it?
S.McC. Yes, they are essential qualities in keeping with our calling and becoming a moral support for us in going on together. It is a great thing that we should go on together, that is what the Lord is aiming at. The enemy has operated, the brethren can see it. He had great objectives in mind as to separating the brethren in their feelings and affections, not only here but all over he operates on that principle. The chapter here is to help us to see, specially in our time, in view of the imminence of the rapture, the need of going on together, using diligence to keep the unity of the Spirit in the uniting bond of peace.
C.F.I. Is that a unity that is established with the presence of the Spirit here?
S.McC. Yes. It is maintained inviolate through the dispensation. The unity of the Spirit is invulnerable, never contemplated as breaking. Abstractly it is maintained inviolate through the dispensation and if only two are walking in it, it still is the unity of the Spirit.
W.H.W. Is it the uniting bond of peace that we are exhorted to keep?
S.McC. That is it. In the uniting bond of peace the unity of the Spirit is there. The thing is that there should be the exercise on our part to keep it in the uniting bond of peace.
A.McK.H. In what way does diligence come in?
{368}
S.McC. I think it involves that we are on the outlook for everything that would operate against this spiritual intangible link among the brethren; because the unity of the Spirit does not exactly refer to what is public. It is more the hidden inward side which holds us together in the Spirit's presence, because the world neither knows the Spirit, nor sees the Spirit.
P.B. Is it like the middle bar that went through the boards of the tabernacle?
S.McC. Something like that. The way that the brethren are held together in a spiritual way.
C.A.I. This element of peace is very important for us to understand then?
S.McC. Well, it is. You notice what Mr. Darby says in this relation. He says it is not only bond but the bond-together. It is not the power of union, that is the Holy Spirit, but the practical uniting in fact as amongst men. The uniting bond of peace would be the testimonial side; the unity of the Spirit is the hidden side.
T.R.H. Should this characterise the saints and would such a suggestion as this keep @Matthew 18 in the background?
S.McC. I suppose @Matthew 18 is part of the truth. Perhaps you have in mind that we should not make use of it in the way use has been made of it.
T.R.H. I was thinking, that it is held in reserve if necessary, but if these features characterise the saints there should be ability to set matters right without it.
S.McC. We should get this point clear because @Matthew 18 presents the assembly in a wonderful light. It is the assembly in judicial glory. Just as the judiciary of New Zealand is a wonderful department of the Government and as in the United States it is a wonderful part of the Government, so the assembly in @Matthew 18 sets out a wonderful glory linked with the assembly on the side of what is judicial.
{369}
W.J.B. Love operating in various stages and culminating in the assembly's appeal in Matthew?
S.McC. Exactly. Not the judicial side operating so much in the way of penalising -- that may enter into the matter -- but operating with a view to the solution of the question of good and evil that good might be set in its place and evil in its place.
C.S.K. Is it noticeable that chapter 18 of Matthew begins with the spirit of a little child, like this chapter here, lowliness and meekness?
S.McC. Well, exactly. It corresponds in that the working out of the administration in Matthew would involve this kind of spirit, care for one another, the matter of the sheep that is referred to in the body of the chapter relating to bearing with one another in love as it says here.
C.F.I. Is that something that will stand the strain? Bearing with one another in love, suggests that we might be called on to bear with something.
S.McC. It is interesting what you refer to; bearing the strain, standing the strain. Oftentimes our relations together are taxed and alas sometimes we fail when they are taxed. One thing that marks the book of Numbers in its typical teaching, is this thought of bearing ability, bearing capacity, in care for the saints and care for the truth.
M.R.J.M. "Abundantly loving you I shall be less loved." Is that the expression of it, to the Corinthians?
S.McC. And in regard to what was referred to no doubt what was in mind was that @Matthew 18 has been used far beyond what it was intended to be used, in prosecuting one another, which is not the intent of @Matthew 18. @Matthew 18 is the glory of the assembly in administration on judicial lines.
C.A.I. Normally it would work out in this way towards the uniting bond of peace.
S.McC. Yes. Having in mind the preservation of
{370}
peace in our relations with one another and among the saints.
G.R.D. So that "if he hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother" would be in keeping with the uniting bond of peace, would it?
S.McC. And as we have said at different intervals along the way, if there is any place where the believer should have a sense of being secure and protected it is in the assembly as Matthew views it.
W.H.W. So that in the 1st book of Kings, as has already been noted, in Solomon's regime there were 70,000 burden bearers, but then in Nehemiah's day, which was a day of recovery, the burden bearers were there too.
S.McC. Nehemiah says in a unique way in the 10th chapter that they made ordinances to tax themselves, to support the administration of the house of God, a great thing, the love in Nehemiah. We might think of Nehemiah as a kind of a hard man but he was a man that was prepared to lay down his life for the people of God. They made ordinances to tax themselves for the support of the administration of the house of God.
L.I. You mentioned in Blenheim, "the cherubim stretched forth their wings over the place of the ark." Would that be in line with what you have in your mind as to judicial glory in Matthew?
S.McC. That is it exactly, the protecting of divine rights which works as much on the positive side as it does on the negative side. It involves that a brother and a sister should be rightly cared for in the assembly, if the matter comes up. Some of our young people may grow up to think that the assembly is a place where they have to be brought and dealt with. We want to inculcate into their minds the fact that the safest place on earth is in the assembly. The place where they will be protected is in the assembly, and
{371}
there should be the witness and testimony to that in the operation of things amongst us.
G.H.R. Would the 17th verse of the 3rd chapter where it says "being rooted and founded in love" be a basis for this operation in this chapter?
S.McC. Yes, it would. You can only work out the public side properly from the spiritual and heavenly side. So the chapter goes on. It is interesting that the moral universe should be brought in, the stability and fixity of the moral universe; as it says, "There is one body and one Spirit, as ye have been also called in one hope of your calling; one Lord, one faith, one baptism; one God and Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and in us all." The order in the moral universe is thus presented, leading us to the supremacy of the Father, who is the Governor of the universe.
G.P. The unity of the Spirit and the oneness, one body, one Spirit, one Lord, one faith, one God and one Father; all that is stressed before the variety of gifts is brought in to reach one end?
S.McC. Yes, and it is touching, the allusion to the body and the Spirit. The body involves the eternal side, not only the provisional side. In @1 Corinthians 12, the body is referred to as a figure of speech, and sets out the provisional idea of it, but when we come to Ephesians, the body involves the eternal side as well as the provisional side, and it is touching to take account of the way the body and the Spirit are linked together, because the Spirit has not become incarnate, like the Lord Jesus, but there is in the body, a vehicle for His right of way in regard to His operations.
P.B. Why is "one Lord, one faith, one baptism" linked together?
S.McC. Well, I think it is to impress us as to what we have been committed to in the kingdom position. We get these concentric circles, referring our
{372}
minds to the fixedness of things in the moral universe.
W.H.W. Do these references have a bearing back on what we have been seeing is of the assembly in chapter 3?
S.McC. I think so. They reflect back on what we have been going over. We need to have our eyes opened in faith to see the moral universe. The world does not understand it. We are in a position of advantage in that the one God and Father of all, who is over all and through all, He is in us all. The saints of the assembly in this dispensation have a peculiar advantage in that He is in us by the Spirit.
A.J.C. We do not make this, do we?
S.McC. It is a statement of what exists. It is fixed.
G.A.A. Do we see the working out of it in verse 16? Is that the functioning of what we are dealing with now?
S.McC. Well, that is an allusion to one item in the moral universe, the body. The body is a great item in the moral universe. One body and one Spirit and it has a peculiar place, and verse 16 would bring in how it works out practically among the saints.
C.F.I. Is one important item in this administration you have been referring to touched on here, in relation to the gifts, that divine thoughts might be arrived at in the saints by way of ministry?
S.McC. The whole chapter is full of the theme of administration beginning with this thought of the moral universe, the great basis in the one body and the one Spirit, then the great working out of the administration in the one Lord, one faith, one baptism, working out even to the physical universe. Because the administration in relation to Christ in heaven, not only involves the moral but the physical universe.
P.B. Are you referring to verse 6?
S.McC. The Lord Jesus upholds all things by the word of His power.
{373}
P.B. Would you say a little more as to one God and Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and in us all?
S.McC. Well, I think a sense of the fixity of the moral universe would help us when things are working out, when the storms rise and the ship may be filled with the waves; it is a great thing to be steadied in our souls in the sense of the fixedness of the administration linked with the moral universe.
W.H.W. So that when the gifts are operating in ministry, this lies behind what they say. It should be in our minds as we receive what they say.
S.McC Because the gifts are really subsidiary administrators. Christ supremely is the great Administrator in heaven and the gifts are subsidiary administrators and the authority of Christ is involved in the ministry in that way.
C.A.I. Would this be seen somewhat in David as leaving Jerusalem at the time of Absalom's rising up; what he did in regard to the ark, sending it back to Jerusalem that God's thoughts might be maintained, and if He delighted in David He would bring him back again?
S.McC. The ark, rightly speaking, is the centre of the universe according to God and David recognised that there was the fixed unity linked with that position and he would not allow it to be entrenched upon.
A.McK.H. In the working out of the truth of the one body, does it begin firstly in our localities?
S.McC. Certainly. The truth in working out practically, always begins with those that are nearest to us, which is an important thing, because sometimes we might think that we would get on better with the brethren in another locality, but the truth is to work out first in relation to those that are nearest to us.
C.S.K. Do feelings lie behind all that? We speak of love, but feelings, sympathy and tenderness, lie in that
{374}
thought of the one body, do they not, in regard of our relations with one another locally?
S.McC. Yes, because the body is not an organisation but an organism, replete, through the presence of the Spirit, with spiritual sensibilities so that we are inwardly affected, mysteriously affected, in the body by what is in one another, by impulses that may surge through the body.
C.S.K. We would be like the Spirit Himself; how tender and feeling and sympathetic He is to us?
S.McC. What a part the body should have in meetings like these! The hidden reserves and wealth that are latent in the body and need to be tapped and drawn upon. That is the relation of the gifts to the body, the body representing the hidden reservoir of spiritual wealth among the brethren.
C.S.K. Do we have to take account, in many ways, of things abstractly, because of conditions in our day, but locally we should be able to have these things practically, you would say?
S.McC. Yes, so that the body should not be just an ecclesiastical matter with us, it is to work out in our localities in sensitive relations with one another.
W.H.W. Would verses 9 and 10 bear on the authority that is in the ministry?
S.McC. They do. The whole section here from verse 8 "Wherefore he says, having ascended up on high, he has led captivity captive and has given gifts to men. But that he ascended, what is it but that he also descended into the lower parts of the earth? He that descended is the same who has also ascended up above all the heavens, that he might fill all things; and he has given some apostles, and some prophets, and some evangelists, and some shepherds and teachers, for the perfecting of the saints." It is remarkable to take account of the ministry as embodying the
{375}
power, flowing from Christ on high, in the power of the Spirit through the ministry.
W.H.W. It would seem that the flock is in view here again. You will remember what you said at Blenheim. We were mostly touched by it I think. You were referring to Philippians, and Christ exalted to the right hand of God. Underneath the truth of Philippians was the administrative thought that appears here again, does it?
S.McC. Yes, the saints are in mind. They are the great object of divine care in the working out of this administration. Not only the gifts, but it says, verse 7, "But to each one of us has been given grace according to the measure of the gift of the Christ," so that every one from the youngest among the saints has part in this great administration working out from Christ in heaven.
A.J.C. Is it the thought of the same One, the One who descended is the same One who ascended; the same Jesus shall come?
S.McC. Yes, so that we are reminded that what comes to us in the administration is based on what it involved for Him in the path of suffering love.
A.J.C. Is the whole system that we have before us now coloured by that same Jesus? Verse 20 in that chapter speaks of the truth as it is in Jesus, the Lord on high is no different from what He was here.
S.McC. No; He is the same Jesus. He has laid down His life in relation to the condition He took up when becoming Man but He has taken His life in new conditions.
R.G.C. If each has something, there should be mutuality, and room should be made for gift if it is there.
S.McC. The whole section here gives a wonderful balance to what there is in the body and what is linked with gift, one subserving the other in relation
{376}
to bringing out the fulness of divine resource, spiritual resource in this administration.
C.S.K. Is this matter of having ascended on high and led captivity captive, giving gifts to men, the result of the great conflict of the Lord's death, and the distribution of spoils administratively to the assembly, by these gifts?
S.McC. It is a wonderful thing to think of the Lord going to heaven and this great administration working out because all the gifts came with the Spirit at Pentecost. It is good to remember that the Lord went on high, ascended up on high, leading captivity captive, and gave the gifts, and they all came here with the Spirit at Pentecost. The position involved this remarkable power, the power of the ascended Man, flowing through the, subsidiary administrators in Peter, John and Paul and others.
F.W. I wanted to ask why these particular gifts are mentioned. Some that are named here are not mentioned in Corinthians.
S.McC. Well, no doubt the introduction of the evangelist for instance would convey to our hearts that the evangelist has a peculiar place in relation to the enjoyment of the heavenly side of the truth. Paul could not refer to the gift of evangelist in Corinth, no doubt because of conditions existing; the gospel calls for good conditions among the saints.
F.W. Sign gifts and gifts of tongues are mentioned in Corinthians.
S.McC. Yes, the public testimony would be more in view in the sign gifts. The enriching of the assembly, the endowment as J.B.S. called it, is more in mind here. The rich way in which the assembly is endowed would be more in mind here.
F.W. Perhaps we could not claim today the sign gifts, could we, but what we have here is still available?
{377}
S.McC. Well, we do not have the apostles; they entered into the inaugural side, and the sign gifts. We do not have either today.
J.B.T. It says in Corinthians they came short in no gift. It is striking then that the gift of the evangelist is not mentioned.
S.McC. Well, it strengthens in our minds the necessity for good conditions for the gospel to go out.
G.R.D. Would you say a word on the Psalm from which this is quoted, "hast received gifts in Man?" I wondered if you would say something as to the relation of the gifts to the Lord Himself? It says here "has given gifts to men."
S.McC. The Psalm from which this is quoted is one of the most wonderful psalms that David wrote. The 68th Psalm is full of triumph and the greatness of God, and conveys to us what divine resource can do, as for instance in verse 13 "Though ye have lain among the sheepfolds yet ye shall be as wings of a dove covered with silver, and her feathers with green gold." It is the idea of what divine resource can do despite the conditions, and the gifts represent irrepressible power, you might say, among the saints, despite what may obtain.
P.B. Over against systematized error, would you say?
S.McC. It is to be noted how the gifts stand in relation to this matter, what they are to have in mind in their service, standing in relation to the saving of the saints from systematized error, *systematized*, not just error coming out in a remark, but a whole system of teaching which is really against the truth.
W.H.W. Would you think, perhaps, the evangelists are brought in here because of the necessity that the saints should be maintained in the grace of God, if they are to move along on the high level of the truth that we have here.
{378}
S.McC. The more Ephesian we are, the more we enjoy the truth on the heavenly side, the more evangelical we are. If the brethren in localities lose the appreciation of the gospel, well, it is a question whether they really are enjoying the truth in Ephesians at all; because the more we are enjoying the truth on the heavenly side, the more evangelical our outlook is.
M.R.J.M. Did not Mr. Darby say that if we want the gospel to prosper, pray for the assembly?
S.McC. Yes. The word evangelist comes from the word "evangel," which means glad tidings.
H.B. Would you say a little as to the gift of the evangelist being for the edifying of the body of Christ? We could more readily connect the other gifts with that. Just how does the gift of the evangelist work in relation to the edifying of the body of Christ?
S.McC. Well, that is interesting, because we are inclined to have low thoughts of the gospel. You will notice that in each of the chapters we have read up till now the gospel is mentioned in some way or another -- in every chapter in the first three of Ephesians. It is a great subject, the glad tidings, an exalted subject, and in its fulness involves teaching, involves that the saints should be instructed in God's approach to us.
C.S.K. Because it represents God.
S.McC. Because it represents God and we are to act like God, so that as the teaching of the gospel has its way amongst us, we act like God.
A.McK.H. So that in the presentation of it the heavenly side should be brought in.
S.McC. Well, it should. There should be stress on the assembly and on the Spirit, and on sonship and eternal life in the glad tidings because all these things are involved in the fulness of the glad tidings.
G.R.D. The service of the evangelist is not only towards the unconverted?
S.McC. No, it certainly is not. Sometimes it is said,
{379}
that we did not have any stranger in tonight, there was not much encouragement to carry on the preaching; but the saints need the gospel, the saints need to be enlarged in regard to the administration of the grace of God.
G.W.B. Is there not a delivering power in the glad tidings being told forth in their fulness?
S.McC. Yes, there is.
T.R.H. "We have sent with him the brother whose praise is in the glad tidings." Is that another side to it?
S.McC. Well, it is very interesting that Paul refers to that in regard to the administration of the money. He names Titus, but he does not name this other brother, save to say that his praise is in the glad tidings.
C.S.K. We may be discouraged in our day if we have not an evangelist locally, but Paul counsels Timothy in his day, does he not, to do the work of an evangelist -- the onerous work it may involve.
S.McC. Exactly. It is a great matter that the open air work should be rightly supported, a great thing that as the rapture draws near, the young men should be fully supported and encouraged and helped in the maintenance of the preaching of the gospel.
G.N.B. Do you mean by support, others being present?
S.McC. Yes.
C.A.I. You referred some time back to the irresistible power that is manifest in regard to these gifts; would you say something more in regard to that?
S.McC. Well, it is the power linked with the ascended Man that is flowing down through the operation of the ministry and it is irresistible in that way, irrepressible you might say.
C.A.I. Does that involve that He has ascended far above all heavens?
S.McC. Well, it is a remarkable allusion to the
{380}
greatness of the Person; He is a divine Person because no one but a divine Person could go there.
C.A.I. So that the operation of this power is flowing from Him in that way.
S.McC. And then it has in mind, until we all arrive at the unity of the faith. Now it is a great matter that the saints should arrive at the thought of the unity of the faith, to which the administration is directed in the work of the ministry. That means, that we all think and say the same things. We are marked by the same apprehension of the truth in a general way.
W.H.W. Would the unity of the faith be like the heavenly pattern? Moses was enjoined in regard of the building of the tabernacle that it was to be according to the pattern given to him on the mount.
S.McC. Yes. So that while each gift would have a distinctive impression of Christ, and it is not for us to compare the gifts, for comparisons are odious, we have to bear in mind that there is infinite variety in the work of the ministry in that way, but there is this idea of the pattern, the unity of the faith which governs all the ministry.
A.T.S. Would you say something about what follows, the knowledge of the Son of God -- why that is brought in in connection with this unity?
S.McC. Well, I think it is to bring out what a prime matter this is, that the Son of God has come into manhood and as such He has become a standard for manhood according to God, and all the ministry is directed towards bringing us to that standard, the knowledge of the Son of God over against the development of what is around us in the world. This is manhood in relation to another world of which the Son of God is the centre.
P.R.C. As regards the open air, would it be in order to sing a gospel message?
{381}
S.McC. Well, I would not commend singing in the open air.
P.R.C. What do you think about @Job 38, verse 7, would that be a warrant for the singing of a gospel message?
S.McC. Well, of course Paul and Silas sang in prison. They sang before men, but I do not think there is much in our singing to commend itself in public testimony on the street -- the brethren will pardon the reference -- the singing is not just exactly something to be presented in testimony in that way, because it is the preaching that involves power in the message which is a little bit different from the singing.
F.W. Would you keep to the higher elevated thoughts in the preaching in the open air?
S.McC. Well, they would be in your mind, they are there basically in your soul. You would remind men, of course, taking account of the audience that you are speaking to; you would measure your message accordingly. You would not go out into the open air and speak about the saints being blessed with every spiritual blessing in the heavenlies in Christ, although that is there in your soul and colouring what you are saying.
L.I. Do you think the same would apply to singing, because it says we sing in the spirit in Corinthians? It is a question of entering into the matter?
S.McC. It is more the link I think with the inside position and then it says, "at the full-grown man, at the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ." Now this brings us again to the import of the Gospels, because I suppose we would have to go to the Gospels to get the fulness of the Christ. It is shining out there, it is a reference to Him in manhood.
G.H.R. Would the reference in @John 8 to the truth setting you free and the Son setting you free connect with this? I thought of the greatness of the Son.
{382}
S.McC. Yes, it has a liberating effect, the knowledge of the Son of God has a liberating effect, detaching us from this world and attaching us to that world, and the resurrection from the dead.
C.F.I. The idea of the full manhood "at the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ" referring to the four gospels would maintain balance, would it?
S.McC. It would. "The measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ." This divine objective in the work of the ministry is important. The saints are to be brought to that.
C.F.I. We need to have this divine objective as set out in these verses constantly in view -- what has been reached through ministry, the edifying of the body of Christ, the knowledge of the Son of God, the full grown man.
S.McC. Especially that we should be preserved from isolationist thinking. The unity of the faith would help us that we might all be ministering the same thing in view of the saints being unified as to the truth.
A.T.S. Would you say something more about the expression "measure of the stature"? Would you enlarge on the meaning of that, please?
S.McC. Well, I think it is alluding to the divine standard that we have in the Gospels, the four Gospels would give us the great standard in regard of stature. Stature would be an allusion to manhood, the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ. Think of it as in Christ, what wonderful stature is there in the Gospels.
M.R.J.M. The various writers write with great variety. Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, yet each has a character which is distinct in itself. Would you say that it would all enrich our expressions in the service of God if we knew more of this?
{383}
S.McC. Yes, and while there is infinite variety on the one hand, there is wonderful uniformity on the other -- an interesting thing to notice in these matters.
W.H.W. So that there are gifts and power coming down from the ascended Man in view of the features that were seen in that Man in humiliation being reproduced in the personnel of the assembly.
S.McC. That is what would be in mind in the ministry -- the reproducing in the saints, through the Spirit's formative work, the features of manhood seen in Jesus.
J.B.T. Would that preserve the saints from this systematized error? Would it be something like Christian Science or would it be more subtle than that?
S.McC. Well, it would be one of the things that it involves. We have to be very careful about any kind of teaching which carries error through it. You take the matter of Newton's teaching in regard to the sufferings of Christ in Plymouth, 120 years or so ago. It was systematized, it was not just that an address was given in which a slip was made but woven through all the lectures and the series of meetings were the references to Christ that were adverse and derogatory to His glory. It is systematized in that way. Systematized means that it is not just mistaken. Many of us may say something that we have to be adjusted in relation to, but if a thing is kept up and we are pressing it and following it through, it may become systematized.
C.S.K. On the other hand the truth mentioned here, holding the truth in love would be in relation to the administration from on high, would it not? It is a system itself of glory and of grace.
S.McC. Well, it is. That is, we have the right kind of system in what we have been referring to in the first part of the chapter and what we come to here, "holding the truth in love, we may grow up to him in
{384}
all things, who is the head." It is a system that is permeated by this rich quality of love, mentioned so much in this letter.
C.S.K. So that it is more than just true things?
S.McC. Yes. It is holding the truth in love. The Holy Spirit in John's gospel, chapters 14 to 16, is referred to as the Spirit of truth. There is not only the truth but there is the Spirit of truth -- what underlies it.
C.S.K. Would the truth be suggested as being within the radius of the 4th verse, one body, one Spirit, one Lord, one faith, one baptism, and so on?
S.McC. Yes, the truth is regulating in that way, regulating and adjusting. Grace is supplying.
C.F.I. Is the thought of mutuality specially stressed in these last two verses? It says, "we may grow up to him ... who is the head, the Christ: from whom the whole body, fitted together, and connected by every joint of supply, according to the working in its measure of each one part." Is the whole body now functioning in love?
S.McC. Love is the great motivating thing here; holding the truth in love, then the increase of the body to its self-building up in love. We need to make greater room for this thought of love amongst us. It has a prime place in this administration because the administration that will be carried on throughout eternity, that the assembly will have part in, is the administration of love.
C.F.I. What is the thought of "joint of supply?" Is every member thus to be a joint through whom this positive supply may flow?
S.McC. So that we are all to see to it that we are functioning in our place according to our part in this wonderful organism. No one is missed out, there is room for everybody in it.
C.A.I. Each one to be functioning in love?
S.McC. Exactly.
{385}
G.A.A. An indispensable part would you say?
S.McC. Indispensable part, yes. Each part is necessary so that we do not write off persons. We want to view the saints in our localities in the light of the organism, that each brother and sister is a constituent member, a component part of this organism.
C.F.I. We do not want to write ourselves off in that way, do we?
S.McC. No. We do not want to minimise things in relation to ourselves to the extent that we elect ourselves out of it; we are part of it and we want to fill out our part in it.
R.L.P. Does Mr. Darby's note help, "The article denotes a known supply from Christ, sufficiently known to be referred to, to which also the 'from whom' lends force"?
S.McC. That is an interesting note there. "The word 'supply' ... has the emphatic article and it might read, 'that supply which is according to.' The article denotes a known supply from Christ." It shows what we have been seeking to call attention to, the functioning of Christ's administration in heaven, working out in a commensurate way down here in the body in the power of the Spirit.
C.A.I. The recognition of the headship of Christ would involve our recognition of those that the Lord has qualified to help the saints?
S.McC. Yes.
A.T.S. You spoke earlier of verse 4, the aspect from which the body is viewed there being the eternal aspect. Would you say something about the viewpoint in verse 16. Is it limited to what is provisional or does the eternal viewpoint extend into this?
S.McC. I think the body of Christ as viewed in Ephesians is an eternal matter. While it is looking on to conditions here at the present moment, the body is
{386}
something that goes through. It is an entity that goes through into eternity according to Ephesians.
A.B. Would you say that the weak member of the body is in the gain of all that is in the body?
S.McC. That is the truth. As to their position in the body they are in the presence of all that belongs to the body; as to their enjoyment of it, of course, that might bring up another side.
M.R.J.M. I was just going to inquire, do we find joyously at times, souls perhaps have not been going on and then you find they get a touch from the Lord and they go on and they derive from Christ and you see love in operation and their part in the meetings is enriched and they edify the body? It is consciously felt, would you agree?
S.McC. Well, I think that is right. And I think it is a great thing that our activities should be directed towards promoting the interest of every member of the body in his or her part and place in the body. That no one in our local gathering should have a feeling that he or she is out of it, that it is all in the hands of two or three. In our localities the thought of the body should be promoted. Even suppose there are the hidden members that do not take part -- the wealth that is resident in them is all contributing to the prosperity of the gathering.
C.S.K. It says it works for itself; we expect God to do much and He does, but this works for itself!
S.McC. That is one scripture that shows us how the assembly may be regarded as a complete entity by itself.
M.R.J.M. Might we say the gifts merge in the body here?
S.McC. They do, because after all, our place in the body and our place in the family is greater than our place in the ministry.
M.R.J.M. So that the disciples with their effective
{387}
service were drawn aside by the Lord, as you said this morning, "Come ye yourselves apart ... and rest a little," but further he says, "rejoice not, that the spirits are subjected to you but rejoice that your names are written in the heavens."
S.McC. Stressing the importance of that side over against public service. It is a poor thing for any of us who may have any little part in the work of the ministry, if we live in it. If we do so, we will be building up our reputation and when that reputation is assailed, everything goes. We want to live in the dignity that is ours in our links with the saints in the family of God.
The allusion to the love of Christ in @Ephesians 5 should affect our souls from another angle now. The unceasing personal activity and ministry of Christ in the constancy of His love in caring for us as of the assembly as it says, verse 29, "For no one has ever hated his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it, even as also the Christ the assembly." We need to get into our souls a little more of this nourishing and cherishing service, the warmth of love that in its circulation is linked with it. What a wonderful thing it is to be in the assembly, to be in this wonderful entity that is the object of the direct love of Christ in its activity at the present time.
H.B. Does the exhortation, the word in @Deuteronomy 24: 5, apply? "When a man hath newly taken a wife, he shall not go out with the army, neither shall any kind of business be imposed upon him; he shall be free for his house one year, and shall gladden his wife whom he hath taken." Is that an allusion to what we have here in Ephesians?
S.McC. You are thinking now of the links between the man and the woman in that way. Like Isaac who was not a busy man like Joseph, as we have been taught. He was a man of leisure who enjoyed Rebecca,
{388}
and the touches of affection between Isaac and Rebecca are interesting in that light, whereas Joseph presents more the administrative side and the fulness of activity linked with it.
D.R.T. Is what is sacrificial linked with delivering Himself up?
S.McC. Oh certainly. The cross of Christ is involved in this word, because the side of purpose and the moral side are linked together here. It says, "Christ also loved the assembly." That is, the assembly is a divine conception, conceived in purpose. He had it before Him, and as having it before Him He delivered Himself up for it. That is, He gave Himself in death, the cross comes into it.
E.W.C. Would it be on the line of "my body which is for you"?
S.McC. Yes that would enter into it, the love that is presented to us in the Supper. We should just finish with the word "and having accomplished all things to stand," verse 13. That is, as Mr. Darby points out, to carry through and put into execution all that is purposed and called for. That is, nothing is left that should be done in regard to the maintenance of the truth.
{389}
THE WORSHIP OF GOD HIMSELF
@John 4: 21 -- 24; @Exodus 3: 13 -- 15; @Revelation 21: 2 -- 4
S.McC. It would be readily seen by the brethren that the ultimate goal of all that has come before us in relation to the position of Christ in heaven functioning in the administration, the features of which we have considered together, is that God might be known as He desires to be known in the blessedness of His Being, in so far as He can be known by us as creatures. It is important that we should get an impression as to God and what He is essentially. It says "God is a spirit and they who worship him must worship him in spirit and truth," @John 4, 24. He desires to be known, in so far as in the majesty of His Being He can be known by creature understanding. Not that we ever will know or understand God in the absolute, for as such He is beyond our range; but nevertheless, the God who is presented to us in the scriptures as dwelling in light unapproachable, whom no man hath seen, nor can see, is the God who has drawn near in the working out of this blessed administration that we have considered, and is the Source and End of all. It is not so much before us to consider the attributes of God, with which we are somewhat acquainted, and which it is important that we should be acquainted with; but what is in mind is *God Himself* as desirous of being known by us in the blessedness of His Being. @John 4 says that God is a spirit, which is a reference to what He is essentially. God is not material. God is a spirit and the worship of God is spiritual, and they that worship Him, as the Lord says, must worship Him in spirit and truth, and believers as having the Spirit are thus helped in standing intelligently in relation to God in this light. In @Exodus 3 we get in
{390}
relation to the name Jehovah, the great name "I am" being involved in it, a suggestion of God's desire to disclose Himself in His secret Being as we have been taught. The name is a mysterious name, it is the personal name of Him who is Elohim, Him who is God, and He desires that that name and what it conveys should have a peculiar place with us, for it is referred to in the Psalms and in the prophets, where the feelings of the saints are peculiarly engaged with God in the blessedness of the way in which we are referring to Him.
Then in @Revelation 21, the great end is reached in God Himself, (involving Father, Son and Holy Spirit) being with them, their God. It is as if the Spirit of God would give us a touch in that word, God *Himself*, that the great end is reached in that God, not so much in the majesty of His attributes, but according to His being with them, their God. It is as if the Spirit of known and enjoyed by creature understanding, in such holy nearness as is suggested in @Revelation 21.
S.L. In @John 1 -- 18 we read "No one has seen God at any time; the only begotten Son who is in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared him."
S.McC. That scripture is very apropos to what we are saying because it brings out just what we wish to dwell upon, that while God dwells in light unapproachable, yet He has drawn near to make Himself known in a way that is intelligible to our way of thinking. "The only begotten Son who is in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared him;" the declaration in regard to God is fully out. These passages would have in mind the worship of God in the full light of that declaration.
A.E.S. Such knowledge of God must bow our hearts in worship.
S.McC. It should, so that you will remember in Exodus when Moses brings the message to the people,
{391}
after meeting Aaron, and all that Jehovah had said to him, it is said they worshipped. That is the true end in all ministry, and administration. God as the great End of all should be reached, feelingly, and intelligently too, by us.
L.K. Would you mind saying something about the difference between declaration and revelation?
S.McC. Declaration has a far wider bearing than revelation. When the Lord says in @John 17 "I have made known unto them thy name and will make it known" He is particularly alluding to the revelation of God as understood and appreciated by a specific family, such as the assembly is. But in declaration the matter is out, and bears publicly upon the whole position into which God in Christ, has come.
C.F.I. What have we to learn in regard to the way the Lord approaches this great matter of worship in @John 4? He speaks about worshipping the Father, saying "the Father seeks such as his worshippers," before He refers to God.
S.McC. I think that as the chapter opens stress is laid on the mediatorial operations in relation to the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Spirit, typified in the living water. It is essential if we are to understand the worship of God rightly, that what is mediatorial should have its place. The economy which is formally stated in @John 3: 35 brings before us the position that the Lord Jesus has been given, in relation to the working out of divine administration. The Father is supreme in the divine arrangement which is established. So that, as the teaching proceeds, the Lord when He comes to the subject of worship, impresses the woman, as a subject of the work of God, with the thought of the Father, and His supremacy in the divine arrangement. "The Father" is the great name of grace, by and through which God is known in this dispensation. All that seems to be important in leading us on to the
{392}
fullest and most extended thought as to God involved in the verse, "God is a spirit, and they who worship him must worship him in spirit and truth."
C.S.K. So that the approach to God is in Spirit not through materialism or ceremonialism, which are eliminated. Does that bring in that there are certain limits within which God will be worshipped?
S.McC. The truth would regulate us and maintain a balance in relation to the worship of God, so that we do not go beyond what we should. In speaking of God we are to remember who God is, and who and what we are, and so the truth would balance us.
G.A.A. Was Solomon in line with that when he said, very early in his reign, "There is no God like unto thee?"
S.McC. We are to know God as He desires to be, in so far as He can be known by us creatures, and this, not only in the exhibition of His power, not only as Creator, wonderful as that is, but according to what He is essentially. The titles Father and Son in John's gospel are to impress us with those tender relationships into which God has come so that He might be known by us intelligently as we understand these relationships.
T.R.H. David said in @Psalm 29, "Give unto Jehovah the glory of his name." Is that according to what you are suggesting?
S.McC. It is. We had the verse in @Psalm 48 referred to this morning in the worship of God "according to thy name so is thy praise." The name, the revelation of God would give character to the praise of God in whatever age it may be.
C.F.I. Have you in mind that in verse 24 God is referred to as God Himself, involving what you have said as to the economy earlier in the chapter, the Father, Son and Spirit operating?
S.McC. Yes. It is all operating to the end that we
{393}
should reach God Himself in this way, involving Father, Son and Holy Spirit, the whole Deity. This means not only God according to His eternal power and divinity but God and what He is essentially, as He may be known by us. God is love, and John's ministry would help us as to knowing God in His Being in so far as He can be known by us. Hereby we have known love John says; that is, we have come to know love in the way that God has moved out from the realm of unapproachable light, making Himself known through the divine arrangement as He has.
M.R.J.M. Does the epistle help -- "God is love and he that abides in love abides in God and God in him," @1 John 4, 16.
S.McC. Well, exactly. Love has a great place in this matter of the knowledge of God because love is the link between the absolute and the relative.
C.A.I. Would the worship of the Father being referred to by the Lord Jesus first, impress us with the wonderful revelation of God in grace which would enable us to be in perfect restfulness?
S.McC. The knowledge of God conveyed in the name Father would have a great bearing in regard to our enjoyment of God in the way in which He has been pleased to make Himself known. The thing is to see that the great object of God's approach to men in the glad tidings in the working out of the administration that we have been speaking about, is that we should know God Himself, in so far as He can be known by us. We are creatures and limited and we can never go beyond what is relative; but according to the name Jehovah, God desires to be known in His secret Being *in so far as He can be known by us* with our finite understanding, and He indicates this in the passages that are before us.
E.W.C. Is what is presented in the 24th verse higher than what is in the 21st?
{394}
S.McC. The Father is supreme in the divine arrangement. The Father remains in the inscrutableness of Deity. It is not so much a higher thought in coming to verse 24. It is a wider and more extended thought, covering the whole thought as to the Deity.
C.S.K. Would it be right to say that the economy has operated so that each of the divine Persons has presented something of God in His operations to the end, as the great objective, that God Himself might be known?
S.McC. Well, exactly. Each of the Persons is operating; the Lord Jesus and the Spirit have come into the mediatorial position; the Father has not in that way. The mediatorial position is not linked with the Father, but with the Lord and the Spirit; but nevertheless the Father is operating, and the Lord, and the Spirit, each of the Persons is operating to the great end that God might be known in this full and extended way.
S.L. Would it do our hearts good to take account of love operating in this economy between divine Persons? At the end of @John 3 all things have been committed into the hands of the Son.
S.McC. That is all part of the divine arrangement, the divine administration, that we might know God. "God is love" refers to what God is in His essential Being; but then how do we come to know it, and how are we brought to intelligently understand and appreciate it? It is through the economy into which divine Persons have come, where the Father is viewed as loving the Son and the Son is viewed as loving the Father, and where the Son lays down His life as having come into manhood. That is how we come to understand intelligently what God is in that way.
G.R.D. So that as appreciating the service and position that divine Persons have taken we may be impressed with the greatness of the Lord Jesus. Would verse 24 come in in that connection, that whatever
{395}
Person of the Godhead is before us, the fact is that God is a spirit and they who worship Him must worship Him in spirit and truth? Would that govern?
S.McC. Yes. The spiritual side in regard to the worship is the important thing there. God is a spirit. It is to stress in our minds the need for spirituality, the need for the Spirit in this great matter. They that worship Him must worship Him in spirit and truth. As having the Spirit we are thus set in intelligent relationship with God who is said to be a spirit. We are not spirits but that which is born of the Spirit is spirit, that is, it partakes of that character; and as having the Spirit, we have the means of being in intelligent relationship with God who is said to be a spirit.
G.R.D. That is what I mean, that that would be necessary and true, whether one of the Persons of the Godhead was before us as God, or whether God, as embracing Father, Son and Spirit.
S.McC. Yes.
P.B. I think some of us need more help in regard to what you stated, "the Father remains in the inscrutability of Deity." Would you just help us on that?
S.McC. I was only referring to what Mr. Taylor has said, that the Father remains in the inscrutableness of Deity. The Father has never, as the Lord Jesus and the Spirit have done, assumed an attitude of subjection or subordination. The Father is viewed in supremacy in the economy, the Lord Jesus saying, "My Father is greater than I." But of course we always keep in mind that in the abstract relations of Deity the Father, the Son and the Spirit are co-equal and co-eternal.
C.S.K. I would like to ask at this time in relation to the pronouns used here as it is in this verse, "God is a spirit and they who worship *him*," and in @Colossians 1 of the fulness it speaks of "*itself*."
{396}
S.McC. Well, it is to intensify in our minds that God is one. There are three divine Persons but God is one. There are not three Gods, there is only one God made known in three Persons according to the name in @Matthew 28, Father, Son and Holy Spirit.
M.R.J.M. We used to speak of the unity of the Godhead but that is not right, is it? God is one, would that be right?
S.McC. Well, the word unity is not a strong enough word I suppose because there could be no thought of disunity in the Godhead.
W.J.B. The God that we worship is the God that we know. He has made Himself known, and the fact that He has made Himself known involves the economy.
S.McC. He has made Himself known in these well-known relationships intelligible to creature understanding. That is an important thing because He wants us to know what He is in His being, and these relationships in the economy intensify that thought in our minds. Of course it involves His power, all that works out in relation to it. All that we had last night in God shining out in the glad tidings, is laying the basis for this that we are referring to, that God desires to be known in so far as He can be known by us in the way in which we are referring to it.
F.W. Does verse 22 help there or is that another thought, we worship what we know?
S.McC. Well, the Lord Jesus there is speaking of a class of persons. "We worship what we know" just as He says in chapter 3 "We speak that which we know and we bear witness of that which we have seen," He is speaking of a class of persons that are marked by knowledge of the truth.
T.R.H. In addressing God would we always have in our mind what He is as made known to us as Father, "to us there is one God the Father?"
{397}
S.McC. You asked if we would *always* have that in mind, did you?
T.R.H. Yes.
S.McC. You would never think of setting aside any feature of the revelation of God; but I think it is well to keep in mind that the full revelation of God involves the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit.
W.J.B. Would it be right to say, in reaching the Father in the service of God we move on from the thought of His being the Father to the wider thought of God as seen in relation to Him, and as we are held in that contemplation it widens out, God as such involving all three divine Persons?
S.McC. That is how I understand @John 20; "My Father and your Father, my God and your God." It is progressive in the sense that God is a wider thought than Father. Father is a limited thought, because the Father judges no one. We progress from "my Father and your Father" to "My God and your God" in @John 20. Progression does not *always* mean plurality of persons, it may mean fulness of thought, fulness of the truth, and the Father is the Person that is before us in @John 20; but we move progressively on to the thought of what He is as Christ's God and *our* God and as such the great full thought widening out as to God involving all three Persons, Father, Son and Holy Spirit.
E.B. I find that very helpful, if I understood what you said rightly, as to my Father and your Father, and then my God and your God. We progress if I might reverently say in the knowledge of that Person we know as Father to the thought of Deity as presented in Him, and having arrived at that, are we to understand that the full thought of Deity must include the other two Persons as well?
S.McC. The full thought of God includes all three Persons; and even in saying in regard to @John 20
{398}
that the Father is the Person that is before us, abstractly we cannot exclude the Lord and the Spirit, because abstractly They retain Their part in co-equality with the Father in the Deity in the full thought of God.
M.R.J.M. We would not know the Father were it not for the mediatorial service of the Son and the Spirit. Is that right?
S.McC. Well, it is through Their service that we draw near to the Father. The Lord Jesus has made known the Father and it is through Him by the one Spirit that we have access to the Father, showing how the mediatorial service operates in regard to drawing near.
W.J.B. There is no Person higher than the Father is there, but the thought of what God is in @John 20 is wider and greater. The *thought* is greater.
S.McC. There has been a little bit of cloudiness in some of our minds perhaps, as to that, in thinking that when it says, "My Father and your Father and to my God and your God," we are going higher and higher; but the Father remaining in the inscrutableness of Deity, it is not so much a question of going higher. We can hardly go higher than that. It is a question of what is more extended, what is unlimited, I mean as to the knowledge Christ has. We must keep in mind that we are limited, but as to Christ. His knowledge is unlimited, He being a divine Person. We shall never be without the mediatorial service and actings of the Lord and the Spirit. We shall never have to do with God apart from it.
C.S.K. "We are the circumcision who worship by the Spirit of God."
S.McC. He is the power of knowledge within us. He is that divine Person in His uniqueness that is the power of knowledge within us and the power for worship. He did not die for us. The Lord Jesus died
{399}
for us, that is His unique glory in the divine arrangement; but the Lord Jesus is not the power of knowledge in us, it is the Spirit that is that power and the power for worship. That is His unique glory and distinction.
M.R.J.M. "Hereby we know that we abide in him and he in us that he has given to us of his Spirit."
S.McC. Well, exactly.
W.H.W. In regard to what has been said about God being a wider thought, is that seen in the service of God, that we are able to link the thought of men with God?
S.McC. Yes. The racial thought comes into view in relation to man. God with men, the tabernacle of God is with men, showing how God has manhood in mind, patterned after Jesus, involving all the families, not only the assembly seen uniquely in it as the tabernacle of God, but embracing all the families in heaven and on earth.
A.J.C. Is it not remarkable, the Lord disclosing this matter to the woman He met by the way?
S.McC. Showing the remarkable way in which this exalted subject comes up in relation to a woman with such a history; but when this subject is introduced, she is viewed as a subject of the work of God, because it is quite evident when she says in verse 19, "Sir, I see that thou art a prophet," that she is to be regarded as a product of the work of God.
G.W. How does this stand relative to "God of the spirits of all flesh?"
S.McC. Well, God is God wherever we view Him and He is the Supreme Arbiter of the universe, in relation not only to men but to everything else. The Father is viewed as the Source of things. That is His distinctive glory in the divine arrangement; the Lord Jesus is the administrator, He is the Lord of glory,
{400}
He administers the glory; the Spirit is the power in us for taking in what is administered, especially in the matter of knowledge.
H.B. Does the expression "Father of glory" suggest His being the Source of it?
S.McC. That is what I was referring to, His distinctive glory, that He is the Source of things, whether light, or glory, or spirits, He is viewed as the Source.
D.B. "For of him and through him and for him are all things."
S.McC. It would involve more than the Father, in @Romans 11, the passage you are referring to, and @1 Corinthians 15, 28. It would involve God in His supremacy, the extended and wider thought as to God, but in @1 Corinthians 8, we have "To us there is one God, the Father, of whom are all things and we for him." That is, He is the Source of things.
W.J.B. It is remarkable that in @Romans 11 the apostle rises to such a height, on such a foundation as the contemplation of mercy.
S.McC. I think that is what we need to see and you feel that we need to know God in the elements, in the fundamental of the teaching of the gospel. The truth of the gospel as you were referring to it last night comes that way, having in mind that we reach God Himself -- what He is in His nature as love and the way that He desires to be known by us. The more we are affected by it the more it will lead us to these exalted thoughts as to Himself.
W.J.B. That would encourage us on Lord's Day morning. Beginning in simplicity would in no way debar us from the heights to which we may rise subsequently.
S.McC. You feel that the knowledge of God Himself would help us as to fluidity, so that our minds are not too rigid. At one time, I suppose, if a brother made reference to mercy at a certain part of the worship,
{401}
some would be all upset; but mercy is a glorious attribute of the God who desires to be known, as we are referring to Him, in so far as He can be known by us, in the greatness of His Being.
C.S.K. So that to priestliness there is a vast realm of the knowledge of God that is open in the service.
S.McC. What a realm, as it were, filled with glory which enters into the service of God; what scope we have in it. We perhaps, get into ruts in our thoughts and become crystallized along certain lines; we want to make full room for the divine arrangement and all that has come to light in God being declared.
A.McK.H. Quick settlement in moral matters as in @John 4 should produce worshippers.
S.McC. One has said, and I believe it is right, that all that we pass through and work out on moral lines should work out in the increase of the yield that there is for God. That seems to be an unchanging principle in the ways of God.
E.B. Does the end of @Revelation 4 bear on this scene of glory, "Holy, Holy, Holy," verse 8, and then the last verse -- "O our Lord and our God?"
S.McC. Yes. The God "who is and who was and who is to come," reminds us of the God of whom we are speaking, the God who is, the "I am," the ever-existing unchanging One.
C.A.I. Does the recognition of the person of Christ and His part in this wondrous declaration that we have spoken of, have an important place? The Lord Jesus is spoken of as the expression of God's substance and the effulgence of His glory.
S.McC. What a passage that is in Hebrews, reminding us of what we are in the presence of Christ in manhood, which should affect our souls; how near God has come in a manner and way intelligible to creature understanding, yet always reminding us at every turn of what is inscrutable, what is beyond us.
{402}
A.E.S. Would you say a little as to God wanting to be known?
S.McC. Well, that should bring us to Exodus. As we know the name Elohim is not a matter of revelation, but the name Jehovah is. The name Elohim was arrived at in some way by the writer, Moses, but it is not one of the revealed names, whereas Jehovah is. God made Himself known, revealed Himself to Moses in this way. Moses says to God, verse 13, chapter 3, "Behold when I come unto the children of Israel, and shall say unto them, The God of your fathers hath sent me unto you; and they shall say, What is his name? what shall I say unto them? And God said to Moses, I AM THAT I AM. And he said, Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel: I AM hath sent me unto you." That is God in His essential Being, the ever-existing unchanging One; and then he says, verse 15, "And God said moreover to Moses, Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel: Jehovah the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, hath sent me unto you. This is my name for ever, and this is my memorial unto all generations." Neither "Elohim," nor "Almighty" are God's memorial to all generations, but "Jehovah," that name involving mystery, involving the I AM, God the ever existing One, unchanging One. It shows how God desires to be known by us, in so far as He can be known by us with our creature understanding, according to His secret Being. Not that we can compass it but the Spirit would help us to grasp the thought of it or an impression as to it.
E.W. Would it be diverting you to ask, whether the Lord's promise to the overcomer in Revelation in Philadelphia, "I will write upon him the name of my God," would fit in with what you are saying?
S.McC. It would show us that in Philadelphia the overcomer comes in for the best and the greatest
{403}
thoughts in the divine mind. I think it is affecting to see the background to this revelation of God, the awful bondage that the children of Israel were suffering in Egypt, the anguish of spirit and of soul that they passed through, then the system, the mediatorial system of deliverance beginning to be set up; Moses having such a part in it and God drawing near, emphasizing here not His power and His Almightiness but what He is in His Being as the ever-existing unchanging One. I think it is to strike a note in our spiritual emotions in regard to God and the desire He has to be known by us, in so far as He can be known by us with our creature limitations. We are impressed with the finiteness on our side, finite as we are, but we are in the presence of infinitude, in God Himself, but we cannot comprehend infinitude -- only a divine Person could do that.
R.G.C. Would you please say a word on "I am *that* I am" and not "I am *who* I am?"
S.McC. "I am that I am" perhaps brings the historical side in, but it would emphasize what we are saying, that God wants to be known according to the glory and blessedness of what He is in His Being. God is Love; and the working out of the economy and the divine administration is to intensify before our souls that great thought. So that in John's gospel where the economy is stressed throughout, the great matter of love is stressed, in the links between divine Persons, in Their links with the saints, and in the links between the saints, one with another.
G.B. Is it significant in John's gospel, when they were going to take the Lord He said "I AM, and they went backwards and fell to the ground?"
S.McC. Well, there the glory of His person comes before us. John would always remind us, and it is well that we should be reminded that whatever place involving subjection the Lord Jesus, may, of His own
{404}
voluntary act come into, we are never to forget that on the abstract side He is co-equal with the Father.
A.T.S. You spoke of the mystery that is wrapped up in the name Jehovah. Is the same mystery wrapped up in the name Jesus?
S.McC. Exactly; Jehovah the Saviour. Because Matthew would impress us at the beginning as to His Deity.
W.H.W. It is interesting to see in @John 18 just referred to, the Lord uses this name when He is just about to make the necessary move to relieve His people from the system of bondage.
S.McC. Yes. It is remarkable, as we take account of it.
C.S.K. God surrounds this revelation of His name by active love does He not, the way He speaks here, "I have seen" and "their cry have I heard" and "for I know their sorrows. And I come down to deliver them." Are all these calculated to draw our affections out to the God who thus reveals Himself. It is not just official?
S.McC. That is the whole point in the memorial. The memorial is brought up in the Psalms, where we have the experimental side, the experiences of the saints. It comes up in the prophetic writings where revival is in mind in the midst of declension, for instance in @Isaiah 26. This is an interesting passage bearing on what we are saying, @Isaiah 26: 7, it is a song that is before us, and it says, "The way of the just is uprightness, thou the Upright" -- a beautiful reference to God, as the soul of the remnant expresses itself in this song. "Thou the Upright, dost make the path of the just even. Yea in the way of thy judgments, O Jehovah, have we waited for thee; the desire of our soul is to thy name, and to thy memorial." This shows how the disclosure of God in this name is affecting the saints, the remnant, drawing out their feelings in the midst of all the judgments, "in the way of thy judgments,
{405}
O Jehovah, have we waited for thee; the desire of our soul is to thy name, and to thy memorial." It is intensifying the feeling side and that is where we need help in the worship of God; we have plenty of light, academically we may be sound in the terms to use, but what God desires is that we should know Him, *Himself*, in all the blessedness of His Being, as He has been pleased to disclose Himself, so that we are affected in our souls in the matter of the worship of God.
G.H.R. Would @Psalm 90 fit in where it says "even from eternity to eternity thou art God" then "For a thousand years in thy sight, are as yesterday."
S.McC. A prayer of Moses, the man of God. What a wonderful insight that prayer gives us to the greatness of that beloved servant. What a man he was, although he did not live in our dispensation you are amazed as you think of the knowledge of God that he had. He did not live in his ministry. He was the greatest minister I suppose of the Old Testament, but he did not live in it, or the reputation that it acquired for him. He lived in the knowledge that he had of God, in so far as he could know God.
E.R. It is Moses who uses the title "Elohim."
S.McC. It shows us the intelligence of Moses because Elohim is the supreme One; God is supreme, but relative to the creation.
T.R.H. We need "soul" in the service of God.
S.McC. I think that is what we need help on. The intelligence balanced with the feelings; and God wants us to be affected by this disclosure of Himself, in so far as He does disclose Himself to creature understanding. In the memorial that is carried through God wants us to be affected by this knowledge of Himself.
L.I. Calling to mind what the Lord Jesus inaugurated on the first day of the week?
S.McC. Yes. Mr. Taylor years ago referred to the fact that we begin with the Passover, in principle
{406}
that is, we all begin together, we do not begin without one another, the youngest is taken into account, we all begin together on the same level and we proceed together.
A.McK.H. Regarding the youngest being brought in, in baptising to the name of the Father and the Son, and Holy Spirit, is the full thought in mind there?
S.McC. That is interesting because that shows that every believer as baptised initially has that advantage, that he has been brought into that realm characterised by God known in this light. Even the children in their baptism are committed to that realm of light.
E.B. I was wondering if the expression, the depths of God in @1 Corinthians 2, would give us some impression as to God Himself.
S.McC. Well, it would. It is to impress us with the marvellous position that we are brought into as creatures as having the Spirit. The Spirit searches the depths of God, not that we search, the Spirit searches the depths of God. The possibilities are in the realm of creature enjoyment and creature understanding, as having the Spirit. Not that we can compass the depths of God or compass the Deity, far be the thought, or not that, we can enter upon the absolute, that could not be, but we are taken, you might say, as far as we can be taken, both by the Lord Jesus in saying "my God and your God" and by the Spirit in searching the depths of God.
W.J.B. What was in mind in the last scripture?
S.McC. I think it should affect our souls that the completing of the ways of God should give us this view of the assembly as the tabernacle of God. No other family will know the nearness that we know. The assembly is so near to Deity, the tabernacle of God. She is in full accord with the whole mediatorial position and all the mediatorial actings, and God is tabernacling there. The tabernacle of God is with
{407}
men, and He shall tabernacle with them and they shall be His people and God Himself shall be with them, not *to* them, but *with* them, their God. As if God has reached the great end that He has had in mind, that He might be near to men in this way, known in this way as God Himself, not exactly by what He has done, by what He has accomplished, but what He is in the outshining of Himself in Christ; God Himself.
C.A.I. Does that involve our knowledge of and intimate relations with each of the blessed Persons?
S.McC. Well, it would; because how can we know God without the Spirit or without the Lord Jesus? We are bound up to that. Their service I mean.
E.W. Do feelings enter into this, "He shall be with them" and "God Himself shall be with them?" Does that show that the feelings you were bringing before us in Exodus enter into this?
S.McC. So that the link between the two scriptures is to be noted. "He shall wipe away every tear from their eyes; and death shall not exist any more, nor grief, nor cry, nor distress shall exist any more, for the former things have passed away." It is remarkable how the highest features of the knowledge of God are linked with that background which has involved so much pressure for us.
J.B.T. I was going to ask if men will only know God through the tabernacle. It says the tabernacle of God is with men and He shall tabernacle with them.
S.McC. The tabernacle, the assembly, will be the great means for the diffusion of spiritual knowledge in the universe of God; although when we say that we must keep in mind that the mediator is Christ, not the assembly. "God is one, and the mediator between God and men, one, the man Christ Jesus." God will be imaged eternally in Christ.
P.B. And the men also involves the assembly?
{408}
S.McC. Exactly. In the assembly the thought of manhood would have a peculiar place. The Lord refers to it in @John 17. The men with whom the tabernacle of God is, would involve more than the assembly but include the assembly.
C.F.I. The relationship of sonship will go through, sonship in a special way in the assembly.
S.McC. No other family will have the spirit of sonship as the assembly has it.
T.R.H. Is union involved in this, the bride adorned for her husband?
S.McC. Union would enter into our relations with Christ, but the tabernacle stands in relation to God, the tabernacle of God is with men.
G.R.D. In that connection would you say something about the assembly as a vessel?
S.McC. Well, @Ephesians 3 helps us to see that there is glory to God in the assembly. That links on with what we have here "unto all generations of the age of ages;" the great place that the assembly will have at the very centre of all the concentric circles involved in the many families.
P.B. Would it be right to say that historically the assembly will have been administrating for a thousand years, and this really comes after that historically, so that she is seen as a bride in all her freshness?
S.McC. It is an interesting thing to see that in the teaching in @Revelation 21 the assembly comes into the millennial position from the eternal viewpoint.
A.E.P. Sonship, is that a greater thought than union?
S.McC. Well, it is. Sonship is in relation to God, union in relation to Christ.
C.S.K. Why is the thought of people brought in here?
S.McC. "And they shall be his people." I suppose it would cast us back in our thoughts now, retroactively,
{409}
to all that enters into this thought of people, "a people near unto Jehovah" as the Psalm says, the climaxing of the Psalms says "a people near unto Jehovah" that is this great thought here, the blessedness of the creature thus in such intimacy with God as it said "God himself."
M.R.J.M. Is this complete salvation?
S.McC. Well, it is. It involves new creation. "I make all things new." It is touching, the tenderness of God in this passage linked with His supremacy and the fulness of thought in regard to Him, that we should have these references to His tenderness, "He shall wipe away every tear from their eyes, and death shall not exist any more, nor grief, nor cry," as if we are reminded of what God is in His feelings, in the working out of His nature in consideration for us.
A.E.S. Is this the answer to the beginning, "Let us make man in our image?"
S.McC. Yes. We arrive at @Genesis 1 and 2 here, God and man.
{410}
LEADERSHIP
@John 10: 1 -- 16; @Isaiah 63: 7 -- 14; @Psalm 78: 65 -- 72
The thought of leadership is in mind in this service this afternoon. Leadership, of course, is spoken of in many ways in the scriptures. We were alluding this morning to leadership by principles. A very important thing in its setting, that we should know how to be led by right principles. It is easy to be led by wrong principles but at the very outset we are reminded in being recovered morally from the ruin around us, that we have to follow right principles. Right principles are wonderful in that relation. We must not minimise them; we must not make little of them, we must hold them all in their relative values, because they are our salvation, in days of public confusion, difficulty and breakdown. But I want to speak of leadership in persons, which Is also a great matter in its place, for it is important that we should understand right leadership in persons and the door is open for leadership for all of us in different ways, as we may know and have observed in the scriptures.
One great feature of leadership is that we are to take the lead in paying honour one to another. For we shall never love one another rightly, according to divine thoughts, unless we respect one another, and value one another, as it is our right to value one another in connection with divine thoughts. And I want to speak first of all of leadership in Christ, our great Model. Then I want to speak of it in Moses, God leading in and through Moses, and then in David -- choice men as they are, two of the greatest men in the Old Testament. They are a great example to us, persons like ourselves, of like passions, a great example to us in relation to the truth and in care and love
{411}
for the people of God. It is obvious to most of us, to all of us I would suppose, here, that it is right and befitting that we should begin with our Lord Jesus Christ, for He has left a model for us. Leadership, in Christ, according to John's gospel involves more than an arbitrary lead, it is leadership presented to us in One who can say He is altogether that which He says. A very important matter in leadership, that we should lead as being living exponents of the truth. And the Lord Jesus sets the example for us in John's gospel and I want to refer to Him in relation to His leadership in this section. As we know this chapter is unique to John's gospel, we do not find it in Luke, nor in Mark, nor in Matthew. It is special to John, as if it is a chapter that we need to understand in the last days, because John's ministry is specifically dealing with the last days. This is one part, one chapter that needs to be understood in our time and in our day, because the Lord Jesus stresses in regard to the sheep that they hear His voice and that they will never perish. He says "My sheep hear my voice and I know them and they follow me and I give them life eternal and they shall never perish, and no one shall seize them out of my hand." We were referring to security this morning and we need to get a sense of the security from this viewpoint also, that we are in the hand of Christ. The Lord Jesus is not as it were, in this relation far from the sheep nor the sheep far from Him. Luke in chapter 15 brings in the matter of estrangement and distance through sin but in @John 10 the sheep are viewed as in the hand of Christ. It is a wonderful thing to take account of, dear brethren, that we are in His hand. There are many things and forces of evil that would take us out of that position if they could, but the Lord Jesus will give us the fixed assurance and we need that assurance in view of being restful in the divine realm,
{412}
restful in the path of the testimony. We need this assurance for our hearts that "I give them life eternal and they shall never perish and no one shall seize them out of my hand." "My Father, who has given them to me is greater than all, and no one can seize out of the hand of my Father." You can see, dear brethren, in this relation how intimately the Father and the Son are bound up with the matter of the sheep, according to John. Because the Lord does not speak of His own hand the second time, He speaks of the Father's hand. It is affecting that God should come into the realm of understandable language, so that we should know the feelings of His heart about us, and toward us, because the Father remains in the inscrutableness of Deity; yet in this gospel we are reminded of how He comes within our range in expressions that are calculated to touch our spiritual feelings and emotions. You will remember how the bosom of the Father is referred to in the first chapter, and the One who is in that place, the Lord Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son who is in the bosom of the Father. The delightfulness of manhood in Jesus in all its spiritual excellence is in view in that position in the first chapter. But it is not exactly a question of the Lord Jesus that is being stressed here and His links with the Father, although they are in the chapter, but the sheep and what the sheep are, not only to Christ but also to the Father. I think it is a wonderful thing in this gospel, dear brethren, that we come under the notice of the Father because we love Christ, and this chapter would intensify that thought in our minds that as loving Christ the Shepherd, the true Shepherd, as hearing His voice and following Him we come under the Father's notice, yea, we are in the Father's hand, the hand of the Father. So that over against all the apostate currents and movements so swiftly flowing in the scene through which we
{413}
pass, we, the sheep of Christ, are in the hand of Christ and in the hand of the Father. What security, dear brethren, as we think of the Father and the Son bound up in this great matter of the care of the sheep. You will have noticed too how the Father and the Son are bound up in the matter of the administration of the Spirit. The Father sent the Spirit, and the Son sent the Spirit. What a prime matter the coming of the Spirit is in that both the Father and the Son should enter into that administrative act seen at Pentecost. What a prime place the saints of the assembly have in the divine mind. What concentration of interest and feeling in relation to the saints is seen in the Father and the Son in Their activities towards the saints in all the glory of the economy into which They come, yea, in which we have part, serving with the fixed objectives that are in mind in the glory and grace of the economy, the like of which has never been seen since time began. And John would stress in this particular part, the holy interest in the matter of the sheep. What the saints are in all that defenceless character publicly in a scene marked by hostility, yet they themselves are subjects of the work of God and true to the work of God in them, hearing the Shepherd's voice and following the Shepherd. The Lord Jesus, in speaking about this matter of the sheep, and His place as the Shepherd does not omit references to the false persons that are alluded to in the thief and the robber. He says, "Verily, verily I say to you, he that enters not in by the door to the fold of the sheep, but mounts up elsewhere, he is a thief and a robber." We have to be reminded, you see, of the legal way, the right way I mean, the door reminds us of the right way. It was not a surreptitious movement that the Lord speaks of here in His coming in but there were those who were marked by surreptitious movements just as in the time of the Galatians Paul
{414}
alludes to those who came in surreptitiously, to spy out our liberty. What necessity was there for surreptitious movement, to spy out their liberty, when their liberty was apparent? It was a testimony before their eyes in both Paul and Titus and the Lord says here "he is a thief and a robber but he that enters in by the door is the Shepherd of the sheep, to him the porter opens." I want you to notice this, dear brethren, to *Him*, the emphatic Him. Now the porter contains in the figure an abstruse allusion to the Spirit, the Holy Spirit, no doubt an allusion to the salutation of Christ as He entered upon His public service. To Him the porter opens, the Holy Spirit would not make room for the thieves and the robbers, the Holy Spirit would make way for Christ. He would make way for Him in relation to the sheep because these others do not have the care of the sheep at heart, they do not have the best in mind for the sheep. They are thinking of themselves, thieves and robbers as the Lord speaks of them, mounting up elsewhere, coming in through means and ways that are not proper to what belongs to the position. We are to beware, dear brethren, of whatever would deflect us from true leadership in Christ in this relation as in His love for the sheep He would carry us along in relation to all that His voice brings to us, and He says to Him the porter opens. I love to think of that. The delight of the Holy Spirit to make way for Christ in this aspect of His leadership, coming in having the sheep in mind, that the sheep should be led out, as it says. He calls His own sheep by name and leads them out. The references are to the Jewish fold, how the Lord Jesus came of woman, came under law as Galatians tells us. He came in by the door. He came in in full view, saluted from heaven and the Holy Spirit opening the door for Him to enter in public testimony and ministry having in mind the emancipation
{415}
of the sheep from all that would hold them in their minds and thoughts and affections in what gendered to bondage. It says He leads them out and when He has put forth His own He goes before them and the sheep follow Him.
Now I want in passing, dear brethren, just to allude to what this kind of leadership involves for Christ. We have mentioned it in the hymn which we have sung. It is mentioned in the chapter, His laying down His life for the sheep. We are not to forget what this leadership cost Him; we, any one of us here, may have a part in leading the sheep but we shall never have to pass through the waters that this Shepherd passed through in love for the sheep. We shall never have to go where He went. Let none of us make too much of our pressure and our suffering, let us remember that the One who has pioneered the way in suffering love for the sheep has gone where none of us shall ever be called to go. How wonderful it is, dear brethren, to think of His leadership, to think of what it cost Him, to bring them out of the fold. There is no fold in christianity. I know we use the word sometimes; you hear it used but it does not properly belong to christianity. The word that belongs to christianity is "the flock." As has been said Judaism is a circumference without a centre, christianity is a centre without a circumference. We want to understand the intensity of leadership in this chapter. The thieves and the robbers, why is the Lord using these terms? He sets on the matter as to the fold, the Jewish fold, and the thieves and the robbers and those that are serving for wages. How totally contrary to the spirit and grace of the economy into which this blessed Shepherd, our Lord Jesus Christ, has come to serve the sheep even unto going into death for them. The Lord throws into relief, you see, wrong leadership, the elements and the principles and the
{416}
features of wrong leadership. When the crisis comes, you see, they vacate the position, they leave the sheep, the sheep are left -- the Shepherd never leaves the sheep. He not only goes in and leads them out and goes before them. He keeps them in His hand, they are with Him all the way. He never leaves them, they shall never perish. No one shall take them out of His hand. He is with them whatever the vicissitudes, whatever the trials, whatever the difficulties. He stands by the sheep. That is true leadership, dear brethren. Whereas the thieves and the robbers, those who serve for wages, they are concerned about their reputation. They are concerned about their own prestige. They have been serving in relation to their own prestige. Oh, dear brethren, that everyone of us, brothers and sisters alike, might eschew this kind of thing and drink into the spirit and grace of the good Shepherd referred to here who is prepared to lay down His life for the sheep, to stand by the sheep, to be with them whatever the cost. And it says, verse 13, "Now he who serves for wages flees because he serves for wages." That is, he brings before us the standards of these hireling elements. They are serving for wages and they desert the position, because they are serving for wages, whereas, dear brethren, if we love the sheep, as Christ loved the sheep, we shall be with the sheep whatever the cost may be to ourselves. Think of what it cost the Lord Jesus, the public ignominy, the shame, the reproach, the spitting, the scorn, all that man in the wickedness of his heart could heap upon Him. Think of what it cost Him! Think of how ready, dear brethren, we are to desert when we should be standing by, when we should be identified with the sheep as the Lord Jesus is here. He says elsewhere, verse 10, "the thief comes not but that he may steal and kill and destroy; I am come that they might have life and might have it abundantly." Think of the elements
{417}
around us, all the different persons in the public profession that claim to lead the people, lead the sheep, and all they are concerned about is ravishing the sheep, shearing the sheep. They are not concerned about the sheep themselves, nor the One to whom the sheep belong. The Lord says "I am come that they might have life and might have it abundantly."
Now I want to speak of leadership in Moses. In @Isaiah 63 we have this reference to the leadership of God in Moses; you will remember how the section opens with the people relating their experiences, the remnant is speaking, someone is speaking here, "I will record the loving kindnesses of Jehovah, the praises of Jehovah according to all that Jehovah hath bestowed upon us, and the great goodness toward the house of Israel which he hath bestowed upon them according to his mercies, and according to the multitude of his loving kindnesses." Then it says, "And he said, they are indeed my people, children that will not lie; and he became their Saviour. In all their affliction he was afflicted, and the Angel of his presence saved them; in his love and in his pity he redeemed them and he bore them and carried them all the days of old." We are reminded, dear brethren, of the care of God for us in this relation, and before saying a word as to Moses and what came to light in divine leadership in Moses, I want to just draw our attention to this great matter of God Himself, and His identification with us in all the vicissitudes of the path here. It says, "He became their Saviour, in all their affliction he was afflicted." That touches our hearts, dear brethren, as we think of our afflictions, we think of what they are to ourselves, we think of what they are to the saints and how the saints feel about them; but think of what they were to God, what they were to the One who became their Saviour, as it says, "In all their affliction he was afflicted." Think of that, dear
{418}
brethren, in regard to the sorrows of the testimony. Think of how God feels about our matters, how He does not hold Himself afar off, hold Himself aloof from our matters, from our sorrows and our difficulties. You see, God is setting out in Himself the great feature of leadership as we may refer to it, "In all their affliction he was afflicted" because we are going on to speak of His glorious arm, His glorious arm leading them by the right hand of Moses. It is a unique expression. You do not find it elsewhere in the same way and relation, His glorious arm leading them by the right hand of Moses. But basic to it, preceding it, we are reminded of God as it says "In all their affliction, he was afflicted, and he became their Saviour." I think, dear brethren, our sorrows, our trials and our difficulties should draw us nearer to the God whose we are and to whom we belong. He wants to be known by us, indeed in the name Jehovah and in the name Jah He would give an intimation to faith of how He desires to be known in the secret of His Being by finite creatures such as we are. There is nothing touches one's heart more than the name Jehovah and the name Jah because it intimates to faith that God wants to be known in the secret of His Being by creatures such as we are. He wants to be known by us, not just in the mighty acts of power by which we have been emancipated from Egypt's thrall and spell, but in all the tenderness with which He is linked with us in our afflictions as it says "In all their affliction he was afflicted," and "the Angel of his presence." Dear brethren, what can that allude to? Is it not in our way of thinking and in our way of speaking, in the light of our dispensation, a touching allusion to the Holy Spirit? We referred to Him as presented abstrusely in the figure of the porter, and is there not another suggestion here "in the Angel of his presence?" You will remember how God referred
{419}
to the name as linked with the angel in Exodus and here it says "In all their affliction he was afflicted, and the Angel of his presence saved them." It comes into one's mind at the moment how much we owe to the Holy Spirit, the Spirit is here, we can count upon Him. It may seem at times that the whole position has gone but the Angel of His presence is with us and amongst us; as we would say as the figure would convey to us, the Holy Spirit is still here, dear brethren; He has never left us. He will never leave us. The Lord Jesus said that He would send another Comforter that He may be with you for ever. The Lord Jesus had to leave the disciples, He had to be separated from them but they were to get a Comforter that would never leave them. We want to know the Comforter better, dear brethren, the reality of the divine presence in the Holy Spirit here. It may seem at times the position may go and be overthrown but the Spirit is still here and we can count on the Spirit. There is what is at the right hand of God, all the power that is there, that will bring every element into subjection in a day yet to come as it operates publicly, but do we understand, dear brethren, that commensurate with the position up there is the position down here in the presence of the Holy Spirit in the assembly. So let us take it more to heart, dear brethren, that whatever may occur, whatever may come about, the Holy Spirit is with us and we can rely on Him and call upon Him to see us through, as it says, "The Angel of his presence, saved them." We have thus the service of Christ mediatorially as the Saviour presented to us in the type and also the suggestion of the Holy Spirit in the "Angel of his presence" and now we come to what it says "In his love and in his pity he redeemed them and he bore them and carried them all the days of old." Think of God speaking about the days of old.
{420}
Think of the days of old in New Zealand, the work as it started and has gone on. We have to let these thoughts come into our mind. They come into God's mind you see, the days of old -- we are not to forget the days of old, not that we are to live in the days of old, but we are not to forget them. He remembered the days of old, what days they were, as we shall see, what powerful leadership, what ministry, what service, what pioneering in love in that service, and by analogy we might say as we take account of the work in these parts, think of how the way was pioneered. God does not give up His work, He stands by His work, dear brethren, a great comfort to all our hearts; it says "but they rebelled and grieved his Holy Spirit, and he turned to be their enemy; himself, he fought against them." Think of the dispensation publicly, the breakdown on the public side, the awful confusion that has come into the position publicly; God even withholding His hand, but then, dear brethren, let us remember what it follows on with, He remembered the days of old, Moses and his people, not now the people alone but Moses and his people. Think of the choiceness of the expression -- Moses and his people. Think of this kind of leadership that our attention is drawn to. "Where is he who brought them up out of the sea with the shepherds of his flock -- where is he that put his holy Spirit within him," that is Moses, "his glorious arm leading them by the right hand of Moses." Think of these unique expressions, putting His Holy Spirit within him, that is Moses. The idea of prophetic ministry is to stress in our minds the attractiveness of spiritual leadership -- putting His Holy Spirit within him, His glorious arm leading them by the right hand of Moses. Think of the identification of God with Moses in this great matter, how God said to Moses "I have made thee God to Pharaoh." Think of the representation of God in
{421}
that kind of leadership. We are to be affected by all these matters, dear brethren. They have not come to us lightly, they have not come to us easily, they have not come to us in any simple fashion, as I might say; the way the truth has come to us has been pioneered through conflict and suffering. How it becomes us and behoves us to evaluate the position rightly, to stand by this position into which God has come and in which He is leading His people, identified with them in the sorrow and suffering and the Angel of His presence saving them. And it says "Dividing the waters before them, to make himself an everlasting name" -- God is not putting honour on us exactly here although honour is put upon Moses, but His own glory is in mind, to make Himself an everlasting name. Then it says "Who led them through the depths." Think of the depths, dear brethren. Some of these circumstances it is difficult to fathom; you cannot go into them and explain them, it says "who led them through the depths like a horse in the wilderness and they stumbled not." Think of the effectuality of that kind of leadership, and it says, "As cattle go down into the valley the Spirit of Jehovah gave them rest; so didst thou lead thy people, to make thyself a glorious name." Well, these are the conditions, dear brethren, that rightly attach to leadership according to God, to leadership that God is with, and there is no stumbling, there is rest for the saints. A beautiful figure, as cattle go down in the valley, so the Spirit of Jehovah gave them rest. Instead of them being all distraught and all upset, right leadership would involve that the saints are set at rest.
Now I just finish with a word as to David -- the matter of David's leadership. It says that "He chose David his servant and took him from the sheep folds: from following the suckling ewes, he brought him to feed Jacob his people." Notice that, dear brethren.
{422}
Why should God allude to Jacob, His people? We might say, well it is easy to feed Israel His inheritance, but what about Jacob, His people? Bringing up in our thoughts all the saints are in the disciplinary ways of God, David is called upon to feed Jacob, His people. The people in the disciplinary ways of God are marked by features, as we all are marked by them, that require the discipline of God to refine us, to reduce us. We are not to despise the saints in these circumstances. Right leadership involves that we understand the Jacob side as well as the Israel side. And it says "And he fed them according to the integrity of his heart, and led them by the skilfulness of his hands." Think of that, dear brethren, integrity of heart and skilfulness of hand. I just leave that thought with us in regard to leadership according to God as seen in this Psalm. The position involves in David that our hearts are right, integrity, uprightness, whatever it may cost me, whatever it may involve for me, the integrity of my heart would hold me to the sheep, what the saints are to God. I am not to vacate the position, I am not, going to desert the position because sufferings are entailed.
We have in these verses, the sovereignty of God's love bringing Jacob His people on to our view, and leadership in relation to them. Judah the mount Zion which He loved, what a position, dear brethren, now to be known in the assembly, and leadership by integrity of heart and skilfulness of hand. Sometimes we say, oh well I may be wrong in the way I do things but my heart is all right, but you will notice that David's heart and his hand were in the leadership. Our heart and our hand have to be in the leadership -- the hand referring to our service, externally, the heart referring to what we are internally, in integrity, in uprightness holding the saints in relation to divine thoughts; and our hands, that is all our
{423}
external activities and movements in relation to the saints, governed accordingly. May God bless the word and help all of us to cherish these thoughts of leadership so that we may be saved from wrong leadership, especially affected by the place that God has in the matter, in the Father and in the Son and in the Holy Spirit.
{424}
DIVINE INTERVENTION IN DAYS OF DIFFICULTY
@Zechariah 10
It is before one, dear brethren, to speak a word this afternoon, on divine intervention, having in mind that our thoughts may be enlarged in relation to God and our knowledge of Him, and His faithfulness, especially as it appears over against the dark background linked with days of brokenness publicly. This prophecy has to do with conditions analogous to our own, but light is brought in in this prophecy to stimulate the remnant in faith, and our faith needs to be stimulated, and the more we read the prophets, the more our faith will be stimulated. So that however difficult the circumstances, the sense of the faithfulness of God to His people, should help each and all of us to go forward with Him in what He is doing. It is a wonderful thing to be with God in what He is doing in the finishing days of the dispensation. It is a sorrowful thing not to be with God in what He is doing, but it is important to see that God takes account in this book of those that are with Him.
You will remember that in one part of this book there were certain persons who were returning from the captivity, whose names are given. God has taken account of them, He must have taken account of what they were thinking and what they were saying, their conversations together; for you will remember what God said to Zephaniah, when He gave his servant the prophet a word in relation to these persons to take gifts to them of the captivity of Heldai, of Tobijah and of Jedaiah, and he was to enter into the house of Josiah the son of Zephaniah, whither they were come from Babylon. He was to take gold and silver and
{425}
make crowns, showing how God takes account of where we are in matters. And these persons are honoured, but why are they honoured? They are honoured because they are persons who are prepared to make way for Christ in the type, because the crowns that are made from the silver and the gold were to be put upon the head of Joshua the High Priest, type, as he is in this particular section, of Christ, sitting as a priest upon the throne, and bearing the glory. I mention that to show how God is taking account of persons. This book opens with references to God taking account of persons, and of the truth. He is in this book taking account of the powers that be, the mountains of brass and the horses and the chariots, of all that is linked with His indirect government, among the nations. All that is coming up in His mind and before Him; so that in itself, dear brethren, should impart a sense of restfulness to us. Especially as we think of the difficulties among the nations, we are always to be reminded and to keep in our minds that God has things in control. The 6th chapter opens up with that, to impress our minds, that all that is linked with the powers that be, whatever may transpire amongst men, however dark it may seem in some parts. God has things in hand, and He is also taking account of persons. As you will note for instance, in this book the prophet is instructed to "run, speak to this young man." What a word for some of the young men here. You will remember that it is not any young man, I suppose there were a number of young men, but the word is, "run, speak to *this* young man" saying, "Jerusalem shall be inhabited as towns without walls." Think of a word like that coming into the ears of a young man, and I may say by extension a young woman. Jerusalem! You will remember how Jeremiah says, "Let Jerusalem come into your minds." And think of God
{426}
marking out young men for this interesting word, this word of vital importance, that would bring the assembly into our minds, for Jerusalem is a type of the assembly. You will see how while God is going on with great things in this book, He is not forgetting any one of us and our interest in divine things, and if we are standing by in relation to the prophetic service, and the prophetic ministry, rest assured that God will have a word for us. He will give us a word. You will recall that it says of Joshua, "he did not depart from the tent of meeting" and that he was Moses¬ attendant. I would say to the young brethren that it is an important thing to cleave to the saints in the light of the tent of meeting. It is the place where you will get light from God. It is the place where you will get confirmed in relation to the truth. Do not keep away from the brethren. Do not isolate yourself from the assembly, from the tent of meeting. Here is a young man, he must have been standing by, just like you young men and women here, you are sitting by and God is thinking about it. He is taking account of it. He says "run, ... " It is an urgent matter "speak to *this* young man," someone that had come under His notice. "Jerusalem shall be inhabited as towns without walls for the multitude of men and cattle therein; and I, saith Jehovah, I will be unto her a wall of fire around about and will be the glory in the midst of her." This is a word for a young man. Think of the faithfulness of God knowing as He knows, as no other knows the ramifications of evil, especially in the times that are referred to here, and yet considering for what a young man would represent in the testimony, and giving him a direct word as to Jerusalem, as to the assembly. And I would encourage the hearts and minds of the young brothers and sisters, as to the joy that divine Persons have in their presence here in relation to the truth, going on with
{427}
the truth, the assembly coming into their minds, the great governing and paramount interest in their lives. It is said of Jerusalem -- "They shall prosper that love thee." And so the word to the young man comes. Then we may remember how as the book proceeds we have a man coming up before our view and the enemy standing to resist his being clothed with festival robes. It is remarkable how this book brings up these matters, because this book has in mind, as all prophetic ministry has in mind, stimulation, that our hearts may not be bowed down under pressure or difficulty, but stimulated in the light of the prophetic word, in the assurance that divine thoughts are not falling to the ground, that God is caring for His testimony, and He will bring the testimony through, and those that are linked with the testimony through with it. And the enemy Satan the adversary, has the boldness to resist the reinstatement of the person I refer to in the 3rd chapter, namely Joshua the High Priest. It says that "He stood by to resist," to resist, not just to accuse. In the Revelation, the adversary is spoken of as the accuser of the brethren, but he is the resister here. It is one thing to accuse, but it is another thing to resist, and the enemy is resisting here. But God is taking the matter on. It is delightful to see in this book, how God takes matters on, and He takes that matter on. And Joshua resumes his place, the enemy is defeated.
Then we get another personality projected on to our view, Zerubbabel, the man in whose hands is the plummet, the man who has the truth, the standard of the truth before him, a man that God is using in relation to the dignity and the glory of the house. His hands laid the foundation, as God says, and his hands shall finish it. It says that "This is the word of Jehovah to Zerubbabel." How God comes in to speak this word to Zerubbabel! He is the Governor,
{428}
he is a man who has got the administration in his heart. He is the man who understands rule, the principle of government in the house of God, and God says, in principle, I am going to strengthen that person. And He will do to every person, who has got the welfare of God's house at heart, and he says, "This is the word of Jehovah to Zerubbabel." We have had a word for the young man in the second chapter, from God; we get a word from God in the 3rd chapter to Joshua, the angel of Jehovah gives him a word as to walking in God's ways, and now we get this word to Zerubbabel. We get the word to the young man, whom we might think of not much account, but who is under the divine eye; then we get the word to the Priest; now we are getting the word to the Governor, as if God is suggesting to our minds and hearts in a time and day of revival and recovery that He is going to strengthen through a prophetic word every vital feature in the testimony essential for the maintenance and carrying forth of the testimony. And the word to Zerubbabel is "Not by might nor by power but by my Spirit, saith Jehovah of hosts. Who art thou, O great mountain, before Zerubbabel thou dost become a plain and he shall bring forth the headstone with shoutings: Grace, Grace unto it." This is all entering into the completing of matters in relation to the house, his hands laid the foundation and his hands shall finish it. We are reminded you see, of the strength and power of resource in the Spirit in the completing of things. You will see the analogy to our times, dear brethren, how God is stressing this matter of the Spirit, that it is not by might, not by force of argument, not by a way of human intellect, or specious human argument. It is, "Not by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit, saith Jehovah." We may get occupied with numbers, but it does not matter whether there are ten, fifty or
{429}
ten thousand, the multiplication of numbers never makes right anything that is wrong. So God would remind us of this word, "Not by might nor by power, but by my Spirit saith Jehovah." And then the headstone is brought forth suggesting that the dispensation is to be completed in the glory of grace. He shall bring forth the headstone with shoutings -- not ordinary words. Zerubbabel represents government in the house of God, right administration according to God. Bringing forth the headstone with shoutings, suggests exultant feelings among the saints, and then the words "Grace, grace unto it," give us the keynote; and I believe that is what the dispensation is finishing with. You will remember that it is said at the outset that great grace was upon the brethren, and the dispensation is ending with that touch.
And now I come to what I have in mind to speak about in this chapter. I had not intended referring to these others, but they came into mind, and I think they serve to stimulate and encourage us in dark and difficult days, because we can see as we look around in the profession, how the truth is given up on every hand, and how the enemy would weaken our minds, weaken our hands, and discourage our souls by the external difficulties of the position, just as in Zechariah's time. But we have to see that however small the position may be publicly, however weak numerically, God is in the position, and the prophetic word is in the position, the priest is in the position, and the Governor is in the position. These elements are not lost, dear brethren, they are there and God would open our eyes to see them, so that we may be encouraged to go forward in view of the completing of the dispensation. The headstone is brought forward, in the hands of a true and right administration, with shoutings, not defeatism -- its shoutings mean exultant feelings among the brethren, among the saints, "Grace,
{430}
Grace unto it." It is a time of salvation, Babylon with all its scope and its pretension might lay claim to much. How many have been ensnared in it, and are still held in it, but we can thank God that through grace we find ourselves in spirit out of it, while publicly linked with all the shame and disaster connected with the breakdown of the church publicly. We can thank God for the moral road that leads us in spirit out of it, as pursuing righteousness, faith, love and peace. And God is filling our minds with thoughts of salvation. As it says, just before the chapter we read, "Jehovah their God shall save them in that day as the flock of His people." See verse 16 of the previous chapter. "And they shall be as the stones of a crown lifted upon his land." He is not just saving them as brands from the burning. His work is coming through in all its distinctiveness as the stones of a crown. Think of the beauty, the glory, the radiancy that is linked with the stones of a crown, and as it says "lifted up upon his land," adorning the whole scope and realm of what is linked with the purposes of divine love, God's hand, "Lifted up" as it says, "as the stones of a crown upon his land." What thoughts these are! God would bring them into our minds in difficult times, so that we might see that He has great thoughts in mind in the completing of things. And so this is what I want to draw attention to in this chapter, how God comes into the position, and how He saves as come into the position. The chapter opens with the time of the latter rain. Need I remind the brethren of the time of the latter rain? We are all conscious I am sure, of the wonderful ministry that we have been brought up under, the distinctive features of it, how wonderful it is; and it is the time of the latter rain here. But then the word is to "ask of Jehovah rain in the time of the latter rain." The rain is still coming, dear brethren, and will come. And it
{431}
says, "Jehovah will make lightnings, and he will give them showers of rain, to everyone grass in the field." That is, the pastures are not ended, God is bringing into our minds thoughts of the flock in this section of the word, and stressing the thought that there still will be rain, and promoting a desire for the rain. Do not let the enemy bring into our minds that the time for ministry is gone, the time for spiritual ministry is gone, we are in the time of the latter rain, and we are to ask for more rain. "Ask of Jehovah rain in the time of the latter rain." And it says, "He will give them showers of rain, to everyone grass in the field." It is important that our souls should be kept under the influence and power of spiritual and heavenly ministry, because, as it says, "The teraphim have spoken vanity, and the diviners have seen a lie, and have told false dreams: they comfort in vain." We know the error that is abroad, we know how the truth of the incarnation is denied, the truth of the atonement is denied, the authority of the scriptures is denied, the truth as to Person of the Holy Spirit and His service is denied. We are in the midst of all these things publicly, the teraphim that have spoken vanity, and the diviners have seen a lie, and have told false dreams. God has taken account of all these matters; He has taken account of the distress of the flock; He has taken account of the leader of the shepherds and the he-goats that are responsible. Think of those that are responsible in the profession for what has come in upon the people of God. God has taken all that into account -- men that occupy positions in the public professing body, positions in which they are intended to help the flock but in which the flock is robbed and the flock is left in distress. God says, "I will punish the he-goats; for Jehovah of hosts visiteth his flock, the house of Judah, and maketh them as his majestic horse in the battle." I want especially the younger brothers
{432}
and sisters to listen to this word of God, for however despicable the saints may seem in the eyes of men, however poor the position may be in our cities and in our towns in the eyes of the world, God would bring into the mind and view of faith, the saints in this glorious light -- the house of Judah as His majestic horse in the battle. So that, as you see a few saints, it may be in weakness and in smallness, but they can stand against an association of tens of thousands. They can stand against men congregated together and united together to achieve their ends, united it may be in numbers of thousands and hundreds of thousands, and you will see one believer, two believers, in weakness it may be outwardly but like God's majestic horse in the battle. I would like to bring into our souls, or rather that the Spirit would bring into our souls the sense of victory in this section, because the victory is ours. God has given us the victory; "and this is the victory which has gotten the victory over the world, our faith" -- the importance of faith! It says God makes the house of Judah as His majestic horse in battle. The house of Judah in the prophets represents the area and the sphere where the light of Jerusalem and God's thoughts are cherished. It would find its answer today in those who are walking in the light of the assembly; not in any way assuming to be the assembly -- far be the thought, we can never assume to be the assembly; but walking in the light of it. God regarding as it were the house of Judah in a day of public weakness and breakdown, in all its majesty and dignity. It says He makes them as His majestic horse in battle.
And then it says, "From him shall come forth the corner-stone, from him the nail, from him the battle bow, from him every exactor together." That is, all that is required and needed to meet the circumstances is divinely supplied. We want to understand that, dear brethren, more and more. The supplies are not cut
{433}
off. If God comes into the position, all that is needed for the position will be divinely supplied. Think of the corner-stone; think of how it is alluded to in scripture. I suppose in some way we could think of Christ as the corner-stone; Peter indeed refers to Him in this light. Isaiah refers to Him as the corner-stone, what is laid in Zion. You remember how it is brought in over against the lies and the covenant with death, the overflowing scourge in @Isaiah 28. God brings into the thoughts and the minds of His people touches as to the glory of Christ, in the way of the corner-stone, the sure foundation. I suppose the corner-stone would be seen in John's gospel and John's ministry, the backbone and foundation of all, especially in difficult days. Then it says, "From him the nail." How essential the nail is; how essential that there should be someone or something to support the varied features of divine glory in the position. You remember that in Isaiah we are told as to Christ typically, that He is fastened as the nail in the sure place. I suppose Luke's gospel would bring into our minds and our thoughts Christ in this way, the hope of humanity, coming in on the side of men, every hope hinging and hanging upon Him, whether small or great. It is "from him the nail" and then it says "from him the battle-bow." The battle bow brings in the matter of the conflict and the thought or suggestion of the victory. We can thank God for the sense of the victory, not that we *shall* get it but that we *have* it; victory is on our side as with God in these matters, and the battle bow is needed and it is coming forth. I suppose Mark's gospel corresponds with that in its teaching and how well Mark is equipped and furnished as having been revived in his own soul, to speak of the battle bow. He had turned aside from the work because of the strenuous character of things; he had not gone forward in the work. Oh, is there any one of us who
{434}
is not going forward in the work? You say, What do you mean? Why, the work refers to what God is going on with in the testimony; whatever it may be, here or elsewhere, we want to be going on with it, not to be drawing back as John Mark. As he writes his gospel, how the thought of victory comes into it. You cannot but feel as you read the 16th chapter what a sense of victory Mark has in his soul as he records the scene of the resurrection. The sun had already risen, the stone is rolled away, the young man sitting clothed in a white robe; Mark is bringing in the features that speak of the victory, that the battle bow as it were has secured the victory. We think as we read in Mark of the seriousness of the sufferings of Christ and the intensity of them, His depth of holy feeling and conflict in the garden and what He entered into in death. It reminds us of the battle bow and what has been secured through it all, and Mark would leave an impression with us of the victorious side of things, so that he gives a touch that none of the other evangelists do. He says that the Lord went to the right hand of God. "The Lord, therefore, after he had spoken to them, was taken up into heaven, and sat at the right hand of God. And they, going forth, preached everywhere, the Lord working with them, and confirming the word by the signs following upon it." That is, the principle of the battle bow. When the enemy thought that everything was gone, everything was lost, Mark in the great ministerial gospel, the gospel that gives us the prophetic ministry, would leave us with the impression that the victory is ours. The Lord is in the victorious position at the right hand of God, the ministry is going forward. Who says here that the time for ministry is over? The ministry is going forward and *will* go forward to the end of the dispensation. Then it says "and from him every exactor" or it might read "ruler." The thought
{435}
of exactor as used here means ruler or administrator. "Every ruler together." That is a good word. It is important that the rulers, the administrators should be together. How often the enemy would operate to bring about divergence in those that have a part in ruling, a part in ministry, but it says "from him every exactor" -- or ruler, or administrator, "together." God is bringing in what is needed, you see. He would bring the rulers together, those that give a lead in administration and influence among the saints -- not those that lord it over God's heritage as abroad in the profession, the he-goats and the false shepherds that leave the flock to distress and disaster -- but those that have got Jerusalem at heart, every exactor or ruler together.
Then it says "And they shall be as mighty men, treading down the mire of the streets in battle." That is what is needed, dear brethren. Oh, the mire that would clog our feet, impede our movements forward in the testimony; it has got to be trodden down, and who are to tread it down? Every ruler together. The principle of the corner-stone, the principle of the nail, the principle of the battle bow, the principle of every ruler together, to tread down the mire so that the saints may not be impeded in their movements forward. Oh, the awfulness of the mire; how it would hold us, how it would hold our feet. You remember how Jeremiah in another set of circumstances sank in the mire. You remember how the Psalms speak of the mire. All these backbitings, wrong speakings, dishonouring of the saints, all that kind of thing is the mire of the streets and needs to be trodden down in the battle. How can we go forward in the victory, in the sense of enjoyment of the victory if the mire is not trodden down. And it says, "and they shall fight, for Jehovah is with them," and then it says "and the riders on horses shall be put to shame." What do they suggest? The riders on horses, we know what
{436}
the scriptures speak about them; they that trust in horses and go down to Egypt for help; they will be put to shame. In the glorious matter, dear brethren, of revival and recovery that God is drawing our attention to there is no room for the riders on horses, just as in Isaiah there is no room in the streams of Zion for the galleys with oars or the gallant ships. Jehovah is to be supreme, God is to be supreme in all these matters. It says, "And I will strengthen the house of Judah." That is, God will strengthen assembly features among the brethren -- that is what the house of Judah means. David is linked with the house of Judah. God will strengthen the *best* side of things amongst the brethren. "And I will save the house of Joseph." Oh, how much that brings into our minds as we think of Ephraim and how the prophets speak of Ephraim, how God says he is a dear son unto Me, child of delight; how the feelings of God enter into that matter of Ephraim. "I will save the house of Joseph, and I will bring them back again; and I will have mercy upon them." "And they of Ephraim shall be like a mighty man, and their hearts shall rejoice as through wine." You remember that in Hosea Ephraim was referred to as a cake not turned -- but not so here. It shows what God can do; when God comes into matters, what He can do, how He can make people stand on their feet, stand by the truth -- "they shall be like a mighty man, and their hearts shall rejoice as through wine." Stimulation is there. Holy jubilance is there in the sense of the victory that is linked with God in the position. Then it says "and their children shall see it." Our children need to see it, dear brethren. How are they going to be held if the mire of the streets is not trodden down; we want to tread down the mire of the streets in our conversations in our houses; do not let us talk about the brethren in a way that will bring them down into
{437}
the dust; do not let us make room for the mire of the streets. It says "and the children shall see it." See what? See what God is doing, how He is turning Ephraim, making him like a mighty man, strengthening him in the conflict. "And their children shall see it, and rejoice; their heart shall be joyful in Jehovah." That is how our children are going to come into things, by seeing what we are in the testimony as mighty men standing by the truth, going on in the truth. Our children will see it, and it says "their hearts shall be joyful" -- in Ephraim? No, their hearts shall be joyful in Jehovah. It is delightful in the prophetic word to see these touches as to what transpires when God comes into the position. God says "I will hiss for them and gather them; for I have redeemed them; and they shall multiply as they used to multiply. And I will sow them among the peoples, and they shall remember me in far countries; and they shall live with their children and return. And I will bring them again out of the land of Egypt, and gather them out of Assyria; and I will bring them into the land of Gilead and Lebanon; and place shall not be found for them. And he shall pass through the sea of affliction, and shall smite the billows in the sea, and all the depths of the Nile shall dry up; and the pride of Assyria shall be brought down, and the sceptre of Egypt shall depart away. And I will strengthen them in Jehovah; and they shall walk in his name, saith Jehovah." Oh, the dignity, dear brethren, of the position. As every department of man's strength, man's pride and glory is brought down, the name of Jehovah in all its renown covers the position and we with our children walk in the light of it. May God bless the word.
{438}
THE SPIRIT IN RELATION TO DIVINE ADMINISTRATION
@John 20: 19 -- 23; @Acts 15: 22 -- 28
The thought of the Spirit in relation to divine administration is on one's mind and heart for this hour tonight. I am sure that we need to apprehend more the importance of the presence of the Spirit with us and in us, not only in relation to this matter but many other matters; but I wish to stress in what I have to say now the administrative side.
You will notice the reference to the Holy Spirit in both chapters from which we read in the New Testament, and the reference to the well which is a type of the Spirit in Exodus. One feels, as no doubt most of us feel, especially in the days that we are in, the need for understanding the Spirit's presence in the way in which He is with us and in us in this dispensation. And not only understanding His presence but coming to a better apprehension of what His presence means, a better enjoyment of what it is to know Him as with us and in us, in the way in which He is. It is something that will never fail us if we make room for the Holy Spirit. Many things may fail, many things may break down, as indeed things have broken down in the dispensation publicly; but there is one thing that never changes, and that is the presence of the Spirit. So that whatever may be the vicissitudes of the testimony, whatever may come into the course of things in the days that may be left to us before our Lord come, although they may be few -- for we wait momentarily for His coming, for the rapture -- but whatever they may be, few or many, it is important that we should see more and more the need of communing with the Spirit and of allowing the
{439}
presence of the Spirit to have full weight with us as set together on the side of administration. Moses was a great administrator as we shall see. You will remember the challenge they raised against him in verse 14 as to administration, and Moses had to flee and he sat by the well. We shall come to that, but I wish to begin with John and what he says in this unique section in his reference to the Spirit. John's ministry has in mind the last days; he has in mind the days when breakdown has set in, when Paul's ministry has been given up on every hand. John comes in to bring in what goes through despite the breakdown. There are many things in his gospel that are unaffected by the breakdown to which he calls attention, as, for instance, the great feature of life. John speaks of life more than any other of the evangelists, and whatever may have come into the dispensation in a public way, the life line goes through, an important thing for us to see. Now in chapter 20 the Lord Jesus breathing into them saying to them, "Receive the Holy Spirit," inaugurated an administration the like of which has never been seen before in the hands of men; a mandate was delivered to them which had never been delivered to men before.
So according to this chapter the Lord Jesus comes amongst His disciples; it had been a difficult time for them. The chapter opens with much perplexity and varied difficulties, but persons are brought on to our view who are getting helped. It is a good thing when we are amongst those who are getting helped, and when we are in the environment where we can be helped. There is no environment like that where divine Persons are operating to get help. And divine Persons are operating in the chapter from which we read, and there is one who stands out amongst the persons we have referred to, who is a remarkable personality -- Mary of Magdalene. She is brought on to
{440}
our view as one whom the Lord is honouring; one who is getting adjustment. The Lord is honouring her. He gives her a message which is unique. Never before had a message been received like it, the message that the Lord gave to Mary to carry to His disciples. And we have to understand what is in mind in this, because John has a way of bringing persons before us that causes us to pause and consider. John does not deal with the assembly formally. He never mentions the word assembly in his gospel. Matthew does. John in his gospel never uses the word, but while he does not use the word, he gives us all the vital and essential elements that enter into the composition of the assembly. And that is a great matter to see. Mary represents the kind of material that the Lord is taking on, dear brethren, at this particular juncture. He is taking on Peter and John later, but He is taking on Mary here, a remarkable thing. We might have said, why not entrust that message to John or to Peter, but Peter and John have to learn. Let none of us think that we are beyond the time of learning. It is a time for learning, a time for adjustment. It will always be as long as we are here. And John's ministry would help us as we are taught, to be quick learners, to be quickly adjusted as indeed we are experiencing in this country and in other countries too. And it is important that we should learn quickly, because there is no time, as it were, to be lost. The translation is so near and we want to learn quickly. And Peter and John have to learn. The Lord takes them in hand amongst the others, but the first one the Lord takes on in the way of entrusting something to is Mary.
Now I believe there is something for us to understand in this before I proceed to the formal delivery of the mandate to the disciples; we need to understand what Mary represents, what the woman, the
{441}
feminine side represents, especially in view of the last days when what is official has been interfered with, and entrenched upon, and broken up by the enemy on every hand. The Lord would stress in our minds the thought of the woman in Mary, that she is a trustworthy element here, not exactly the assembly in a direct type, nor in a full way but a suggestion of the assembly as if the Lord is thinking of Mary and what she, a woman, would represent to him. And the Lord can impart something to her. She is trustworthy and the Lord is honouring her. He will always honour the thought of the assembly whether it be seen in a small way or in an extended way; the Lord will always honour the principle of the assembly. And I think that is the suggestion in regard to Mary in an unofficial way. We have to understand things from the unofficial viewpoint first, according to John. As we know, John wrote his gospel in days of difficulty when doctrinal degeneracy had set in, and all his ministry is calculated to meet what has come in through doctrinal degeneracy. And oh, dear brethren, what evidences there are of it on every hand as we see how the truth as to the Person of Christ is set aside. And John would stress the truth of the Person of Christ -- "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God." And then it says that "the Word became flesh, and dwelt among us" -- reminding us of the incarnation, wondrous, indisputable. Think what a transaction took place in that great matter of the incarnation. John would save us from lifeless theology, from doctrinal degeneracy. John's ministry would help us as to this great matter, so that our thoughts might be adjusted in relation to the truth. The truth is stressed in John's gospel. We cannot read it without being impressed with the thought of the truth all the way through, the Lord Jesus Himself
{442}
saying, "I am the way, and the truth and the life." (@John 14: 6).
We need, dear brethren, to understand John's gospel because it is the great corrective to departure from the truth in regard to doctrine. Some may say, well, we do not need to be concerned too much about doctrine. We need to be concerned a great deal about doctrine. It is important that the doctrine should be right and that it should be preserved. We need to be helped as to the doctrine and we shall be as we are prepared to be subject. The Lord Jesus says, "If any one desire to practise his will, he shall know concerning the doctrine ... " (@John 7: 17). Doctrine represents the ordered form in which the teaching may be set forth. Now in the public body, in the history of things in christianity, an attempt was made in church councils to preserve the doctrine by bringing in the creeds, by setting the truth in crystallised form so that the doctrine might be preserved, and alas, as is always the case when man goes too far, the doctrine is corrupted, the doctrine degenerates; as for instance in regard to the truth of our Lord's sonship when in the great church council in the establishing of the creed, the desire was to preserve the truth of His person, and they felt it necessary to incorporate in the creed the thought that He was begotten before all worlds.
You can see that John's ministry would help us to see what comes in through degeneracy of doctrine, and when the mind of man apart from the Spirit injects itself into the great matter of the truth, there can only be one result and that is disaster. What error has come through the church councils in which men endeavour to preserve the truth, their endeavour, perhaps, well meant. And then the great truth of the Reformation came in, and much was done, servants of God were raised up and gleams as to the truth came forward -- the great servant of God, Martin
{443}
Luther, and the truth of justification by faith emerging from all the shackles of the awful system in which the truth was corrupted then and is now. John's ministry is taking into account all these conditions, and as it has been said, his gospel is the backbone of things, the backbone of scripture. If we are going to be preserved in relation to the doctrine as to divine Persons, we shall have to understand John.
And so I come to this matter of the administration that is in the Lord's mind. It is introduced by this teaching in regard to Mary. She represents the unofficial side and she gets the truth for the moment. An important principle, dear brethren. And we need to be on the outlook for the feature which is suggested in Mary, and this precedes what we have read. The disciples are gathered in the light of the message that Mary brings, and the Lord comes among them and the first thing He says is, "Peace be to you. And having said this, he shewed to them his hands and his side. The disciples rejoiced therefore, having seen the Lord. Jesus said therefore again to them, Peace be to you." I stress this for a moment to draw our attention to the way that the administration is brought forward. It is brought forward in an environment that is charged with peace, the Lord repeating His message to the disciples, "Peace be to you;" as if He would imply that in the setting out of the administration that is in His mind, we are to understand this thought of peace. You will remember how the disciples were sent out and were instructed to look for a son of peace. What an element a son of peace is in any city, dear brethren! What an element sons of peace are throughout the assembly! And the Lord would inculcate into our minds in the teaching here this great thought of peace with the administration that He is about to set out formally from this environment. And he says, "As the Father sent me forth,
{444}
I also send you." Think of the high level of his commission! We are to think of the twelve, the apostles in this light. We are to think of their uniqueness, these men who were given to Christ by the Father. How wonderful they were. What men they were! What tributes to the service and work of Christ! You will remember what He said to them, "Come after me, and I will make you fishers of men" (@Matthew 4: 19).
We see them here as under the Lord's hand, and He says, "As the Father sent me forth, I also send you"; that is, the administration is going to be carried on by them now; they are to have their part in it. "The Father loves the Son, and has given all things to be in his hand." (@John 3: 35.) But now the disciples are formally brought into this matter, and the Lord says, "I also send you." And having said this, he breathed into them, and says to them, "Receive (the) Holy Spirit." Now this is what I wish to come to the importance of the Spirit in relation to this great matter of administration, our part in the administration. As I have said, while John does not formally mention the assembly, he stresses the persons who compose it, and we are to gather this up in our minds as we read this section, the greatness of the persons who compose the assembly. Matthew stresses the assembly formally, "Tell it to the assembly" -- the augustness and majesty of that great vessel, the highest court of appeal here on earth amongst the people of God, what dignity attaches to it! But John would impress us with the dignity of the assembly from the viewpoint of the persons who compose it. Think of these persons breathed into by the Lord Jesus Christ, the last Adam. You see the connection with what I have been saying, that when doctrinal degeneracy has set in there must be an answer in some way to meet it. Because in man's administration things break down but in divine administration things have to be preserved in life and in power
{445}
and in authority; and therefore the matter of the Holy Spirit here, because how can divine administration be rightly carried out unless we see the place that the Holy Spirit has in the matter, for this involves ability to work out features of the administration.
Our attention has been drawn in the ministry to the two words used for authority or power. Mr. Darby points out the difference in the New Translation in @Matthew 10: 1 and in the notes in @Luke 4 and @Acts 1. The first word for authority or power "exousia," means the right to do things, the authority to do things, the divine commission entering into it, a great matter to see. But the second word which I wish to stress, "dunamis," refers as we have been taught to what is dynamic, the *ability* to do things, the ability to carry out the administration, the Spirit being in us and imparting to us. It is important, dear brethren, that we see this, that in the presence of the Spirit, in the light of the second word "power," as we have it in @Acts 1 and elsewhere, it not only means that there is a commission with the twelve or a commission in the assembly to do things as in the first word, but there is ability to carry out things as in the second word. That is what I would like to draw attention to in the presence of the Spirit here; there is not only the divine mandate but there is this great thought of dynamic power to carry out the mandate in "Receive the Holy Spirit." We can never do anything rightly in divine things without the Holy Spirit, and there is need for the Spirit in matters of administration. It is the great preservative against mere creed and doctrine. How much we would like a copy-book to work out all our local problems from! If we could just turn one up and see how to work out this difficulty or that! But it would not be very wonderful, for it would bring us back to Judaism. Christianity is a system of life; the doctrine of it is to be held in life, and the administration
{446}
of it is to be held in life. And that is the meaning of the Holy Spirit in this section, for this glorious and dignified administration is not to be carried out according to arbitrary authority or official mandate only, although it is important to see the place it has; but it is to be carried out in the ability which the Holy Spirit gives, as if the Lord is saying, I am committing to you this wonderful part in administration, but you must make room for the Spirit. It is the pattern of what comes in in @Acts 2. No other men had the experience that these men had, for they were breathed into by the Son of God raised from the dead. No one else amongst men has ever had that experience. How unique the disciples are! It is to bring to our attention this great matter of the dignity of the persons who compose the assembly.
Now we may stress the assembly here, but it is the persons who form the assembly. John does not, in his gospel, use the word formally. Matthew uses it, and taken together they are a wonderful combination. The one stresses the vessel in all its august and judicial glory; I do not mean in the sense of just administering judgment but judicial in the sense of discernment as in Abigail, "Blessed by thy discernment;" what we might arrive at as together in the light of the assembly in Matthew, the authority of the truth in that relation. But John stresses the persons, the dignity of the persons who form the assembly. And he says, "Whosesoever sins ye remit, they are remitted to them: whosesoever sins ye retain, they are retained." As has been said by Mr. Taylor, @John 20, is our Magna Carta -- remission comes first. They are empowered with a mandate to remit sins. Think of men having a mandate like this as these disciples had, breathed into by Jesus saying, "Receive (the) Holy Spirit." They were empowered in a dynamic way by the presence of the Spirit with ability to carry out
{447}
the administration of this great mandate. Never before had men received a mandate like it. Oh the glory of this apostolic mandate! And all these mandates of course, are as we know, carried forward in the assembly. John would impress us with the assembly from the standpoint of the dignity of the persons who form it. So that as we have part in it in any way in divine administration, we are to understand the principles of it as in @John 20, because we are in days of brokenness and difficulty. We are to understand the spirit and grace of the dispensation from the standpoint of @John 20, that we have the Spirit and we have the ability to have part in divine administration. We, by the Spirit; not just by a clever mind, a keen mind naturally, but by the Spirit in this way involving dynamic power, have ability to carry out things.
What need there is for knowing the Spirit in regard to this setting of the truth! How we would be preserved from systematised error in our difficulties if only we relied on the Spirit, for the administration is characterised by the presence of the Spirit among the saints in the assembly. We need to understand this in our localities. It would save us from much running to and fro; it would save us from much perplexity if we were cast back more and more on the ability that we have, in the presence of the Spirit amongst us to carry out our part in divine administration. And how it would help us in the spirit and grace of the dispensation of which we have been speaking.
How we would be helped too in regard to recovery, as the apostle says, "Brethren, if even a man be taken in some fault, ye who are spiritual restore such a one in a spirit of meekness, considering thyself ... ." "ye who are spiritual," alluding to those who have the Spirit; they are accustomed to making room for the Spirit. They have an ability, not the ability that comes
{448}
from a mind which is cleverer and keener than others in natural things or business things; but "Ye who are spiritual" -- those who are making room for the Spirit and are accustomed to communing with the Spirit. As using the Spirit they have ability by the Spirit to handle the matter on hand, and they come to this matter, this fault. As having the Spirit they can look the thing over without being defiled by it. This stresses the importance of the presence of the Spirit and the immunity for us as making room for Him in regard to evil. In Leviticus, mention is made of a spring or well that is free from uncleanness. We are to understand that, and the only way we can have to say to sin rightly is as being priestly, making room for the Spirit. Such persons can look a matter over; shall they bring it to the assembly or not; is it trivial, of such a nature that it does not need to be brought to the assembly? The spiritual have a judgment of the matter and they may decide that there is no need to bring it any further. They are acting in the spirit and grace of the dispensation, seeking to recover. The man is taken in a fault and they are going to recover him; they are going to set him up, set him up wholly mended, not partially, but completely.
I would refer briefly now to @Acts 15 and the letter that was written. We do not get many letters recorded for us, but this is one and it is a choice one. They said, " ... For it has seemed good to the Holy Spirit and to us to lay upon you no greater burden than these necessary things." What a word! Can we align the Holy Spirit (I say so reverently) with our judgment, with what we have arrived at? Can we, as in the consciousness of the known nearness of His presence link Him on with what we arrive at? Think of the greatness of the environment here -- the dignity of those who are set up not only with a commission, but with dynamic power, the power of the Spirit.
{449}
They draw from this scripture and from that scripture. What dignity is there, as one of them says, "Brethren, listen to me." Think of the moral authority in a man like James! Think of the moral authority in a man like Peter! They were men who knew what it was to make room for the Spirit, to put into practice the ability given by the Spirit not only in ministry or in preaching, but in dealing with matters involved in divine administration.
In closing, I would allude to the scripture in Exodus referring to Moses, and I believe we can learn from it, dear brethren. It is a good word to leave at the close of these meetings. It is said in regard to Moses that he sat by the well. He had been taking part in matters. They said to him, "Who made thee ruler and judge over us? Dost thou intend to kill me, as thou killedst the Egyptian?" You see, Moses had to learn the utter ineffectiveness of an administration which had its roots in Egyptian strength. He was skilled in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, but he was going to be employed by God in the wonderful administration of grace that would bring His people out from Egypt's thrall into the wilderness where God would unfold to them His mind and heart. We have to learn as Moses did, and he comes to this point as he sits by the well. It would speak of our positioning ourselves in relation to the Spirit. Let us learn in forsaking the ways of the world, in forsaking the ways of man, what it is to sit by the well, what it is to take account of the waters of Shiloah which flow softly, over against the rampaging Assyrian who dares to entrench himself upon Immanuel's land. In @Isaiah 8: 8 it speaks of the waters reaching "even to the neck; and the stretching out of his wings shall fill the breadth of thy land, O Immanuel!" It is not *beyond* the neck, for the position would have been lost if the head had been covered; but it is *up to* the neck, the head is still above the
{450}
water, that is, thus far and no further. Think of the seriousness of the position, but in the midst of it all our attention is drawn to Immanuel's land and to the waters that flow softly. God protects the position.
I would refer briefly to the nineteenth verse of chapter four. After sitting by the well and learning all that God intended him to learn, God said to him, "Go, return to Egypt; for all the men are dead who sought thy life. And Moses took his wife and his sons, and set them riding upon an ass, and he returned to the land of Egypt. And Moses took the staff of God in his hand." Moses is going to represent God in all the dignity that a representative of God requires, no more killing of the Egyptians. He had known what it was to flee for his life, but in chapter 4 he is going to know what it is to meet a brother who loves him, a brother who can kiss him. After the serious situation in the inn, love comes in in all its healing power, and God spoke to Aaron -- God had someone to meet this crisis. Zipporah is not in the right spirit. She is insisting on circumcision of course; and God is insisting on circumcision for He is not going on with any of us who go on in the flesh, especially those of us who serve. We have to accept circumcision, the inward acceptance of the death of Christ in the Spirit's power on all that I am and all that I have.
Zipporah is using extreme language; she is using unrefined language. She says "A bloody husband indeed art thou to me!" It did not fit in with the position in one way and yet in another way it did. And God said to Aaron, "Go into the wilderness to meet Moses." And it says that he went. He is not holding back; Aaron is a priestly man, a man who can love -- a man who can kiss. It says "And he went, and met him on the mountain of God ... ." Not in the valley of despair but they meet on the mountain of God, in that elevated environment where the mists are cleared
{451}
away and where God discloses Himself to His people and to Moses.
Then it says that Aaron kissed him, "and Moses told Aaron all the words of Jehovah who had sent him, and all the signs that he had commanded him." What a sight for heaven, these two beloved men both used in the things of God! There was the embrace of love. Moses had learnt God as we have to learn Him, and may we learn more what it is to sit by the well and make room for the Holy Spirit in our thoughts in every way.
May the Lord help us as to the importance of the Spirit collectively and individually, in regard to our ability to handle matters involving administration.
{452}
THE ACQUISITION OF MORAL POWER
@Genesis 43: 1 -- 15; @Genesis 44: 14 -- 34; @Genesis 49: 8 -- 12
I have on my heart to speak a word on how moral power and moral weight are required. You will notice that in the passages we have read there is constant reference to Judah, and Judah, as we know, particularly emphasizes this side of the truth. We are told in Chronicles that Judah prevailed among his brethren and of him came the prince or the ruler. I am sure that there would be a desire with all of us to acquire greater weight and power morally with God and with men. The prince suggests that idea, and I might say, dear brethren, that there is no royal road to acquiring moral power, as men speak of a royal road, there is no short cut to it. It involves much heart searching, but God is ready to help us if we are desirous of acquiring power morally with Himself and with men. The whole bearing of the teaching in Romans has in mind that the believer should learn how to acquire moral weight and moral power. We can never acquire it if we do not begin in ourselves. It is important with every one of us in regard to the truth that we begin with ourselves. We must let the truth have its way in our own souls before we seek to bring it to bear upon others and the teaching in Romans is to help the believer towards this end. Not exactly to acquire power officially, but to acquire power morally as with the help of God we learn to deal with sin -- sin as it bears on us externally and sin as it is in us internally. No one ever is of much moral weight in the testimony unless he learns how to deal with this great matter of sin in himself. The exercises of @Romans 6 and 7 are essential to this end. How many a believer has been crippled morally by never judging
{453}
the principle of sin as in @Romans 6 operating in the world around us and affecting us too in the way in which it sometimes does. But through our baptism the moral door out of it has been found and we are to hold ourselves. I would say to the young people it is especially needful that we hold ourselves free from the operation of sin upon us in a damaging way as linked with @Romans 6 as it says, "Should we continue in sin that grace may abound? Far be the thought." We are to learn to take up the teaching linked with our baptism. All here, I suppose, would be baptised, and we have to learn how to take up the teaching linked with our baptism, for it involves salvation from the world in all that is around us and we will be effective in the testimony, and acquire moral weight and power as we give full room to the truth in our souls, of deliverance from the world as presented in @Romans 6. Paul could say, "Thanks be to God, ye ... have obeyed from the heart the form of teaching into which ye were instructed."
Then the teaching of @Romans 7 which I may briefly allude to; it is a difficult chapter but it is a chapter that is a great help and a great advantage in the working out of matters in our souls in view of the acquisition of moral weight and power because we must understand and learn how to deal with sin in ourselves. We are never called to die to sin in us, we die to sin outside of us as an operating principle in the world. The teaching of the glad tidings involves that we are to be set free, delivered from the power of sin working in us. Many a young person is detained by the difficulties of the teaching linked with deliverance as in @Romans 7. We set up a standard for ourselves, it may be, and we feel we have fallen short of it, and distress comes into our souls and darkness comes into our minds, and we begin to wonder whether we have any appreciation of the truth at all. We begin
{454}
to wonder if we have had any link with God; I know what I am speaking about; I have gone through it. I know what it is to wonder whether we should go out of fellowship, whether we have any link with God at all, the enemy working in the midst of the darkness linked with deliverance. But on the other hand, there is all the strength and support of the new husband, the Lord Jesus Christ, standing by us, so that we might be carried through on the strength of the bond of affection between our hearts and Himself. I would say to the younger brothers and sisters that if you are having a struggle within yourself, if there is darkness in your mind as to your state of soul, remember to keep your eye fixed on the new husband, the one to whom we have been married, free from the law as we have been made through His death, "Dead to the law by the body of the Christ, to be to another, who has been raised up from among the dead in order that we might bear fruit to God." I feel that what is being said in this regard is important for the younger ones because we wonder sometimes where we are. We wonder just how we stand in these difficulties of soul and divine Persons would help us to face the matter thoroughly because it is on these lines that we acquire moral power and moral weight because if I can deal with the matter in myself, then I have gained the advantage of being thus equipped to deal with it, not only in myself, but to deal with it as it may come up in circumstances around me.
I now come to @Genesis 37 where our attention is focused on Joseph, as the centre of Jacob's love. "These are the generations of Jacob, Joseph being seventeen years old," and we are told that his father loved him. In the passage that we have read we also see Benjamin coming in on this line; there is a link of affinity between Joseph and Benjamin. They were of the same mother -- and they are both the objects of Jacob's love, but
{455}
following that chapter where Christ is so distinctly brought upon our view, in chapter 38 Judah develops a link, as alas, many do sometimes, with an Adullamite called Hirah. He goes down, as it says, and what a going down it was, for in the sin, the shame and the degradation linked with that path, there was no moral weight acquired by Judah. It may have started with just a little thing, just a little friendship, just a little association with an Adullamite. It may have been all right to Judah but it was not in the line of the testimony. And I would earnestly appeal to our hearts to eschew every form of wrong link and association that would lead us on a path that morally would take us into the depth of sin and degradation. Judah has to learn, as most of us have to learn, the depth of sin and degradation in our hearts. It is on this line, you see, that we acquire power, we acquire moral weight. We do not ignore sin, we do not say that we have not got sin. John says that he that says he has not sin deceives himself. Judah has come to it, he has to come to things the hard way, and we have had to come to things the hard way but God helps us. It is a hard road for Judah and it is a hard road for the brethren of Joseph but thank God they come to it eventually; they come to it, but the way involves much heart searching, much testing and trial.
I suppose that the brethren wondered why they could ever have allowed their hands to become involved with the matter of delivering over of Joseph, but there it was, and God has to teach us you see, through all these matters, that sin by the commandment might become exceedingly sinful. You say is not sin sinful? Yes, it is, but in @Romans 7 we are told that sin by the commandment might become exceedingly sinful. Sometimes persons are allowed to go into the world to taste sin, in all the depth of the shame and degradation linked with it. God has to pass some that way
{456}
in order that we might know what it is to avoid it, not that there is to be any premium put upon it, but these matters are real and we know that they are real, but we want to be with God about them. Whatever came into the history between @Genesis 38 and @Genesis 43, something has happened in Judah's soul, something had come about. He is getting right, you see, as to the truth. He had been involved with the others in the matter of the delivering up of Joseph to the Midianites but something has occurred, and we are reminded of the work of God as it goes on in our souls, its mysterious operations working along with the moral side in discerning between good and evil in our souls. The work of God basically underlying everything helps us to come to a right judgment of things, and Judah is coming to a right judgment of things, and what I want to stress in this passage that I have read from chapter 43 is that Judah is holding to the truth. The truth was that everything was to be regulated, as we heard today in prayer, by Joseph's commandment, and Judah holds to that; he will not give up that thought. It is not what Reuben says; it is not what some of the others say; it is not even what Jacob says. It is what Joseph says, so he is governed by the light that God has given in regard to the position. He says to his father, "The man did positively testify to us, saying, Ye shall not see my face unless your brother be with you. If thou wilt send our brother with us, we will go down and buy thee food; but if thou do not send him we will not go down." Notice the moral power in Judah. You see, things have gone on, Judah was involved with the others of his brethren in what had happened, but not any longer; he is not drifting along with the many now. He is standing out and making the thing a moral issue. It is a moral issue now. The truth is that Joseph's commandment must regulate and that is the truth today, dear brethren, the Lord's commandment
{457}
must regulate. "He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me, but he that loves me shall be loved by my Father," "and we will come to him and make our abode in him." Oh, the blessedness in this wonderful day of the assembly of being regulated by the word of Christ, being regulated by the commandment of Jesus. How important it is, dear brethren! We all know what it is to allow men's words to regulate us, but the point with Judah is, Joseph has spoken the word and that word must prevail.
You remember the same thing happened in 2nd Samuel in the crisis when David was dethroned. Joab and the others wanted to slay Absalom hanging on the terebinth, but there was a man there, unnamed, and he said to Joab that the King commanded a certain thing and Joab heard it and the others heard it and the man would not yield the ground. It was a question of the word of David, the word of the King, the true King, and he was holding his ground and would not let go. I think that is important in every matter in all our lives that we be regulated by the word of Christ. You young people as you go to school, what is going to regulate you -- what the teacher says? No! -- Not a bit. What the Lord says must regulate. They may tell you to do what is wrong but as you acquire moral weight you say 'No,' this is what the Lord says, and this is what I am going to stand by and stand to! As it says of the noble in Isaiah "to noble things doth he stand." Nobility acquired in this way on moral lines is a great matter. You stand to noble things, you stand to your confession of Christ. You have come under His saving grace, you have been relieved from the consequences of your sins and you are enjoying peace of conscience, and you are committed to the fellowship and are fully in line publicly with the rejected Lord. Stand to that. Stand to your confession of Him through
{458}
thick and thin whatever may come in, and to those of us who are older, our businesses may be affected, and our opportunities of getting on may be affected, but these are to be regulated by the commandment of Jesus, the commandment of Joseph, and that is what Judah is insisting on. He says, "If thou wilt send our brother with us, we will go down and buy thee food, but if thou do not send him, we will not go down, for the man said to us, Ye shall not see my face unless your brother be with you. And Israel said, Why did you deal so ill with me as to tell the man whether ye had yet a brother? And they said, The man asked very closely after us, and after our kindred, sayings Is your father yet alive? have ye a brother?" Note all this. They are conscious, you see, that Joseph was getting near, Joseph was getting under things. They had that sense in their conscience. In all that the Lord is doing He is aiming to get us right on moral lines. He wants us to be right on moral lines, and the whole issue now is focussing on the brother in Benjamin.
What does Benjamin represent? Benjamin represents the work of God in the family of God untouched, untainted by sin. He had no part in the crime, he had no part in what was done; he does not speak; he does not act; he is just there, Benjamin. It is the work of God, basically, according to John's ministry and Joseph says in the solution of the moral question in regard of his brethren and the relations with himself, that we must make way for Benjamin. It is important to see the place that this family feature has, the place that the brother has. The brother, according to the truth, is not established by ecclesiastical privileges. Our relationship as brethren according to the truth in the New Testament is established according to our place in the family of God. We have the work of God abstractly in the family of God in type in Benjamin according to John's ministry. It is important to bear that in mind, that ecclesiastical privileges
{459}
do not constitute us as a brother and the deprivation of them does not unconstitute us as a brother. We come into the family of God not on the basis of ecclesiastical privileges but we come into the family of God on the line of generation. Children of God is what we are to God. Brethren is what we are to one another as belonging to that family. I know that the thought of the brother works out in the way of practical support in other matters, but in the family of God our relationship as brethren is linked with generation, divine generation. We are begotten of God. It is a great thing to realise that, so that a person who is withdrawn from does not cease to be one of the family of God. He is still carried in our thoughts, abstractly as a member of the family of God although deprived of the privileges of fellowship and we should pray for him in that light, speak to God about him in that light, for his recovery. It is important, dear brethren, that we should understand that it is a day of recovery. The Lord Jesus has died to gather together in one all the children of God scattered abroad. We have to have that in our minds according to John's ministry.
You will remember in @Deuteronomy 25, if I may speak of it as it comes into one's mind, it says, "If there be a controversy between men, and they resort to judgment, and they judge their case; then they shall justify the righteous, and condemn the wicked. And it shall be if the wicked man" -- notice this -- "it shall be if the wicked man have deserved to be beaten, that the judge shall cause him to lie down, and be beaten before his face, according to the measure of his wickedness with a certain number of stripes. With forty stripes shall they beat him; they shall not exceed." Now notice this, "they shall not exceed, lest, if they continue to beat him with many stripes above these, thy brother may become despicable in thine eyes." It
{460}
is important that we should understand that setting of the truth, that whatever comes in, you see, our brother in that light is not to be despicable in our eyes.
Now Joseph insists on Benjamin being brought and Judah holds to the word of Joseph and in our language, dear brethren, that is the word of the Lord and we are going to be regulated not by what men say but by what the Lord says. It says in chapter 43, "The man asked very closely." I love that thought. The Lord does not operate at a great distance. I suppose we have all proved that however deep our sorrows, the travail and anguish and distress of soul we have gone through, the Lord has been very near. He has been asking us very closely about matters because He loves us too well; He does not want us to get into sin; He does not want us to lose the joy in our souls of uninterrupted communion through the activities and operations of sin. He loves us far too well for that. Think of Joseph's love for his brethren, even supposing they had committed such a dastardly crime, think of his love for them. And it says, "Judah said to Israel his father," verse 8, "Send the lad with me, and we will arise and go, that we may live and not die, both we and thou and our little ones. I will be surety for him." Look at the moral weight this man is acquiring for he is speaking to Jacob his father. He says *we will not* go down. Jacob's word should have regulated Judah in the ordinary sense of the word but this is not an ordinary matter and if it comes to Christ, His word must come first. His word must regulate us. Judah has come to that. He is standing by it. He will not give up the ground and the Lord helps us as we stand by that. That is the line on which we acquire moral power. He is not only going to stand by Joseph's word but he is prepared to take all the consequences. We have to be prepared to lose our lives for the interests of Christ. That is the line on which we acquire
{461}
moral weight and moral power. Then it says, "Of my hand shalt thou require him," and then it says, verse 11, "And their father Israel said to them" -- notice the delightfulness of this -- and Jacob is brought into this movement in a dignified way as Israel suggests. You see if you stand by the truth you always find the Lord will give you someone else to stand with you in it, that is the point. The truth will assert itself; that is what is being done here. It is asserting itself, and Israel says, "If it is then so, do this: take of the best fruits in the land in your vessels," thank God they had not lost their vessels. They still had their vessels, and we may say we have not lost our vessels, dear brethren, we have vessels to carry things in, we have sacks to carry corn in, and vessels to carry the best fruits of the land in. The work of God furnishes us with these great matters, carrying capacity, a wonderful thing. Often we say, in regard to meetings, and to ministry, well, I cannot take all that in. Well, we are not expected to take all that in. None of us is expected to take all that in, but we can carry things, even supposing we cannot eat things. We can carry them. There is carrying capacity as well as appropriating capacity, a great thing to notice in the type here.
I want to say a word about chapter 44. Judah goes up and they take Benjamin with them, that is, they have taken on the truth, the regulation by Joseph's commandment. Joseph is dealing with them a step at a time. He gets Benjamin up and then he operates now on the high level of the silver cup, the glory of redemption to detain Benjamin. This precious feature is too great, Joseph would say, to be lost. I want to retain it, I want to detain it. He wants to detain Benjamin. This great system of service is set in operation to detain this precious feature. Divine persons, you see, are interested in the work of God in all its
{462}
unsullied character. Identified it may be in the public position with all that is around just as Benjamin was identified with his brethren whose hands were stained with the guilt of the crime of delivering Joseph up. Yet he was apart from it morally and Joseph says I want that feature, I want that side and he wants to detain it. The Lord begins to operate, and how the Lord operates, dear brethren, in ways that are difficult to describe. He has means, He has a house here under His hand. Thank God for that house, Joseph's house, the holy affections that radiate in that realm, and the holy feelings that that environment is replete with and that sphere is filled with. Oh! dear brethren, as we think of the feelings of Joseph, pent up as they may be until a time, but when the time comes, their release comes into view. What feelings lay behind all the rough speaking, all the treatment of the brethren, and behind it all comes the disclosure of his heart, based on Judah's intervention. Now it says as Joseph operates to have Benjamin returned -- and he wants to bring the brethren back to Benjamin, to the work of God in all its basic uncorrupted character, he would like to bring us to that -- so it says Judah and his brethren came to Joseph's house.
Then, I do not want to go into the detail but I just want to refer to the continual acquisition of moral power on the part of Judah, seen in the way he takes up the matter and so he does not excuse himself. You might say, well, Judah; you have some right to excuse yourself, you stood by the commandment of Joseph, why not tell Joseph that. Well, he does in effect. But the point is that Judah sees there is no use for excuses. He says, "God has found out the iniquity of thy servants; behold, we are my lord's bondmen, both we, and he in whose hand the cup has been found," and then it says, "Judah came near to him." There is something more than coming to the end of ourselves; there
{463}
is something more than coming to just a judgment of sin as in these few verses. What comes out in verse 18 to the end of the chapter is the full expression of the holy feelings of the family of God compressed in a vessel like Judah. What a wonderful thing to have in our localities, dear brethren, a Judah who can express the feelings of the family of God, that can bring love into the matter. Notice how it says of Benjamin, his father loves him. John's ministry stresses love, dear brethren. It is the secret of the whole position in the working out of the truth -- Love -- the love of the Father in committing the administration into the hands of the Son and the love among the saints. "By this shall all know that ye are disciples of mine, if ye have love amongst yourselves." Let us make room for love -- love that would think the best and speak the best. Not that sin is ignored, Judah fully acknowledges it, but then he makes way for the work of God, as it were, to come out. He makes way for what he has acquired morally with Joseph and with God as I might say, in our way of speaking, to express itself. He speaks in one of the most moving passages that we have in all the word of God, even the higher critics, and secular writers say that there are few passages in the canon of the scripture to compare with this one, with all its moving appeal. But we are not thinking of the human side; we are thinking of the work of God and the family of God and we are thinking of divine Persons and how the Lord delights to see those that can supply what is needed. You remember Paul says, of certain in Corinth, as to Stephanas, Fortunatus and Achaicus, he says salute such for they have supplied what was lacking on your part. Think of brethren like that in a locality. Think of what these brothers were in Corinth. They supplied what was lacking. The most of us are on the line of demanding what is coming to us. We want what is
{464}
coming to us. We want to be more concerned about supplying what is lacking. The more heavenly we are, the more we are in the enjoyment of the family of God, whether as children, or in sonship, the more we will be on the supplying line, supplying what is lacking and that is just what Judah does.
Now just a word as to the last chapter, Judah makes way for the disclosure of Joseph. Joseph comes into the matter and there are affections freely flowing as Joseph releases all that was pent up in the way of love towards him. Now I come to this last passage which just shows us clearly the great moral power in Judah. Judah becomes the sanctuary of God. When God takes the children of Israel out of Egypt, think of that, Judah was His sanctuary, Israel His dominion. The nearest place, Judah has it -- the sanctuary. It is an interesting thing too, in regard to Benjamin, that the house was in Benjamin's territory. The beloved of Jehovah, he shall dwell between His shoulders. There were these two great links in the chain of events that lead to the full disclosure of Joseph and what a place of honour they came into. Judah, as it says, "thy brethren will praise thee." He becomes the sanctuary and Benjamin becomes the house in principle. The beloved of Jehovah, he shall dwell between his shoulders, meaning Benjamin's territory where Jerusalem was. Then it says, "Thy hand will be upon the neck of thine enemy"; you see that is what the line of acquiring moral power gives us, that is where we are brought to. Would the young brothers and sisters like to have their hand on the neck of their enemy -- sin, and the world, and all the principles of the flesh that operate to bring us into bondage? Would you like to get your hand on the neck of your enemies? It is on the line that Judah travelled, that is in coming to a right judgment about yourself and your own heart in all its nakedness coming to God's judgment about matters. You remember
{465}
when Tamar's sin came to light Judah said "Bring her forth and burn her." Many of us are like that you know. He was like David, whose ancestor he was, he was incensed and indignant when the parable came to him as to the sin and he was ready to put the man to death, just like Judah. Bring her forth and burn her, but Judah got right. Then it says here, "Thy father's children will bow down to thee. Judah is a young lion," and so on; then verse 10, "The sceptre will not depart from Judah. Nor the lawgiver from between his feet." Now notice this that the man that held to regulation by Joseph's commandment is the man with whom the lawgiver is now linked. I think it is a beautiful touch, dear brethren, as to the acquisition of moral power. There is no royal road to it. It does not drop on us as a mantle out of the air. It is developed in a hard and difficult way but it is developed in our relations with Christ and with God and as making room for the Holy Spirit. So it says, verse 11, "He bindeth his foal to the vine. And his ass's colt to the choice vine; He washeth his dress in wine, And his garment in the blood of grapes. The eyes are red with wine." I believe, dear brethren, that in our language, that suggests one who knows what it is to make room for the Spirit -- the holy stimulating features that are linked with the Spirit's activities. What moral power Judah acquired, and the door, dear brethren, is open to every one of us, brothers and sisters alike.
May the Lord help us to take that way!
{466}
THE POWER, LOVE AND GRACE OF CHRIST AS ATTRACTED BY THE ASSEMBLY
@Ruth 3: 8 -- 13; @Genesis 29: 16 -- 18, 30 -- 32; @1 Samuel 25: 23 -- 26, 32
It is laid upon one's heart, dear brethren, to speak a word this afternoon as to the assembly, as winning her way and place in the affections of Christ and as drawing out certain features in relation to the particular circumstances. We have often heard, dear brethren, that the great feature of this dispensation that makes it so unique, is this very subject of Christ and the assembly. No other epoch or age has ever, as it were, had in it a family like the assembly. And divine Persons are continually seeking to help us in regard to the dignity and the glory of the assembly, it being as we might refer to it, the chief thing in the ways of God at the present time. Everything is held up in relation to the prophetic clock in order to make way for this wonderful dispensation. A great servant has described it as a nondescript dispensation, and in it the assembly has come to light under the divine eye.
We all need to understand more, the great place that the assembly has in the divine mind, and I would counsel and exhort and urge the younger ones coming on in the truth to set themselves more and more towards understanding and appreciating the great truth in regard to the assembly at the present time. You want to be helped and divine Persons will help every one of us as we set our faces toward it to arrive at the truth concerning Christ and the assembly. As we reach Christ as He is and where He is as the centre of the heavenly domain, and by the Spirit are given to enjoy our link with Him in union, His interests will become our
{467}
interests, and we shall see the nearer we get to Christ, that His chief interest on earth at the present moment is the assembly. The glad tidings, too, is of great interest to Him, and the nearer we get to Christ and the more in the power of the Spirit we enjoy union, the more our hearts will appreciate these two features of the interests of Christ, the assembly and the glad tidings.
The assembly, as has often been said, is the family of families. There is no family in the universe of God that will ever have the same dignity and glory as the assembly has. Every family, of course, in God's universe will bear the touch of the Father's impress -- He who gives names to every family. And in Ephesians where the Father is referred to as naming every family in heaven and on earth, the writer does not go on to speak of these families, he goes on to speak of one family. The other families recede, as it were, from our view, as he goes on to speak of the great family that is found in the assembly, the vessel to which there is glory to God at the present time.
Now there are many ways in which the assembly may be viewed. We think of the type in Eve. Jehovah saw that it was not good that man should be alone and he furnished in Eve a counterpart, a helpmate for the man. We find too, in regard to Rebecca, that the father sends the servant out on that glorious mission of finding a wife for Isaac his son. But that is not the side that I wish to speak of. We find also with Joseph, in Egypt, that a wife is given to him, Asnath, but I do not have in mind to speak of that side in regard to the assembly. I want to speak of the assembly, dear brethren, as she is in herself, a woman of worth; as she is in the types we have read about, a woman, who can make way for herself in the midst of difficult circumstances and difficult matters. Now we are to understand the assembly from this viewpoint, because
{468}
as we do we shall be helped in our localities, in taking on this feature of the assembly, to work out things ourselves, to be industrious, to be energetic, to make a way for ourselves in whatever it may be in regard to the truth and to draw out what is in Christ as standing related to us. You might say, is not all that is in Christ toward us and available to us, and is He not constantly moving toward us in relation to it all? He is, but He loves to have things drawn out from our side. He loves to take account of us in the working out of matters as making a way in His affections, winning our way in His affections, for that is what the woman of worth involves. It is right that we have been given to Christ according to the counsels and purposes of eternal love, in the divine mind before time, but it is also right that the assembly comes under the divine eye, as furnishing divine Persons with a reason why They should do this and why They should do that. Matthew's gospel shows us that whatsoever is bound on earth is bound in heaven. The assembly, you see, comes under the divine eye in her judicial glory as doing things and divine Persons are with the assembly in what is done. The Lord Jesus says, "I am with you all the days until the completion of the age," to remind us as we do things, as we operate, the Lord is with us. The Lord is operating from on high. Mark tells us that and He set himself down at the right hand of God and the servants go forth and the Lord is working with them. The Lord is operating but He loves to see us operating, and this thought as to the assembly is to intensify this in our minds, that we have to operate, and in the operating, we are to draw out the resources of Christ. There are marvellous resources in Christ, dear brethren, and they are all towards us but the Lord Jesus loves to have them drawn out or drawn upon. And, each of these women, Ruth, Leah and Abigail, represents the
{469}
assembly from the standpoint of the woman as drawing out the resources that are in the man.
I want to refer to Ruth as drawing out the resources linked with power in redemption. The glory of redemption enters into this book and Ruth draws it out. She operates with a view to drawing it out; Boaz is a wonderful type of Christ, as a mighty man of wealth, not just a man of wealth, but a mighty man of wealth. In him is strength. In this book it is power in relation to redemption, the taking up of the right of redemption. The assembly, typified in Ruth, is drawing it out; she is winning her way in the heart of Boaz. He was a great operator, with a great range of operations under his hand, and in the working out of these operations there comes under his notice this maiden called Ruth. Just as in a gathering like this the young people may come under the attention of Christ in His mighty operations and as subject to Christ in relation to the area, the limited sphere and area of His operations, they come in for His attention, and that is chapter 2. Let none of us think that we are not getting the attention of Christ. I believe the Lord loves to see every one of us here. He loves to look upon a gathering like this and see the young brothers and the young sisters, loves to see the children too, not that we are forgetting the older ones, far be the thought. The controlling influence in this book is the older ones, Naomi, who is furnishing Ruth with the opportunity to make her way. I would say to the older brethren, in the light of the type in Naomi, it is a great thing to help the younger ones, to make their way in affections of Christ, to promote the idea of winning their way in the heart of Christ, so that His power may be drawn out towards them because they have to face much, as Ruth had to face much.
The right of redemption involves that there was
{470}
power with Boaz to take up Ruth's condition, to take up Ruth's position, we may say too, and to bring her into what she is brought into at the end of this book. I would point out about Ruth that she is a subject person. Now this is one of the prime features of the assembly, as in its members, making their way in the love of Christ, in the affections of Christ. Subjection is a prime feature -- not only subjection to Christ but subjection to Naomi, subjection to the brethren. It is a great thing that we should see, dear brethren, in our local settings that none of us is greater than the assembly, the assembly is greater than any of us. As a brother said in a critical moment, "I have two features of responsibility, one is to protect the assembly in the setting in which I am and the other is to be subject to the assembly." It is a great thing and it is the secret and the basis of all spiritual prosperity. Insubject persons will never make their way in the affections of Christ, which never varies, but the Lord would love to encourage our hearts to make our way in His affections. Naomi is helping Ruth towards this end and she encourages Ruth at every step of the way and our young people need instruction. When they come up before the tribunals, surely they have got to stand on their own feet. They have got to give witness and testimony to what is in their own souls but, dear brethren, they need to be helped, and they need to be shepherded, and they need to be instructed and the Naomis are needed for this. The spirit of Naomi in the local gathering is needed in regard to the teaching and the instruction as to the young persons making their way in the affections of Christ, to draw out His support, to draw out His help because if Boaz does not come in, we might say, the position is helpless and that is the point with all of us, dear brethren. If the Lord does not take on our matters, where will we be? We want, more and more,
{471}
to engage ourselves with drawing out His love toward us.
But I want, first of all, to speak of drawing out His power in redemption. Leah, suggests more the side of drawing out His love, Abigail the side of drawing out His grace, but Ruth suggests more the idea of drawing out His power. I would say in regard to the Ruth position and the assembly viewed in its members in this type that the exercises of Romans have to be faced and the glory of redemption is shining in the teaching in the early chapters of Romans. We have got to face the world, and to face it in a real way. Our fathers and mothers have faced it, but we have to face it, and we have to face what is in ourselves, sin, in all its working, which would bring us into enslavement to law and to the flesh. But as we face these matters rightly, we shall draw out the Lord's power toward us. We will draw out all that He is in His resourcefulness to help us and to carry us through. Peter had to leave the boat and walk on the water and how is he going to get through those exercises -- how is he going to reach what was before Him? He had to draw out the activity of the power of Christ in the way that he spoke in relation to the Lord, and the Lord was ready. So that let none of us avoid what is involved in the working out of the truth. There are many that shirk it, and sink into a state of apathy, because they are not prepared to face the working out of the truth in their souls, in all its soberness. I would encourage the young persons this afternoon, to set themselves to the working out of the truth, whatever it may cost them, and they will draw out the power of Christ toward them.
Well, that is Ruth, and in chapter 2 she comes before us as a person who is seeking to make her way in the love and affections of Boaz. Did not Boaz know all about her? He certainly did, just as the
{472}
Lord Jesus knows all about you. But that is not enough, she has to make her way in the affections of Boaz, and this is how it is done. She has to sacrifice personal reputation. We all have to do that. Let us not think of our personal reputations, and let us not think what it cost us to enter into the path of winning the affections of Christ. We may have to give up a better job, we may have to allow the truth to become the great governing light in judging wrong associations, there may be many things that may be beneficial to us and would help us in the ways of God here, but if we are to make our way in the affections of Christ, we have to be prepared to sacrifice, to take a risk. Ruth is really risking something here. How does she know how the man will react, for she was taking her life, in principle I mean, in her hands, just like Esther in the book of Mordecai. We have to learn to do that, we have to learn to take a risk. There are many persons who are not prepared to take a risk spiritually, but we want to take a risk, in the sense in which I am speaking about it, because it will draw out actively the power of Christ toward us. It says, "It came to pass at midnight that the man was startled, and turned himself; and behold, a woman lay at his feet. And he said, Who are thou? And she answered, I am Ruth, thy handmaid, spread thy skirt over thy handmaid; for thou hast the right of redemption." Think of the members of the assembly seeking Christ to spread His influence over them! I wonder what influence is exerting itself over you; it may be the influence of a world; it may be the influence of a young man or a young woman; some are even prepared to risk the fellowship to gain a husband and to gain a wife, prepared to marry out of the fellowship in order to get a temporal gain, but not Ruth. Ruth is taking a risk the other way, for she is risking all that temporal gain would bring to
{473}
her, and we have to come to that, if we are going to get the gain of the truth of the assembly from the light in which I am now referring to it. She says, "Spread thy skirt over thy handmaid." Have you ever asked the Lord to spread His influence over you and to cast His shadow over you? Have you ever asked the Lord, got near to Him and asked Him to take you on in this light? How the Lord loves it and he says, "Blessed be thou of Jehovah, my daughter! Thou hast shown more kindness at the end than at the first, inasmuch as thou followedst not young men, whether poor or rich. And now, my daughter, fear not: all that thou sayest will I do to thee." All that thou sayest, not what Boaz says, but what Ruth says. Think of getting at the feet of the Lord Jesus Christ in this way, drawing out His attention, arresting His attention and drawing out His interest in this way. The assembly is in mind, in the teaching, in the type, but I am speaking now of how the truth works out in those who are the members of the assembly, those who have had a history of sin and shame, such as many of us have had, but have been extricated from it; that is, Ruth.
And he says, "all that thou sayest will I do to thee; for all the gate of my people knows that thou art a woman of worth." I would ask every one of us as to what kind of testimony we have among the brethren; it says of Timothy that he had a good report, he had a good testimony among the brethren. It is a great thing to have a good testimony among the brethren. The Lord loves to draw attention to it in the type here and he says, "Thou art a woman of worth. And now truly I am one that has the right of redemption." That is, he is prepared to take on the matter; there is something to be adjusted, something has to come in, and the Lord takes up that position. In what the law could not do, in that it
{474}
was weak through the flesh, God sending His own Son, has done, a wonderful thing to take account of. And so I finish. Ruth is taken on and she becomes his wife. She has drawn out the activity of his power in the right of redemption, and she becomes his wife, and she makes way for that glorious line in the testimony that culminates in David. Now I would commend it to our minds and to our hearts, the assembly, from this viewpoint, drawing out the activity of Christ on the line of redemption, the right of redemption, as it is said in the end of the book, in the working out of the results, in verse 14 of the last chapter, "And the women said to Naomi," notice how Naomi becomes part of the matter, "Blessed be Jehovah who hath not left thee this day without one that has the right of redemption." Ruth in principle merges into Naomi, and Naomi merges into Ruth. It says, "May his name be famous in Israel! And he shall be to thee a restorer of thy life, and a nourisher of thine old age." That is, things are on the principle of being built up, of being invigorated, revived, and that is what we want in our local gatherings. The great thought of the assembly from this viewpoint as to what is working out in the members, drawing out the power of Christ, that resourceful power, exercised in the right of redemption, that can set persons up again in their inheritance, with all the wealth and the dignity and the glory that belongs to it. That is what the right of redemption means, that persons who have got down in their souls, persons who have got away from the truth with their affections grown cold, there is ability and power to set such persons up again, in relation to the glory of the inheritance, and that is the power that Ruth is drawing out.
Now I want to speak a word on Leah. She is a remarkable type of the assembly. I suppose Ruth is not one of the major types of the assembly, but
{475}
nevertheless she is a type. Leah is one of the major types of the assembly, another type from the viewpoint in which I am speaking, as active and energetic in winning her way in the affections of Jacob, in the affections of Christ that is. Jacob loved Rachel, who is a type of Israel. The Lord Jesus came to Israel and He served in view of securing Israel, but He has got Leah, and Leah is a type of the assembly, especially from the Gentile viewpoint. She is hated, she is not loved, a remarkable thing, the Jewish position entering into that. When Paul brought the truth of the assembly in to view, the animosity and the hatred of the Jews was activated, so much so that it results in his being cast into prison and the book of the Acts ends with him in prison, all through the hatred that stood related to the Leah side of the assembly in Paul's ministry. Leah represents this great thought conscious that she is in a place of reproach, conscious that she is in a position of being hated, and over against the Jewish position, she is working and operating to make a way in the heart of Jacob. She is like the assembly today, by her industry making a way in the affections of Christ. The Jewish position is not changed because the hierarchy around us has no use for us. It has ostracised us; and reckons us of no account. In fact we are hated; such is the position from the Jewish viewpoint. But we are to learn to accept the reproach and the hatred connected with the public position, where the truth of the assembly is cherished in this light, and in the face of all the opposition, in the face of all the hatred and reproach, we are to learn how to pursue, making our way in the heart of Christ, drawing out His love, as Leah says, "For now my husband will love me." She feels the position, she feels the circumstances, but she persists in her activities and in her operations to draw out the love of Christ, to draw out the love of Jacob. We are to continue
{476}
on that line, dear brethren, in our local gatherings, however great the reproach may be, however difficult the exercises may seem, we are to persist like Leah, in drawing out the love of Christ, in winning our way in the affections of Christ.
What mixed exercises there are in these two chapters, what soul searchings, what heart searchings, as difficulty after difficulty arises, and Leah is made to feel the keenness of things, and in her desire to be conscious of the activity of the love of Christ towards her, she has to make her own way. It is not a question here of God, as it were, making way for Leah, although there is the thought in verse 31, "And when Jehovah saw that Leah was hated, he opened her womb." God comes in a little, you see, but Leah still has to persist in making her way, to draw out the love of Jacob. The assembly, in that light, has to persist in making its way in drawing out the love of Christ. And it says, "And Leah conceived, and bore a son, and called his name Reuben." You notice it means "See! a son." That is, sonship is the first feature of the truth here; and then Simeon means "hearing," that brings in the ministry. The first thing that comes up in making her way, and the thing that comes up in all our gatherings, in making our way in the affections of Christ, is whether we have an ear to hear. "He that has an ear let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies." Have we an ear for the truth and are we going to be subject to the truth or not. Now time will not permit to go into all the details, but I submit to the brethren the interesting type of the assembly in Leah, as affecting all our local gatherings. That we are to be conscious, whatever the pressure, whatever the difficulties, whatever the anguish of spirit and of soul, we are to keep at it in making our way in the affections of Christ, and drawing out His love, and we will find that on this line the house of Israel
{477}
will be builded, as it says in Ruth, "which two did build the house of Israel."
Now I want to speak a word as to Abigail, another unique type of the assembly as winning her way in the affections of Christ. Not as Eve or Rebecca or Asnath, or as Solomon's wife who set out more the result of divine Persons in Their own operations but as suggesting the assembly itself operating, the saints operating, to bring out divine resources. They are all there, dear brethren, but they have to be brought out. They have to be drawn out from this viewpoint and therefore there is much room in the light of @Proverbs 31 for the side of the woman of worth in our local gatherings, in keeping on with the gospel, and in keeping on with the exercises as to the assembly. There is plenty of room in spiritual industry to work our way into the affections of Christ. With Abigail here, it is a critical position, it is a crisis in her life, and we are in the midst of crises in these days, not one crisis only but many crises. How important it is that we should learn that in difficult conditions, in difficult circumstances, where the truth as it were for the moment may be lost, we want to be industrious and active in making our way to draw out the resources that there are with Christ. And what I would submit, dear brethren, in the type of the assembly in Abigail, is that she draws out this great resource; not the power of Christ as in Ruth in relation to redemption, nor yet the love of Christ as in relation to Leah and Jacob but the grace of Christ. The assembly understands the character of the dispensation, and the necessity, as it were, for drawing out the activity of the grace of Christ to meet the situation. Oh, what the Lord thinks of the assembly, in all our localities in this light, and in our activity and industry in this way! We see that this woman has a remarkable knowledge of the truth, she is a product of the truth in the
{478}
prophetic ministry, she has followed up the ministry. You can tell that in reading what she has to say. I would say, dear brethren, on this line, that it is a great thing that we should follow up the truth, follow up the ministry and that we should be intelligent in regard to the truth. She is intelligent in regard to David, and we should be intelligent in regard to Christ. "David said to Abigail, Blessed be Jehovah, the God of Israel, who sent thee this day to meet me. And blessed be thy discernment, and blessed be thou, who has kept me this day from coming with bloodshed, and from avenging myself with mine own hand." There is need for the spirit of this in our local gatherings, that would draw out the grace of Christ, to meet the conditions as they exist, whatever they may be.
May the Lord bless the word.
{479}
HUMILITY
@1 Peter 5: 5 -- 7; @Daniel 9: 17 -- 23; @Philippians 2: 5 -- 11; @2 Samuel 15: 25 -- 27
It is on my mind and heart, dear brethren, to speak a word on humility; a feature, dear brethren, that is not native to the flesh, for the flesh always likes to assert itself. But it is a feature that belongs to the work of God in us, and yet in the passage that we have read in Peter it is put in such a way that, as taking account of it objectively, and measuring and understanding its value, we are to put it on. Peter uses a strong word -- *bind* it on. I want to begin with this passage in Peter to indicate to our minds the advantage of humbling ourselves, of being marked by humility; and then just for a moment to refer to it as set out in the perfect example and model that we have in the Lord Jesus Christ; and then to speak of it in Daniel and David, men of like passions as ourselves.
You will notice that Peter says that God "to the humble gives grace." It is to be before us as an incentive, so that we might go in for it and for the exercise of it as indicated in this passage of Peter. I suppose Peter himself could speak effectively about this matter, after all that he had been through. There had been a good deal of self-assertiveness with Peter, as there is with the most of us; but Peter had come to know that to the humble God gives grace. Here in this last chapter he is speaking about matters linked with the flock of God -- a beautiful reference to the saints as divine property; they are not the property of man or of any one of us; they are the property of God and they are to be shepherded, as he says, "exercising oversight, not by necessity but willingly."
{480}
What a word that is, dear brethren, for us. How often shepherd care comes in because of necessity; we might think that is good, and it is in a certain aspect; but Peter says "not by necessity but willingly, not for base gain, but readily, not as lording it over your possessions but being models for the flock." You can see how the flock of God has a great place in Peter's mind. I suppose it shows the effectiveness of the grace that Peter had received, because the Lord, in His probings of Peter, had brought up the matter of the flock. In the beginning of @John 21 Peter said, "I go a fishing;" he was not thinking of the flock of God and there were others that went with him and the Lord takes the matter up with them; but He intensifies His searchings with Peter and introduces with him the matter of the sheep and the lambs, we should notice that. Why should the Lord in probing Peter bring up the matter of the flock? I think there is definite point in the Lord's mind in the matter, because Peter represents the great administrative side; and if we are rightly and properly to understand and to work out and appreciate, the administrative side, we must understand the flock of God. It is a principle interwoven from Genesis to Revelation, in the ways of God, that administration honoured and blessed of God works out through care for the flock. You may see it in Jacob, in Joseph, in Moses, in David, in Paul; it is certainly uniquely seen in the Lord Jesus Christ. The enemy would give us wrong thoughts in our minds as to administration, and it is important that we should see how, with every efficient and capable administrator in the ways of God, the flock .of God loomed largely in his outlook and service. I believe, dear brethren, God would impress us in our local gathering with this thought of His flock, the flock of God. The Lord brought it up with Peter; it is first Peter, in the administrative gospel of Matthew,
{481}
and as he stands up in the early chapters of the Acts he is leading in the matters of divine administration, for he is a man who understands and appreciates the flock of God. I do not believe, dear brethren, any of us can effectively administer in the things of God unless we understand and value, in some measure, what the flock of God is.
Peter says, "and when the chief shepherd is manifested" -- what a touch! The chief shepherd! How often in local gatherings there is a great deal of concern as to who will take the lead, as to who will be the chief. It is humbling how these things come up among us. I believe if we understand administration from the viewpoint of the flock of God we would not think of being chief, we would be thinking about laying down our lives for the flock. There is only one chief Shepherd, and He laid down His life for the flock. He measured the depths for the sheep and He is the chief Shepherd. Peter is going over this matter as he wishes to inculcate into their minds this thought of the flock of God. We can see all around us how men in responsibility lord it over God's heritage. Peter says, "not as lording it over your possessions" for the saints are not our possessions, "but being models of the flock." He says "ye shall receive the unfading crown of glory." Now if we want to be distinguished, this is the road to distinction, distinction according to God. You know the flesh would love to be distinguished in some kind of way, even in the things of God; but this kind of distinction is distinction divinely conferred, as being models for the flock, administering with the flock of God before our souls and our hearts -- and he says, "Ye shall receive the *unfading* crown of glory." You will notice the reference is to the amaranthine, the idea of what is perennial, the unfading crown of glory. We want to go in for what is unfading. Peter would help us as to what is unfading.
{482}
Peter's letter is dealing with the ways of God into which sufferings enter, discipline coming in under the hand of God. But he impresses upon our minds and hearts what is unfading, as you will notice -- what is incorruptible. Notice how these words appear in his letter -- unfading, incorruptible. The nearer we get to divine Persons as Peter got, the more we shall be engaged with what is unfading and incorruptible.
He says as he proceeds "Likewise ye younger be subject to the elder, and all of you bind on humility towards one another." I want you to notice this word "for God sets himself against the proud but to the humble he *gives* grace." Think of God looking over the position and taking account of pride in this way working in men's hearts and setting Himself against it. That is, God deliberately enters into the matter; it is not just a casual matter, but God *sets* Himself against the proud. I think we need to note that, dear brethren, that if pride comes into our lives and characterises us God sets Himself against it -- a solemn word. So that nothing seems to work out as we would like it to work out, because if we carry pride in our hearts so that it characterises us, we have got to face the fact that God has set Himself against it; but it says, "but to the humble he gives grace." Peter goes on to say "Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of God that he may exalt you in due time." We all know our hearts do not like to humble themselves. We always think, "Well, if we give way, then we shall lose all the prestige that we have, all that attaches to us personally, we will be less thought of." But there is an advantage in being humble; it says, "God to the humble gives grace," and, dear brethren, there is an incentive for every one of us, and we all need the word; it is a word for all of us. Peter is speaking to the saints scattered in the dispersion and he says to the humble God gives grace.
{483}
There are wonderful advantages in coming into that position, dear brethren, as judging the pride that is in my heart naturally, and its operation as tending to characterise me. As I judge that and set it aside and bind on humility, I come in for this great supply of grace. What a quality, what a feature grace is in the divine system. It is a remarkable expression, "to the humble he gives grace." For what purpose would the grace be? God gives grace, grace to support, grace to sustain, grace to carry on, you see. The first reaction in my mind is, "Well, if I go down and humble myself, that is the finish I cannot carry on any more." But that is not the point; the point is that if I humble myself, God gives grace, grace to carry on better than ever before. You can see how it works out in Peter; as you look on that great servant in the beginning of the Acts, the dignity that is upon him, how he is able to carry on in a dignified way. So Peter says, "Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in the due time." Now, dear brethren, let every one of us be concerned as to our links with God, our relations with Him. Let us not be concerned about the brethren honouring us or exalting us. It says, "Humble yourselves therefore." Many of us may think of humbling others -- that will not do. God will never support us on that line; let none of us think that we will get support on that line, but we will get divine support on the line of humbling ourselves. "Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of God" -- not the mighty hand of man. David knew what that was in his experience as when he got three things offered him, he chose to come under the hand of God. We know, dear brethren, what the hand of God is. We can well afford to humble ourselves under that mighty hand, because it says, "that he may exalt you in due time." Then it says, "having cast all your care upon him, for he
{484}
cares about you." Oh, the incentive that surrounds this matter of binding on humility towards one another! Binding it on means that it is like a garment that has to be bound on, not loosely held, but bound on, in our relations with one another. I believe that as we understand the flock of God, and what the saints are as in the light of the flock of God, marked out according to God's own thoughts for blessing in relation to His counsels, and what these counsels of His love have in mind -- as we understand all that, we shall see the value and the importance of "all of you," not some of you, not two or three, but "all of you binding on humility towards one another." And then, "Having cast all your care upon him for he cares about you." Why should this come in at this juncture, dear brethren? It is something for us to inquire, why God should at this point impress us with this matter, following this thought of humbling ourselves. "Casting all your care upon him for he cares about you." A good deal of care and anxiety enters into these matters and nothing retards or hinders spiritual progress and prosperity, like care and anxiety in an undue way. We are to understand the God under whose mighty hand we humble ourselves and what it is to cast all our care upon Him "for he cares *about* you" -- not for you.
Now I want to enlarge on that from the scriptures I have read, to stress the great importance of what we have set out in the Lord Jesus Christ as a model. He is a model for us in all things, but He is a model for us in this; and one would desire, dear brethren, that we might be more and more affected by this wonderful Model in humility. We have often referred to this 2nd chapter of Philippians which is what you might call unique, in this letter; it is like a jewel in a rare setting. The book of Proverbs speaks a lot about things that are out of their setting and we are
{485}
to learn that too; but Paul impresses us with things that are in their setting, and this reference to the humbling of the Lord Jesus Christ comes in, not in the letters that deal with questions of doctrines, but in a letter that is particularly marked by a good healthy spiritual state among the brethren. We are to learn from this, dear brethren, that in understanding the truth as to our Lord's Person, it can never be rightly arrived at through an academic mind. The bringing of this holy exalted subject into the letter to the Philippians shows the advantage of a good state amongst the local brethren. It makes way for the bringing in of what is choice and rare, as we have in this unique word of Paul to the saints in Philippi. He says, "Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus." He goes on to speak of what I wish to come to, "Having been found in figure as a man, humbled himself, becoming obedient even unto death and that the death of the cross." Dear brethren, what an example for us, as we think of all that was due to Him, as we think of who this Person was, in the form of God, the One through whom and by whom creation came into existence, into being. Creation not only exists through Him, He being the instrumental power by which it all came about, but creation exists as His creature, for He is God. He was in the form of God, but we are told that He emptied Himself, taking a bondman's form. We are to notice the peculiar place that this expression has here, taking a bondman's form. It is difficult to understand; we cannot understand it with the natural mind that One who was in the form of God should empty Himself, taking a bondman's form and it says "Taking his place in the likeness of men." Think of this place, dear brethren; how unique this place was. How we are impressed with it in the Gospels; how He took His place wherever He went; if He went into the house
{486}
of Simon the Pharisee, He took His place at the table; He took His place in the likeness of men, *His* place. Think of what His place means, dear brethren. Let our hearts and minds contemplate it; let our affections feed on the preciousness of it. A divine Person comes into manhood, taking His place -- not anyone else's place, but His place; no other place would do for Him but *His* place. No other one will fill that place; it is unique to Him. In that place He glorified God. He grew up in it, in all the perfection of manhood under the eye of God, marked by all the moral qualities and features that ministered to the heart of God, that furnished food for the affections of God. The typical books unfold to us the wealth of what flowed out as a result of Jesus taking His place in the likeness of men. We read in Leviticus and Numbers, and Exodus too, of all the typical details referred to in relation to the offerings. We are reminded of all that has come out in relation to Jesus "taking his place in the likeness of men; and having been found in figure as a man, humbled himself." What a model for us! He subsisted in the form of God, and He has come into a position involving service. Think of how He said to His disciples, when they were reasoning among themselves as to who should be the greatest, He says, "I am in the midst of you as the one that serves." How it should cause to wither in our minds and our hearts any desire after greatness according to man as we think of the Lord of glory coming into this position, not only taking a bondman's form and taking his place in the likeness of men, but humbling himself, "becoming obedient even unto death, and that the death of the cross." Think of that! "Wherefore also God highly exalted him and granted him a name that which is above every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of heavenly and earthly and infernal beings, and every tongue confess
{487}
that Jesus Christ is Lord to God the Father's glory." What an example we have in Jesus thus!
Now I want to come to Daniel, to speak about this man, a man of like passions as ourselves, but who is marked by this feature of humility. I believe as we feed upon the grace of it as seen in Christ in @Philippians 2 we shall come out in the feature of it, dear brethren, not only putting it on, binding it on, but, as we drink into the spirit and grace of Jesus as the One who is our Model in relation to humility, coming out in that spirit and grace in our relations with one another. It is always a touching thing to one to note that it is in the kingly gospel, in the gospel which deals with divine administration, the Lord Jesus says, "I am meek and lowly in heart." It is not in Mark, nor Luke, nor John that He says, "I am meek and lowly in heart." We want to understand this, in the working out of administration, because in Philippians the great administrative position is in view -- the right hand of God, whence all administration in its true spiritual character and glory emanates. The basis of it from the standpoint of @Philippians 2 is in the humbling of Himself; because it says, "wherefore." God's exalting Him is because of that. The place where the Lord Jesus is supreme in administration is heaven; it is based on what He was here below in the days of His flesh, humbling Himself, even to death.
I want to refer to Daniel for a moment -- the spirit of grace that marks Daniel. Daniel was one who knew what it was to take account of things in the testimony, not just from an inquisitive and curious standpoint, but as one who had taken up things definitely in his soul with God. I believe that we would be helped, dear brethren, in our lives as brothers and sisters, in taking things up more definitely with God. I would especially encourage the younger brothers and sisters to take account of what I am saying in
{488}
this regard, because often in our lives crises bring to light the need for the renewal of our links with God on a sound and solid footing. Daniel knew what it was to refuse the things of the world; he is presented to us as an example in this regard, along with others. But there is one thing that I would like to say about Daniel at this juncture; and one thing that I think is the secret of all his prosperity; we have often referred to it, and that is that Jerusalem had a place in his heart, in all that he had to go through. I believe it was the secret of his resisting the advances of the world in the king's delicate food. It was not just that he had a negative judgment about the defiling character of these things, but he had the flock of God livingly in his soul. Jerusalem and the people of God were there in his affections as they are in the heart of every saint who has part in divine administration. So we come to this section here where Daniel had to be tested and we all have to be tested, dear brethren. Daniel had to suffer, and we all have to suffer; we suffer in different ways; some suffer in business, some in their families; but there is one thing about Daniel and that is, whatever circumstances he is in, heaven has confidence in him; so that the last word of the book is, "Go *thy way*, Daniel." I believe, dear brethren, that is what divine Persons are looking for in every one of us, trustworthiness, as pursuing this path of moral integrity in communion with God in the secret of our souls, so that we are not just, as it were, marked by something externally that has no solid foundation. All our part in the assembly and our part in the meetings in the local gathering, should be based on the solid foundation of good upright relations with God -- how searching that is, dear brethren, with every one of us. How often we have been found as it were at sea in our souls and in our links with divine Persons. We should covet, especially the younger ones
{489}
in their earliest days, good solid relations with divine Persons; so that when you awake in the morning, the *first* thing that should come into your mind is *God*. The outpourings of your soul are to God. It is a wonderful thing to cultivate relations with God; He is constantly before your soul. I would commend it to the young people. In regard to this man Daniel I believe God was never out of his thoughts -- whether waking or sleeping, God was there with Daniel; and when it comes to the test Daniel is with God. We shall all be tested, young people going out into the world and getting new jobs, you will be tested, things come up, and the thing that stands out is not the amount of knowledge we have, not the amount of light we have as to our Lord Jesus Christ exactly, and the truth -- that is important and has its place -- but where we are in the solidity of good relations with God. Daniel is marked by that, he is concerned about the position, he has been with God. It is a great thing to be with God about things. Many of us are concerned with being with one another about things; that is good too, but we should be concerned to be with God about matters. And he is not with God in any shallow or artificial way. Oh, how shallow and artificial we are; we can talk to one another in such a shallow way. But here a man that is with God in the depths of his soul is presented to us in what he says -- "And now our God." Notice that; he begins with "our God." He is not isolating himself from the rest of the brethren; he is not thinking he is more spiritual than the rest of his brethren in the locality. He says, "and now our God, hearken to the prayer of thy servant." He is bringing in the flock of God remarkably in his thoughts, but there is also the bringing in of the integrity of his relations with God; that is where we are weak, dear brethren, in the integrity of our personal relations
{490}
with God, with divine Persons. Daniel says, "Hearken to the prayer of *thy* servant and to his supplication and cause thy face to shine -- upon Daniel? No, "upon the sanctuary." He is thinking of the assembly, not that his ideas or his thoughts might be justified or set forward, but that God might shine upon His people, upon the assembly as we would speak of it. Then he says, "Incline thine ear" -- not now *our* God, but *my* God. Oh, the value, dear brethren, in the local gatherings of brothers and sisters who are rooted and established in the integrity of good relations with God and with divine Persons. And he says, "Open thine eyes and behold our desolations and the city that is called by thy name." Oh, what a word this is for us, dear brethren. Then he says, "Lord, hear! Lord, forgive! Lord, hearken and do! Defer not, for thine own sake, oh my God! Thy city and thy people who are called by thy name."
Now I want to finish by just referring to the way he is answered. It is not a question of the powerful address he has given, or how he is getting on in taking readings, how he may be helped on in taking readings, how he may be helped in preaching or visiting, how helped in doing things externally. The basis on which this man is as viewed in this chapter is the moral integrity of his relations with God. That is where we are weak, dear brethren, and we need to cultivate it. We need to be with God more on our knees, and on our faces before Him, if our localities are to prosper. If we are to have power with God and power with the brethren we need to know what it is to pray and pray feelingly. "Pray with prayer" as is said in the New Testament. What need, dear brethren, for praying men and women in all the local gatherings that God might come in and bless His people, cause His face to shine upon the sanctuary. We are thinking, you see, of the service of God, how much it has been
{491}
weakened, as it were. As Daniel was speaking about it the word comes to him, "Daniel, I am now come forth to make thee skilful of understanding. At the beginning of thy supplications the word went forth, and I am come to declare it; for thou art one greatly beloved." There was a man that was known in heaven.
I want to speak of another man that was known in heaven, and that is David. Think of being greatly beloved in the sight of heaven. This is the moral road to it, dear brethren. So, as to David. The passage is beautiful in itself without commenting on it. There was a crisis and the king said to Zadok "Carry back the ark of God into the city. If I shall find favour in the eyes of Jehovah he will bring me again and show me it and its habitation. But if he thus say I have no delight in thee, behold here am I, let him do to me as seemeth good to him." I do not think Zadok ever heard a word like that before. Think of that man Zadok listening to what David was saying. In the time of the crisis, in the time of distress, he was the king. He could have said a lot; he could have done a lot to marshal forces in support of him, but he says "Carry back the ark of God into the city." Typically the great thing in his mind is the assembly. He is in type thinking of the assembly, and the place of Christ in relation to the assembly; and as he says, "I shall find favour in the eyes of Jehovah he will bring me again and show me it and its habitation. But if he thus say, I have no delight in thee, behold here am I, let him do to me as seemeth good to him." Now, the crisis brings out the inner secret of David's moral power, that he was a man that was with God and in the test what stands him in good stead is the integrity of his relations with God. David is a man who is prepared to humble himself, prepared to go out completely that God might be justified, that
{492}
God might be vindicated in all He is doing. The king said to Zadok the priest, "Thou art the seer," or as it might read "Dost thou see?" That is, the point is "Do you see, Zadok?" Zadok was a priest but he says, "Thou art the seer" or "Dost thou see?" That is, it is what God may do in this matter; not what I would like to have done or what I think must be done, but it is a question of what God is going to do; and I believe, dear brethren, there is need for this with every one of us, the humbling of ourselves under the mighty hand of God in view of Him exalting us in due time.
{493}
THE SPIRIT OF RECOVERY
@Hebrews 13: 20 -- 25; @Hebrews 14: 22 -- 24; @Zechariah 9: 9 -- 17
In what I have to say in reading these passages I desire to promote with us the spirit of recovery. It is a day of recovery. We, ourselves, have come into the truth, into the position in which we are on this basis. God has intervened in the closing years of this dispensation on the principle of recovery, both as to the truth and as to persons, and where we are tonight and what we have, we owe to the great work of God in recovery. And the work of recovery is going on, it is a day of recovery, and God would inculcate into our minds through the teaching this great thought of recovery. For one feels that if we are true to our ancestry on the line of faith we shall be marked by this spirit, this grace, of desiring to recover our brother. You will recall that with the one who is said to be the father of us all, the heavenly man unofficially, Abraham, one of the outstanding features that shines in him early is this feature of interest and care for the recovery of his brother, Lot, who had declined from the testimony. Lot had chosen the well watered plains of Jordan, figurative to us as they are of all the advantageous opportunities that may spread themselves abroad for us in the scene through which we pass, but may cause us to lose our lives in the assembly. Abraham was great enough to reach out in the spirit and grace of this feature that we are referring to and to go after his brother Lot; and, as if heaven would show us what it thinks of this matter, heaven's resources are mysteriously moved into the scene, projected on to our view in the service of Melchizedek to show how heaven would support this kind of spirit and grace amongst the people of God. The ministry
{494}
of Melchizedek stands particularly related to the return from the great conflict linked with the recovery of Lot. We have often referred to it, dear brethren, as fortifying Abraham against what was to come in in the overtures of the King of Sodom, but I think we need to look at it also in its retroactive bearing in regard to the activities of Abraham in seeking to recover his brother Lot. While the ministry suggested in the bread and the wine would have a prospective view it has also a retrospective view, in that heaven was as it were saying that here is a man that must be supported, and encouraged, and strengthened on the line that he is on, holding the ground for God. He is said to be the friend of God, a wonderful reference to a man like ourselves, dear brethren, and I desire in the word that is laid upon one's heart tonight, to promote this spirit among the brethren, especially in view of the imminence of the rapture, the Lord's return for which we watch and wait every moment. For the rapture will mean that every redeemed saint will be secured, none will be lost; there will not be one left behind, as it was said by Moses in Egypt, not a hoof would be left behind. So it will be in the great exodus of the assembly to be with Christ for ever; what an exodus it will be, dear brethren, when we shall go out in the sense of victory in our souls in response to the rallying shout of Him who shall come forth to receive us. He is going to take the matter into His own hands. He is not going to leave it to another, the Lord *Himself* will descend with a shout. The Spirit will not conduct us to heaven. The Lord Jesus will conduct us to heaven, such is His care for us and His interest in us. There is a lot to be done in many souls, maybe a lot to be done in the souls of some of us here in this audience, but it will be done, and everything will be secured in and from this scene that God has a claim to on the basis of redemption.
{495}
If the glory of redemption laid hold of our souls in the way in which it should do, we should be more and more concerned in our prayers and in our outlook as to the securing of every bit of material that on the ground of redemption belongs to God. You will recall that when the great reverberating blast of the trumpet was heard in the fiftieth year, the year of jubilee, every man was to be returned unto his possession, every hold was to be relaxed upon their brother, and we need, dear brethren, to be marked by the spirit of the year of jubilee in relation to things being set up again on their proper basis on the ground of redemption.
I have read these passages because of a reference in them to the covenant and to the blood of the covenant because I think the blood of the covenant would especially help us as to this matter of the spirit of recovery. The covenant reminds us of certain fixed conditions, conditions that are linked with divine faithfulness and our souls need to be imbued more and more with an appreciative sense of divine faithfulness. Every one of us must know in some way or another, experimentally, that when we have failed at different times in our lives, as indeed others have failed, for who amongst us here has not failed, yet divine faithfulness has remained. The covenant reminds us of what abides and what remains in a fixed and permanent way despite the perfidy of man after the flesh. As you recall, in the book that speaks of the latter glory of the house, Haggai the prophet, the word is given, "the word which I covenanted with you, when ye came out of Egypt, and my Spirit, remain among you." That was a word given in days of recovery, dear brethren, in days when the building, the reconstruction period was difficult and required the energy of the prophetic word to stimulate and strengthen the hearts and the hands of those that were strengthening
{496}
the things that remain. It is in that book, that we get the word, "the word which I covenanted with you" as if God is reminding them that whatever had departed from them, whatever they may have lost, the word that He covenanted with them was the same, it remained among them. So that one desires to speak of these passages from that viewpoint, especially too to draw attention to the blood of Christ in this relation because I believe the blood in this relation reminds our hearts, that the basis on which God goes forward to effectuate His great thoughts of blessing in recovery, is in the blood-shedding of Jesus. The blood has been shed. It has been poured out freely, without reserve, that the Lord Jesus, if I may speak reverently, might furnish God with a free hand, taking full account of the moral question, to go forward on the lines of recovery and set us up in relation to Himself. You will recall in this first passage that we read it says "But the God of peace, who brought again from among the dead, our Lord Jesus, the great shepherd of the sheep, in the power of the blood of the eternal covenant, perfect you in every good work to the doing of his will." Why these references, to the shepherd of the sheep and the blood of the eternal covenant? We must remember the way that this letter is written and to whom it is written, especially with the intent that they might be saved from apostatising from the faith, and that they might be preserved from falling short of the great end in mind. For we are not, as the writer says, of them that draw back, we are not of the drawers back, dear brethren. Young people, I would speak to you tonight. It is a great matter not to be among the drawers back to perdition, but to be amongst those that are marked, as it says, "of faith to saving of the soul."
Then the eleventh chapter goes on to enlarge on the operative principle of faith in individuals who are
{497}
saved on the basis of it.. Think of a man like Noah. We speak of the conditions of our day, the power of things in this modern age, but think of Noah's time, and what existed in the antediluvian period, what he had to contend with; but yet he was a righteous man. He did what was right in the sight of God. He pursued it, and he found grace in the eyes of Jehovah, and that man built an ark for the saving of his house, not only for the saving of himself. I would speak to the heads of houses that may be here, to those of us who are husbands and who are fathers. Apostasy may affect our houses, the enemy may make a bold bid to entrench upon these areas that on the ground of baptism rightly belong to God. We are to be concerned as to the exercise of faith, that our houses may be saved, that our houses or ourselves should not be marked by the drawing back principle. In the light of this epistle, with all the advantages that Christ's priesthood on high affords, we see how every resource in it is directed towards full salvation on our side, as it is said "He is able to save to the uttermost, all that come unto God by him." These thoughts, dear brethren, would affect our hearts in the way of desire for the, salvation of everyone that belongs to God, the Lord ever living with that in mind on high, exercising His priesthood in the power of indissoluble life, life established in resurrection, life that can never end, or be interfered with. That life is figured in the blossoming rod in Numbers, the rod, that blossomed, and yielded almonds, pointing to that wonderful efficacious intercessory service of Christ by which we are carried through, saved in a day of religious apostasy, such as marks the scene around us. Hebrews has that in mind, and therefore, the writer, Paul no doubt, as he finishes the letter draws attention to the leaders, as persons whose moral influence has meant something to the brethren He says, "Obey your leaders and be
{498}
submissive for they watch over your souls as those that give account that they may do this with joy and not groaning, for this would be unprofitable for you." Then he says, "Pray for us." Think of the great apostle saying that, "pray for us, for we persuade ourselves that we have a good conscience, in all things desirous to walk rightly. But I much more beseech you to do this, that I may the more quickly be restored to you." Paul is speaking about his restoration *to them*, not just his recovery from the circumstances that he is in as affecting him, but in the presence of which he can write this letter, bathed with glory. The glory of the vast universal system in which God's glory is displayed in Christ, is filling his soul in this letter and he is writing of it. He describes it, with a view to drawing souls out of that which would hold them here on the earth, not so much the evil world, but things here, such as the Jewish brethren were tested by, as in Judaism. He says as he proceeds "The God of peace, who brought again from among the dead our Lord Jesus, the great shepherd of the sheep, in the power of the blood of the eternal covenant." I believe he brings this forward, dear brethren, to bring into their minds an incentive to yield themselves in submission and subjection to the divine will with a view to the perfecting of the divine work. This applies of course to every one of us who read the scripture now, just as to them to whom he writes.
In relation to the great Shepherd of the sheep, we think of the great work of recovery as it went on and still proceeds under His hand. Peter says to the brethren, "Ye were once going astray as sheep, but are now returned unto the shepherd and overseer of your souls." The shepherd of the sheep, dear brethren, brings into our minds, as in @Luke 15, the care expended that one sheep might be recovered. How we should drink into the spirit of the gospel in @Luke 15 and be concerned
{499}
that the feelings of the gospel lay hold on us as to the recovery of one sheep. What a spirit and grace in recovery mark divine Persons in @Luke 15, the Lord setting out in His own service the amount of care He was prepared to expend on one. We might ask, what does one sheep mean among a hundred? It means much in the divine mind, dear brethren. The whole Godhead is presented typically as searching and seeking in @Luke 15. Each One of the divine Persons is typically set out in the three phases that we have in that chapter. Are we to be behind God in the spirit and grace of recovery proper to our dispensation? Surely not, dear brethren. We have often alluded to Peter, how the sheet comes out of heaven to help him and bring him into accord with what heaven is doing, the light that heaven is shedding on the position in regard to the introduction of the Gentiles. We need to drink into the spirit of @Luke 15, that we might come out as marked by it. You remember in @Luke 11 the Lord Jesus alludes to the body being full of light having no part dark "as when the lamp lights thee with its brightness." I believe that in @Luke 15 the lamp is lighting us with its brightness, the brightness of the activities of divine Persons in recovering grace, bringing us into the full value and gain of the house of God. The reference in @Hebrews 13 to the great shepherd of the sheep, is to bring these thoughts into our mind, dear brethren. There was no Shepherd like Him. We are humbled as we think of how little care we are prepared to expend on a soul; but as we think of the great Shepherd of the sheep, as we sit at His feet and contemplate His ways and His service it will help us to be marked by the grace and the spirit that marked Him. It says "in the power of the blood of the eternal covenant," because the blood of the eternal covenant alludes to the great fact that the Lord Jesus has laid the basis for God to go forward
{500}
in recovery in regard to His people in relation to His fixed thoughts of blessing, as the covenant suggests. When everything was hopelessly lost on the side of man's responsibility, God intervened, in the resurrection of the great Shepherd of the sheep. He must bring that Shepherd from among the dead, because the blood of the eternal covenant called for it, speaking reverently; that is, God's fixed purposes to bless, called for it, and the blood lays the permanent basis for God to go forward with His fixed purposes to bless. It says "perfect you in every good work to the doing of his will doing in you what is pleasing before him through Jesus Christ to whom be glory for the ages of ages."
Now I just want in leaving this passage to allude to the word as to Timothy -- "Know that our brother Timotheus is set at liberty." What a word, dear brethren, in relation to the liberating character of this kind of ministry! We need to think of the Timothys among us, that need to be set free, liberated for the testimony, and for the service of God. We want the ministry, dear brethren, that will liberate them, set them free, bring them into the work, into the line of the testimony, to function in liberty in it. The allusion would be to Timothy, being set at liberty figurative of what I have in mind as to one and another being liberated today.
Now I want to speak a word as to Mark. While the Lord's supper bears on and becomes a doorway into the service of God, I believe that there is presented in Mark's gospel in relation to the cup that which will affect us as drinking into it, in love for the sheep, for whom the Lord Jesus measured the depths. As it says, when the Lord comes to the cup, "And having taken the cup, when he had given thanks, he gave it to them, and they all drank out of it. And he said to them, This is my blood, that of the new
{501}
covenant, that shed for many." It is a unique touch to Mark; I suppose if we could have had a conversation with Mark he would have said "I am one among the many." He knew what it was to be deflected, but he also knew what it was to be recovered, and what a contribution he brings into the service of God, giving us the perfect Servant. He starts his gospel thus, "Beginning of the glad tidings of Jesus Christ the Son of God," and it is Mark that gives us this peculiar touch as to the blood of the new covenant; he brings in more the persons, not, as Matthew, the administrative side, "for the remission of sins." Mark would stress the persons, shed *for many*. "This is my blood, that of the new covenant, that shed for many." That of the new covenant, is one point, dear brethren, we do not want to forget, the fixed purpose of divine love to bless, nothing can alter it. We may lose the joy linked with the knowledge and appreciation of it, but in itself the fixed purpose to bless is unalterable. It is a good thing to see that and to know it. Mark, being the gospel that gives us the ministry, stresses the need of immediate action, that things are to be done immediately. He impresses us with the condensation of things, and the compression of time and there is no time to be lost. The rapture is near. Let us drink into the spirit of what is suggested in the cup in which is set out the blood, that of the new covenant, that shed for many. What a leverage it would be in our souls and in the souls of those in whom declension may have set in, the declining of affection. He says, "This is my blood, that of the new covenant, that shed for many." Mark would help us on the lines of the ministry, and the ministry involves light from God. You will notice that, in regard to the light, Mark gives it a peculiar touch in regard to the lamp coming. In chapter 4, verse 21, He does not speak of anybody lighting a lamp, as Matthew
{502}
and Luke do. He speaks of the lamp *coming*; that is, we are reminded of the authoritative character of the ministry -- light in itself, as it comes to us from God, and our responsibility to act in relation to it. But then, there is more than that, we are dealing with persons who have souls, persons who have got hearts, and they need to be recovered. Mark's gospel is stressing recovery. While the reference to the young man of chapter 14, verses 51 and 52, would figure persons who are in the line of the testimony with a garment lightly cast about them, running away and leaving the position, he also tells of the young man in the 16th chapter sitting clothed in a white robe. This latter suggests what is set up anew in relation to the great range of things linked with the resurrection of Christ from among the dead. So that as we drink into the cup according to Mark we would be helped in care for persons. How it shines in Paul in relation to the Corinthians. He says "I shall most gladly spend and be utterly spent for your souls, if even in abundantly loving you I should be less loved." These are the words of a man who has drunk into the spirit of the cup with which is linked the blood of Christ, that of the new covenant, that shed for many.
I want to refer to Zechariah; a great book of recovery. It is filled with the thought of recovery from beginning to end; it is filled with exalted thoughts in regard to Jerusalem and Zion, and with the thought of God coming into the position Himself. However difficult things may be or may seem to be, God comes into the position, even giving a word to a young man standing by. We have often referred to it; we may well refer to it again, the word that God gives in the 2nd chapter of this book "Run speak to this young man, saying, Jerusalem shall be inhabited as towns without walls." Think of how God would enlist the young men and the young women in their interest in relation to
{503}
the assembly, God's chief interest on earth, Jerusalem, the sphere of His government where administration according to His mind works out. God is thinking of the young men in this book. He is thinking of others as well. The Governor, Zerubbabel, the priests, Joshua the high priest, and He is thinking of those that come back from captivity with material to support divine thoughts and divine ideas. God says to a certain one "Take the gold from them" and they were to make crowns, that would adorn the head of the One who is worthy to be crowned, our Lord Jesus Christ, in the type, who sits upon the throne and bears the glory. All these personalities are in mind, just as you and I are in mind tonight that we might be brought fully into the line of the testimony in sympathetic interest in all that God is doing at the present moment in the perfecting of His work. And so in this passage here the word is "Rejoice greatly, daughter of Zion; shout daughter of Jerusalem! Behold thy King cometh to thee: he is just, and having salvation; lowly and riding upon an ass, even upon a colt the foal of an ass." You will remember how earlier in the chapter God says, "I will encamp about my house because of the army, because of those that pass by and that return;" God is thinking about the position, dear brethren. Think of Him camping, God encamping about His house. We wonder sometimes why the enemy does not go too far; but God is round about His people. You think of an army, encamping around a city, and you see the tents, they are not in the city but they are around the city, about the city. Think of God encamping about His house, not *in* His house, that is not the thought, but "I will encamp *about* my house because of the army." God sees these forces that are moving in to overthrow the position and He encamps around about. God says earlier in this book as to Jerusalem -- "I will be a wall of fire
{504}
round about and will be the glory in the midst of her," chapter 2, verse 5. What divine protection is suggested, one of the most interesting things that runs through this book. God through the prophet, says at the beginning of this chapter, "Jehovah hath an eye upon men, and upon all the tribes of Israel." That is, the localities of the brethren. He looks out upon the tribal setting. He sees how we are getting on, how we are working out things, whether the spirit of grace and recovery commensurate with His own spirit and grace is operating amongst us. He has got an eye on these matters, the tribes of Israel, the local settings in which we are, and He is encamping about His house to protect things in view of His own rights. Then we have the Lord Jesus presented as coming in and the receding of the idea of conflict. Notice this, that if the work of grace operating in recovery is coming more into prominence, the spirit of conflict is receding. So it says, "And I will cut off the chariot from Ephraim, and the horse from Jerusalem; and the battle-bow shall be cut off." That is, these matters are receding, right in their place, and employed well in their place in the wars of the Lord as they might be, but they are receding now. "And he shall speak peace unto the nations." Think of the way the Lord Jesus could come in and speak peace to the brethren -- how He could enlarge on the thought of a son of peace in sending out the disciples. That is what we need in our local gatherings, dear brethren, ambassadors of peace among the brethren. Then it says, "As for thee also, by the blood of thy covenant, I will send forth thy prisoners out of the pit wherein is no water." Think of this kind of release, for God is addressing Zion and Jerusalem, and He is speaking of the receding of conflict and He is enlarging on the thought of peace and release. The time of release, we might say, is come, and then it says, "For I have bent Judah for
{505}
me, I have filled the bow with Ephraim." What flexibility this suggests in the people of God. They are not crystallised, unyielding, unbending, but pliable, and flexible in the divine hand. "I have bent Judah *for me*," not to be used by men. How much Judah suggests to the mind of faith. "I have filled the bow with Ephraim." And He says, "I will raise up thy sons, O Zion, against they sons, O Greece, and make thee like the sword of a mighty man," Greece, representing as we know in our time and day, the great idea of education and learning. It is the world in that cultured and philosophical form. God is raising the sons of Zion up against it; and He says "And Jehovah will be seen over them." It is delightful, dear brethren, the way that God comes into the position, and adorns His people, and supports them on the line of recovery, and what has been liberated in the work of recovery. It further says, "and they shall be filled like a bowl, like the corners of the altar." Notice this suggestion of correspondence with the altar -- correspondence with the sufferings of Christ amongst His people; as it says, "filled like a bowl, like the corners of the altar," alluding to what received the blood. It represents the saints, accepting the position of suffering under the divine hand. Think of how Paul says "I fill up that which is behind of the sufferings of Christ for His body's sake." What an impression that man had and how far he was prepared to go and suffer! Then it says, "And Jehovah their God shall save them in that day as the flock of his people." We come back to the flock, dear brethren, the great potential value of the saints in the light of the flock, in whichever way we may view them. Then it says, "They shall be as the stones of a crown, lifted up upon his land." Think of that, dear brethren, and the testimony in it -- the saints appearing as God's land and shining in all the beauty of divine workmanship, ornamented as the
{506}
stones of a crown adorning the inheritance, for that is the thought. They are not as it were, enslaved by sin, nor by the principles of self-will, detracting from the glory of the inheritance, but adorning it "lifted up as the stones of a crown, lifted up upon his land," adorning the inheritance, enhancing, as we might say, the thought of it. Then it says, "For how great is his goodness, and how great is his beauty! Corn shall make the young men flourish, and new wine the maidens." Christ ministered constitutionally affecting the young men, the youths amongst us, and the Spirit made room for in the figure of the new wine, stimulating the maidens. What prosperous conditions are here suggested, fruit of the operations of divine grace in recovery!
May the Lord bless the word.
