{#Spiritual Quality}
{1}
SPIRITUAL QUALITY (1)
@Acts 1; @Acts 2: 1 -- 4
S.McC. I was thinking of the book of the Acts having specially in mind the thought of spiritual quality appearing in those who are the subjects of divine workmanship in the book, and I thought it might be good to commence with the first chapter. It is hoped that in the pursuit of our enquiry together in a subject and dependent way we shall see the greatness of the Spirit's place in this book, and also the great place the assembly has, but it is particularly in mind to centre our thoughts on the thought of spiritual quality appearing in persons who come before us uniquely in this book, and who are serving in the testimony in relation to the promulgation of the thoughts of God. It is important, I am sure we would all agree, that in the closing days we should see the necessity for quality. I suppose at no time has there been such insistence on quality in the minds of men in the world as at the present time; quality has a unique place, and great efforts are made in order that the materials and the like might be of dependable quality, and how much more so should it be in the testimony, and in relation to the assembly in the finishing of the dispensation, and we are to be concerned about the matter of quality, quality in persons, for this book brings persons before us. Christianity is not something in the air. Christianity is a living system of things centring in Christ glorified and the Spirit here, and then worked out, not just in books, nor in ritual or ceremony, but in persons who coming under the hand of divine Persons have been wrought upon by Them, and give evidence and testimony to that work. It is in mind as we pursue to take account of Peter, and Stephen, Philip, and
{2}
Paul, and others, and especially to see the place that women have, because it is of all moment that the sisters should understand the place they have in the present economy, the place they have to fill out in usefulness, whether old or young, because this book shows us quality in persons both old and young.
I thought we might begin with the first chapter which has primarily in mind those who were the fruit of the Lord's own personal service in the days of His flesh here, and they are brought before us in relation to the upper room in Jerusalem. We should dwell for a moment on the remarkable way in which Luke opens the book by drawing attention to Christ, presenting Himself to His own, as it says, "I composed the first discourse, O Theophilus, concerning all things which Jesus began both to do and to teach, until that day in which, having by the Holy Spirit charged the apostles whom He had chosen, He was taken up; to whom also He presented Himself living, after He had suffered, with many proofs; being seen by them during forty days, and speaking of the things which concern the kingdom of God." Now, we are to note the way the Lord continues to use the Spirit although He had been into death. When He came into manhood and entered into public service He referred to the Spirit according to Luke, being *upon* Him as He stood up in the synagogue in Nazareth, and the Spirit was used by Him all through His pathway. Chapter 1 of Acts views the fact that He has died, was buried, and had risen again, and we are to note the stress on the Holy Spirit, because by way of model and example the Lord Jesus is setting out what is to be the true source, spring and power of all service in persons, whomsoever they may be that are used in the testimony in the book of the Acts.
J.R. Is this quality to be seen in the saints as the result of the work of the Holy Spirit?
{3}
S.McC. I thought so, because none of us are to rely on anything we may be naturally. There is nothing so uncertain in the things of God as anything we may have naturally, be it a keen mind, or keen perception naturally, be it a humble disposition naturally, or an obstreperous disposition naturally; none of those things can be relied upon. We have to make room for the Holy Spirit. He is the great power by which things are to be done in this book, so that the book might be rightly termed "The Acts of the Holy Spirit."
J.R. It was at Antioch that the disciples were first called Christians. They were like Christ.
S.McC. Yes, at Antioch, showing I suppose that the name came out through what would be expressed in them. It was not a name given from heaven, but a name which seemed to be given in relation to what was expressed among them.
O.E.F. So Paul says in Philippians, "We are the circumcision who worship by the Spirit of God, and boast in Christ Jesus, and do not trust in flesh," @Philippians 3: 3.
S.McC. Very good, showing what a complete deliverance there had been with Paul from Judaism which claimed to be the circumcision. Paul understood the whole setting of Christianity that the Spirit was the great power and means by which things are done.
F.W. Do you have something in your mind as to the Lord using the Holy Spirit Himself in this first chapter? "Having *by the Holy Spirit* charged the apostles whom he had chosen."
S.McC. The way the Lord Jesus moves in these forty days has specially in mind, by way of precept and example, to inculcate into the minds of His disciples the way things were to be done, that is by the Spirit, not by natural resources or human strength, but by the. Spirit. The Lord Jesus could say in
{4}
resurrection, according to @Matthew 28: 18, "All power has been given me in heaven and upon earth." But here it is remarkable that the Person who says that is presented to us as *by the Spirit* charging His apostles whom He had chosen -- delightful reference "whom he had chosen" -- and he charged them by the Holy Spirit.
L.C. Would this expression "whom he had chosen" bring to our minds His choosing in regard to the pearl of great value? Quality had been in His mind in making that choice.
S.McC. Exactly. I am sure there is something in that. Before choosing these men He had spent a night in prayer to God. What ground must have been covered in that all night season of prayer! What He must have gone through in communion with God about the matter, and then they were chosen. It would bring in the great idea of spiritual quality. Of course, we have to bear in mind that among them appears Judas of whom the Lord says, "Have not I chosen you the twelve? and of you one is a devil," @John 6: 70. In the great public profession we have to bear in mind that there may be what is unreal, and Judas represents that side. He is in the place of outward relations with Christ as many in the profession are, but this chapter soberly unfolds to us that he is an apostate, a very humbling thing which should search every one of our hearts, because every one of us may be so near to divine Persons, the Lord Jesus, and the Holy Spirit, even perhaps be useable in any service, and yet there is always the possibility of a Judas coming to light. We have to watch that element. Only the work of God will go through.
F.H. The Lord's word to the woman in @John 4 was "The Father seeks such as his worshippers." She had been the subject of the work of God and there was quality and reality with her.
S.McC. I am sure it has in mind the thought of
{5}
quality, and I think the Lord would impress our minds with that this afternoon, that it is not a question of anything and everything, but a question of divine selection, divine choosing, and what can any of us say about the matter? If in the sovereignty of God, and the exercise of His mercy we have come into the line of the testimony. What can we say in the presence of it all? The Lord has in mind quality to carry on the testimony, and these persons come before us as persons of quality as under His hand.
M.D. "The Spirit said to Philip, Approach and join this chariot" in @Acts 8: 29. Was there spiritual quality with Philip?
S.McC. Yes, we shall see that. He was a man with the quality of an evangelist. He was a remarkable man, and he had remarkable daughters, showing that there was not only quality in the man himself, but in his house. He had four daughters who prophesied; where and how is something we need to look into, but the Spirit of God says that they prophesied and we may be sure that they did.
G.S.R. In @John 15: 16 the Lord says "Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you."
S.McC. John's gospel has in mind very specially what is trustworthy, that the Lord could commit things into their hands, and we know that naturally we are not trustworthy. In the beginning of John we have "Jesus himself did not trust himself to them, because he knew all men, and that he had not need that any should testify of man, for himself knew what was in man," @John 2: 24, 25. But as divinely wrought upon we become trustworthy vessels, and John's ministry has that particularly in mind.
J.R. In verse 15 of @Acts 1 it speaks of "the crowd of names." Would that suggest what is distinctive?
{6}
S.McC. That is what I thought, and the allusion to the women among them is interesting. We are to note how women enter into this setting in the upper room and are marked by spiritual quality, but before going on to that the matter of the Lord's sufferings is alluded to in verse 3, "to whom also he presented himself living after he had *suffered* with many proofs being seen by them during forty days, and speaking the things which concern the kingdom of God." We are not to forget the impress the writer would put upon our minds and spirits as to the sufferings of Christ. How much we owe to them! Indeed, we owe all to the sufferings of Christ, and we shall see as we proceed with this book what spiritual quality shines testimonially in sufferings; however great the sufferings might be we shall find features of spiritual quality shine in the persons in suffering, and we are not to forget the suffering, whether in Christ, or by extension in the saints of the assembly. Suffering is our privileged portion, and we ought to thank God for it all the time.
E.C.L. Would suffering enter into the making? The Lord says to Simon and Andrew, "Come after me, and I will *make* you fishers of men," @Matthew 4: 19.
S.McC. I think there is something in that. Think of the Lord taking them in hand, and take all the personnel that are here today; each one has a certain individuality, and think of the Lord making disciples of us! Think of what He has had to take in hand in oneself, and in the rest of us. We are all different in temperament and make-up. We know, some of us in the field of engineering, how hard it is, and what a trial it is to work on difficult material. Well, think of the Lord working on material such as we, and we can thank God for the results, not that there is any praise to any of us, but to Him under whose hand we have come.
J.B. Would you say the woman of Samaria in
{7}
@John 4 was marked by spiritual quality after she came in contact with the Saviour?
S.McC. I think so, and we would like to see a lot of sisters like that. She did what the twelve did not. They were occupied with material things, but she was thinking about attracting the men of the city to Christ, and so wonderful was her testimony (she must have been remarkably affected because of the power there was in her testimony) that the men of the city followed her.
J.W. Would Rebecca in @Genesis 24 be marked by spiritual quality in her readiness to follow Abraham's servant?
S.McC. I think so. Scripture abounds with suggestions in persons as to quality, right from the beginning to the end, and Rebecca is one of them. Of course, we have not time to go into all the examples that may come up. In our enquiry this afternoon we are centring on the beginning of the Acts to see what is making way for the great vessel which is about to come into view, the assembly, as formed by the incoming of the Spirit, a vessel that is to take the place of Israel in the ways of God, and in which the testimony of grace is to be set out. @Acts 1 brings certain persons concretely before us. The Lord is preparing the way in His service for the descent of the Spirit, and they are to become accustomed in their minds and thoughts to what is spiritual, because the Lord is stressing the spiritual side. "Having by the Holy Spirit charged the apostles whom he had chosen," verse 2, and in verse 5, "Ye shall be baptised with the Holy Spirit after now not many days." Think of what the baptism with the Holy Spirit would mean; what a powerful touch that would be in their lives. Think of the first touch when Christ called them, when He said, "Come after Me," and then think of what this touch, yea, more than a touch would be. The baptism of the Spirit involves
{8}
that they would be merged together in that great vessel of grace in the dispensation, the assembly, the body of Christ.
O.E.F. I was thinking of the personnel as making room for the Spirit. Holy men of God were used by the Spirit of God in writing the Scriptures.
S.McC. It is a very great matter that the personnel should be kept before us. Men make a lot of personnel these days; their records are voluminous that deal with personnel, but think of the personnel that form the assembly, and while the assembly is a glorious entity, the body of Christ, we are not to lose sight of the fact that that entity is composed of individuals such as we are, and they constitute the personnel under the hand of divine Persons in relation to the promoting of divine ends in the economy of grace, so that in the baptism of the Spirit what a testimony there would be in persons coming under the influence of the Spirit. If you met a person under the influence of the Holy Spirit you could not help feeling there is something different about that brother or that sister, and I am sure we all need to be concerned more and more as to what the Lord has in mind here in His education of His disciples that they are to come under the hand of the Spirit, and *we* are to get that into our minds that *we* are to come under the hand of the Spirit.
G.S.R. In connection with that does the word in verse 3 bear on it, "to whom he presented himself living after he had suffered with many proofs." Is there a suggestion in that to the Spirit's quickening service? The last impression the apostle had was of a living person who would give character to the system.
S.McC. I am sure that is right, for in the presentation of Himself living there was something in that in the way of testimony that was to affect them and is to give character to the whole system of Christianity,
{9}
because Christianity is a living system, and life is to be seen by extension in persons who are made to live in the life of a risen and ascended Man, because we are quickened in that life.
L.C. Is it a matter that the Lord Jesus accumulated certain material during His time here, and now is entrusting that material to the Holy Spirit and now it would be a question of what the Holy Spirit would make of these persons.
S.McC. Yes, I think that is what chapter 2 would bring us on to. But here the Spirit has not yet come, and the Lord is with them during the forty days prior to the Spirit's coming, and the Lord is serving to help the disciples educationally in view of the coming of the Spirit and the fact that the Spirit was to take them on, and they were to form part of the vessel the assembly, that the Spirit would indwell and were to be used by the Spirit in relation to that vessel.
S.W.R. What is the difference between the baptism of John and the baptism with the Holy Spirit?
S.McC. You notice that twice in the chapter reference is made to John's baptism, in verses 5 and 22. Now, there is a moral element in the matter of John's baptism that we are not to forget. The Lord is not pushing John's baptism aside. Notice the word 'indeed.' "John *indeed* baptised with water." That was the baptism of what we might call separation through which the remnant were separated from what then existed, but the baptism of the Spirit is a merging baptism, which involves not so much that we are separated from something, but merged by the act into the glorious vessel that constitutes the assembly, but with John's baptism there is a moral element that we are not to lose sight of, because you will notice when the matter of selecting one in the place of Judas comes up, it says "it is necessary therefore, that of the men who have assembled with
{10}
us all the time in which the Lord Jesus came in and went out among us, *beginning from the baptism of John* until the day in which he was taken up from us, one of these should be a witness with us of his resurrection," verse 21, 22.
S.W.R. And that was maintained right on till the Ephesian disciples were found.
S.McC. Well, it would look like that, but there was something amiss there, and they had suffered from it in that they had not received the Spirit. It seems as if the baptism of John forms a kind of background for what the Lord proceeds with in relation to His service. He Himself said about it "thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness," @Matthew 3: 15.
J.G. Is the baptism with the Spirit done once and for all in relation to the assembly?
S.McC. Well, the Spirit does not come twice, He came once. I know that in certain Hymnals and others too, there is the thought of the renewing of the coming of the Spirit, but that does not fit in with the teaching of the Scriptures. The Spirit came once, He does not come again. @1 Corinthians 12: 13 says "we have all been baptised into one body." The reception of the Spirit involves that we have part in this glorious entity that is formed of everyone who has the Spirit. In that way the baptism with the Spirit covers the dispensation.
J.R. Is it a fact that we have been baptised into one body when we receive the Spirit?
S.McC. We come vitally into the assembly as receiving the Spirit, because we could hardly refer to a person who does not have the Spirit as forming part of the body of Christ. Of course, what God will do at the rapture is another matter. Many persons who have just a little link with Christ, who may have the forgiveness of sins but not the Spirit, God will do wonderful things at the rapture,
{11}
because I do not think there will be any person in heaven who belongs to this dispensation and has the forgiveness of sins who will not have the Spirit. We have the Spirit, of course, in this dispensation in a way that no other family has.
J.R. Is that where spiritual quality commences?
S.McC. That is what I think. The reception of the Spirit involves the beginning of the formative side of the work of God, because what we take in by faith in the way of light, and the receiving of the forgiveness of sins and justification, hardly alludes to the formative side of the work of God. It is a question of what we appropriate of the work by faith. @Numbers 21 involves the life line. The reception of the Spirit and His service in us has in view the work of God subjectively bringing about spiritual quality.
There are a few interesting words to be noted in this chapter, and we should note the word in verse 4 'assembled,' and then we have it in verse 21, "the men who have *assembled* with us." Notice the disciples are taking on the use of this word. In the first section it stands related to Christ assembling with His disciples, and now Peter takes on the word in this section. "It is necessary therefore, that of the men who have *assembled* with us." There is dignity about that word 'assembled.' It links on with the idea of the assembly, but we do not have the assembly in chapter l of the Acts, and it is well to keep that in mind. We have to come to chapter 2 before we get the assembly.
F.W. You mean the personnel were there, but the Spirit had not been given yet?
S.McC. Exactly. The assembly is formed by the Spirit; you have the assembly when the Spirit comes. Of course, the Lord says in @Matthew 16: 18, "on this rock I will build my assembly," and in @Matthew 18, "tell it to the assembly" which is anticipative, and in @John 20 "He breathed into
{12}
them, and says to them, Receive the Holy Spirit," that was pattern and, anticipative; we have to wait till @Acts 2 before the assembly is actually formed by the coming of the Spirit.
A.E.McC. Is there a suggestion of quality in the Lord saying to them that they were not to leave Jerusalem until they had received the Spirit? He does not say how long they would have to wait, but He would leave them with that word.
S.McC. That is very good, because the element of trustworthiness enters into that. The Spirit had not yet come, and I think these men and women are a wonderful tribute to the work of Christ. The Lord in @John 17 speaks to the Father of "the *men* whom thou gavest me." Think of what each of them was to the Lord Jesus, and how, in the days of His flesh He had served them and carried them through. "He said to them, When I sent you without purse and scrip and sandals, did ye lack anything? And they said, Nothing," @Luke 22: 35. They had lacked nothing; but think of how He had cared for them, even in a paternal way, for He had been a father to them. Think of what they were, each of these persons with a known history who had been under the hand of Christ, because we must remember that the nucleus of the assembly in these persons is the fruit of the service of Christ.
S.T. So you would say that these men and women would learn from this blessed unique Person all these features exemplified in Him, so that with the incoming of the Holy Spirit they would be witnesses here for the Lord Jesus; they had witnessed the way He did things and taught.
S.McC. That is right. Jerusalem would have in mind the very place outside the gates of which He had been crucified. It is a wonderful testimony of grace, and we want to think of the grace that enters into it that in the very presence of the most terrible
{13}
wickedness expressed in the Jewish leaders, and in those of the nations, that in that very place grace was to be expressed in the testimony of the word of God in the glad tidings. The Lord said to them they were to tarry there. They might have said "they will do the same to us as they have done to You," but there is nothing of that. In the very scene where Jerusalem had lifted its head against the vessel of grace, Jesus, they were to abide *there* until they received the Spirit from on high.
It is a great thing that we should see this matter of quality, because quality involves ourselves, as Peter and John said, "Look on *us*." It is a wonderful thing when you can not only point a soul to what may help him in the Scriptures, but when you can point him to persons in whom the truth is working. That is a great matter, and is what is in mind here; each of these men and women had a history with God, and with the Lord Jesus.
E.C.L. The Lord in Luke went through city by city, and certain women went with Him. That would be a testimony.
S.McC. It would, a wonderful testimony to the attractiveness of Christ in that way. Then it says in verse 12, "Then they returned to Jerusalem from the mount called the mount of Olives, which is near Jerusalem, a sabbath day's journey off. And when they were come into the city, they went up to the upper chamber, where were staying both Peter, and John and James, and Andrew, Philip, and Thomas, Bartholomew and Matthew. James son of Alphaeus, and Simon the zealot, and Jude the brother of James. These gave themselves all with one accord to continual prayer, with several women and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his brethren." Now we can see how the stress on quality is getting greater and greater. The upper chamber would allude to what is over against Judaism which was vanishing
{14}
away as Hebrews tells us. Wonderful things had been linked with Jerusalem, the temple and the glory, but now it is a transitional time, and persons are linked with the upper chamber, "where were staying *both* Peter, and John; and James, and Andrew, Philip and Thomas, Bartholomew and Matthew, James son of Alphaeus and Simon the zealot, and Jude the brother of James." How do *we* get on with one another? All this enters into this matter of quality. Persons in whom God had wrought should be able to get on with one another. They recognised the grace that belonged to each; each is essential if the truth of the assembly is to be arrived at rightly and effectively.
S.W.R. Was it a normal thing for them to enquire in regard of the kingdom?
S.McC. Well, it is interesting the enquiry that comes up. "They therefore being come together, asked him saying, Lord is it at this time that thou restorest the kingdom to Israel?" verse 6. Notice all these words, "being come together," "being assembled with them." The word 'meeting' does not appear in this chapter, it is assembling, a very dignified thought. "They therefore *being come together* asked him saying, Lord, is it at this time that thou restorest the kingdom to Israel? And he said to them, It is not yours to know times or seasons, which the Father has placed in his own authority, but ye will receive power, the Holy Spirit having come upon you, and ye shall be my witnesses both in Jerusalem, and in all Judaea and Samaria, and to the end of the earth," verse 6 -- 8. He is reminding them now that there are certain things that are beyond their ken. The Lord is drawing their attention to the supremacy of the Father in the economy of grace, and that is a thought that should touch our hearts. In the economy of grace the Father remains in the place of supremacy, the Lord Jesus
{15}
and the blessed Spirit taking a subordinate position. In abstract Deity the Father, the Son and the Spirit are equal, but in the economy of grace the Father occupies the peculiar place of supremacy, and He has the times and seasons in His hand.
F.H. As this light of the dispensation is conveyed to them, does it settle the matter for them?
S.McC. I thought so. There is no other question raised. They are content to leave it. It is another tribute to the quality that was there, and what they were as coming under the hand of Christ, and they just leave the matter. "And having said these things he was taken up, they beholding him, and a cloud received him out of their sight," verse 9. Now the sight period is over, and we enter upon the dispensation of faith.
We cannot pass on to this remarkable section at the close without referring to this matter of the women. "These gave themselves all with one accord to continual prayer, with several women, and Mary the mother of Jesus and with his brethren," verse 14. We have often thought of this matter -- why should Mary the mother of Jesus be singled out and not left among the "several women"? But after all, in Christianity divine Persons have a right to put forward whom They will. In the body of Christ we are all merged, and are all members of the body in that sense, we are all one in that sense; but what we are referring to now is the personnel of the testimony, and the Lord has the right to point to any one in whom a particular phase or feature of things may be presented to us. Like in @Luke 7 the Lord says to Simon the Pharisee, "Seest thou *this* woman?" verse 44. Notice that. The Lord loves to single out persons in whom certain spiritual qualities may be present, and we want to be on the look out in our localities and make the most of any sister or any brother who has got something. The point we are
{16}
arriving at is the hidden wealth there is in Christianity, and that is why the sisters are being brought forward, and we want to get at what is in the women, and get at the wealth that is circulating there.
S.W. There should be liberty amongst us to set forward those who have quality as we see in the record Peter and John are first. They were men of quality and were set forward.
S.McC. Very good. That brings us to the thought of gift as we shall see as the book proceeds. It is remarkable that in @1 Corinthians 12, a chapter which largely deals with the thought of the body, and the Spirit's place in the body, it says, "God has set certain *in the assembly*." It would never do to think of the gifts as set in the body, although part of the body, and a great means of wealth in the body, but the gifts are set in the assembly, so that there should be no overshadowing in the body. It is a poor thing if any ability a brother has becomes an overshadowing feature in any locality, and hinders the development of what is latent in the saints. You will always find where there is true gift, and true moral weight and worth under the hand of Christ, there will always be room for what there is latent in the saints. The Lord is laying stress on the hidden side of the body. Take all the sisters here, what a source of wealth they constitute! After all, what may come out in any given meeting depends largely on what is among the brethren. Gift is not like a water pump, you pump the handle and something comes out! Gift is in a setting of light and wealth, and there is ability to set in relief what may be there. F.E.R. said that gift was like a precious stone in the temple, it radiates the light. The light is there and gift radiates it.
E.C.L. "In those days Peter, standing up in the midst of the brethren."
S.McC. Not standing up above the brethren, but
{17}
in the midst, and in *those* days, It is interesting study in the book of the Acts in the first ten chapters to look into this matter of "in those days." You will find it a few times referred to, and you find it here, "In *those* days Peter, standing up in the midst of the brethren." It is a matter of leadership in regard to a given matter on hand, and nobody seems to appoint Peter. He sees what is needed, and we should concentrate now on this section and see what appears in Peter. He had a knowledge of the Scriptures, and what he says is from the Scriptures, showing that he was a man who read the Scriptures, and I think that is a word we need to take to heart as to whether *we* read the Scriptures, and as to whether we know the Scriptures, because that enters into our subject of spiritual quality.
E.C.L. The Lord in @Luke 4 reads from the Scriptures, and He says, "today this scripture is fulfilled in your ears," verse 21.
S.McC. No doubt Peter must have been affected by the Lord's use of the Scriptures. The remarkable way the Lord used the Scriptures in His service at Nazareth, and the way He used them before He entered into His public service, and the way He used them in the wilderness in regard to Satan; there is nothing more effective than the word of God. Peter says it is necessary that the Scripture should have been fulfilled. Now notice this -- it shows in Peter one feature of quality -- "which the Holy Spirit spoke before, by the mouth of David, concerning Judas, who became guide to those who took Jesus." The Lord is charging the apostles by the Holy Spirit in the beginning of the first chapter, and Peter has got the gain of this. It is a great thing to be alert, and to apprehend things, and to be taught, for teaching is a great matter, especially in regard to the truth, and the Lord had been inculcating into their minds this great matter as to the Spirit, and so Peter
{18}
immediately takes it on and says "that the scripture should have been fulfilled which the *Holy Spirit* spoke before, by the mouth of David." I think that is a beautiful touch as to Peter as benefiting from the education. The Lord had just recently left them and gone up, and immediately there appears in the midst of the brethren the results of the education connected with the days the Lord was with them. That should come home to us. Are we quick learners?
H.F. It is very solemn what is said in regard of Judas, "that the scripture should have been fulfilled, which the Holy Spirit spoke before, by the mouth of David, concerning Judas, who became guide to those who took Jesus."
S.McC. Well, that is a very humbling matter how the Scriptures long before give us light as to Judas. I suppose in the Psalms Ahithophel would be in mind, the betrayer of David. What must it be to the heart of Christ to take account in Christendom now, in the public profession, of the feature of betrayal. The matter is fully covered here. It says, "who became guide to those who took Jesus." That is a very interesting reference over against the Holy Spirit. When the Lord Jesus was going away He had to deal with Judas in the choice realm where love was operating in @John 13. You remember how His spirit was troubled in relation to Judas, and then in chapters 14, 15 and 16 He draws attention to the Spirit and specially alludes to the Spirit as "the Spirit of truth ... he shall guide you into all the truth." Here Judas is guiding those who took Jesus. What a contrast to the blessed Spirit who has come to guide us into all the truth. It says "he was numbered amongst us, and had received a part in this service." A very humbling thing that. @Hebrews 6 gives us a remarkable outline in relation to apostasy and as to those who may have tasted the good word of God, and the works of power of the age to come,
{19}
and have fallen away, crucifying for themselves (as they do) the Son of God, and making a show of him," @Hebrews 6: 5, 6. For such there is no hope.
H.D. Does not Peter display great accuracy in quoting the Scriptures? He presents it with authority and with accuracy.
S.McC. That is a great matter. There is nothing more important than that we should know the Scriptures, and know them accurately. The word of God is important, and especially important in the assembly in matters and issues that may come up, and I think what you point out is interesting and helpful. The way they go through with this matter, and the matter of the resurrection, not the ascension, is stressed. Resurrection is the greatest testimony to the power of God. We do well to keep that in mind. Ascension links more with the inward, private, heavenly, spiritual side, but resurrection stands related to the moral question and the public testimony and is the outstanding witness in the dispensation to the greatness of God's power.
J.R. Would that have a place in the preaching?
S.McC. That is what one has in mind. Quality in persons would stress this side of the truth in the preaching of the word of God. It is a matter of a Man out of death, divine power operating miraculously in breaking the power of death. In @Numbers 17 Aaron's staff budded, and brought forth buds and bloomed blossoms and ripened almonds. It is life established on the basis of a miracle, a witness to resurrection, which means we belong to another world. We are not going on with this world, and its passing show, and fashions, but we are going on with that world and the resurrection from the dead.
L.C. Does Peter take on another matter in that the Lord Jesus had said in verse 8, "the Holy Spirit having come upon you, and ye shall be *my* witnesses both in Jerusalem, and in Judaea and Samaria, and
{20}
to the end of the earth." So Peter states here that the person who is to be a witness must qualify for being *My* witness, as having seen the Lord.
S.McC. It shows what a quick learner Peter was, and how he must have paid attention, and I think that is a great matter that *we should pay attention*, and not sit casually in the meetings. When we read the ministry or are in the meetings we are not to be casual, but to pay attention because that is how spiritual quality develops.
H.D. In chapter 2: 32 Peter says "This Jesus has God raised up, whereof all *we* are witnesses." The "we" is emphatic.
S.McC. Very good. Showing heaven was honouring their selection. We might finish with a reference to verse 24, "And they prayed and said, Thou Lord, knower of the hearts of all, shew which one of these two thou hast chosen, to receive the lot of this service and apostleship, from which Judas transgressing fell to go to his own place. And they gave lots on them, and the lot fell on Matthias, and he was numbered with the eleven apostles." The Lord had delegated to them apostolic authority, but their humility of mind is interesting here. "Thou Lord, knower of the *hearts* of all." Notice, hearts, not minds, of all. "They gave lots on them, and the lot fell on Matthias, and he was numbered with the eleven apostles." That is a wonderful tribute to quality, while they are exercising apostolic authority in selecting one to fill the place of Judas, they are doing it in such a dependent way, bringing God into the matter.
Kingston, Jamaica.
{21}
SPIRITUAL QUALITY (2)
@Acts 2: 14 -- 18; @Acts 7: 55 -- 60; @Acts 8: 26 -- 40
S.McC. Our enquiry this morning takes us to these three choice vessels. The passages we have read refer to Peter, Stephen, and Philip. The scope of course, is large, and we shall have to keep within certain limits, and I think the Lord would help us to take account of the quality that appears now in such a definite way in these vessels like ourselves, men of like passions, who are under the divine hand in relation to the testimony, always keeping in mind as we suggested yesterday, the place the Spirit has in the assembly in relation to all this. We must not forget the place the assembly has, because the assembly is a great thought in the chapter. As we were saying yesterday, whatever ability there may be in our localities we must never let the thought of the assembly be overshadowed. It is a sorrowful thing in our localities when persons think they are greater than the assembly. They are on decidedly wrong lines, and may come to disaster. It may take years, but we have proved it and seen it working out practically. If there is one thing the Lord will not tolerate it is setting ourselves against the assembly and the background in @Acts 2 is the assembly. The assembly has been formed and Peter is standing up in relation to this setting. Our hearts and minds should be affected by the pristine state in the Pentecostal church, for however much in the revival of our day we may come to certain things spiritually, we never come to the actual glory that existed in the assembly in @Acts 2. We may touch spiritually and morally in a wonderful way in the light of the Philadelphian church revival wonderful things, but we shall *never* come publicly to the actual conditions of
{22}
the Pentecostal church. The power that was there as the blessed Spirit in His sovereignty had free right of way, uninterrupted in His service by the conditions we have to do with in the broken state of things, and all the confusion publicly; think of the power that was there, the souls that were affected in this chapter, and Peter standing up against this background and the power that is evident in his ministry as he "lifted up his voice and spoke forth to them." Now we are to take account of Peter; he was quickly recovered, because his behaviour had been very questionable in the end of the Gospels, but the Lord took him personally in hand -- wonderful touch as to the grace of the dispensation, and Peter was fully adjusted, so that we see him here standing up *with* the eleven. That is another thought that enters into our subject. Isolationism is to be avoided. Peter is not an isolationist, he is standing up *with* the eleven. "First Peter," he is leading in the ministry, but not independent of what is under the divine hand. He stands up *with* the eleven, and he lifts up his voice and speaks forth, and he alludes to what had taken place, and it is an interesting thing to see how even the sisters were affected in the Pentecostal state of things. "And they were all filled with the Holy Spirit; and began to speak with other tongues as the Spirit gave to them to speak forth." *All* would include the women as well as the men. "And they were *all* filled." We are reminded of the glory and the power that existed then, and while there is no return publicly to what existed in the pristine state of things in the Pentecostal assembly, we are to learn from all that is there, and to see that the Spirit that was there then is the same Spirit that is here now amongst us and with us, and while hindered greatly by public conditions yet He is the same Spirit and we may touch the power that is linked with that blessed Person in His operations in
{23}
relation to the testimony. It is a question now of the testimony in this setting, and its bearing upon men. The Spirit is contemplated as the Person who has authority. He is here in charge in the assembly.
D.M.D. You were referring yesterday to the need of knowing the Scriptures. Peter starts here by referring to the Scriptures.
S.McC. I think that is a very important thing, especially in having any part, however small it may be, in serving in the testimony. There is nothing like a knowledge of the Scriptures. You will find that certain systems that are promoting things around in this island now, do not believe in the atonement, or in the Person of Christ, or the Spirit. You will notice in contact with them remarkable ignorance of the Scriptures, and it is a great thing that we should have a knowledge of the Scriptures in meeting all that we have to do with, not only in the assembly, but with men generally, because there is nothing that carries power like the word of God. It is an interesting thing that Peter brings to bear upon the situation in @Acts 2 a Scripture that really refers to a day yet to come, showing how the Scriptures may be used in spiritual application in regard of a given matter on hand at the time.
D.M.D. Was it to bring forward that it was the Spirit's day, and everything that was to be done was to be done in the power of the Spirit?
S.McC. I think so. So that we have quite a scope of things in mind in the pouring out of the Spirit here. It is important that the sisters should see the bearing that the Spirit has on them as well as on the brothers. While they do not take active part in the assembly as the brothers are doing now, it is important to see what is in mind here is that the Spirit is poured out "upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy," verse 17, and in verse 18, "and even upon my bondmen and upon
{24}
my bondwomen in those days will I pour out of my Spirit and they shall prophesy." So that room is to be made for the bondwomen as well as the bondmen who can prophesy in the appointed sphere that is theirs. Philip's daughters prophesied, and it is evident from @1 Corinthians 11 that there is the thought of women prophesying "every woman praying or prophesying with her head uncovered puts her own head to shame," @1 Corinthians 11: 5. Paul says in regard to the assemblies that the women are to be silent, "Let your women be silent in the assemblies," @1 Corinthians 14: 34. That would be the Scripture that would govern things generally. Of course, we have to understand what the word 'silent' means; it does not mean that sisters are not to sing and not to say 'amen.' It is apparent that the allusion is to teaching and exercising authority over the man.
J.R. "I will pour out of my Spirit." Does that suggest a plentiful supply?
S.McC. Yes, it would suggest that God has given the Spirit in full measure. He is not holding back in any way. Pouring out suggests the plenitude, the copiousness of it and the fluidity of it. That is a wonderful thing, and we shall have to see the fluidity of the state of things in going through Acts, as over against the crystallised state of things in Judaism. Legality always develops a crystallised state of things, whereas grace, and what is linked with the Spirit always gives us a fluid state of things, as @Psalm 133 sets out, and if there is anything we should avoid and be on our guard against it is legality, although someone has said it is better to be legal than loose, but still legality is to be avoided because it stunts spiritual growth, and spiritual liberty in divine things.
A.E.McC. Does "pouring out" suggest the thought of filling? It says of Stephen he was a "man full of faith and the Holy Spirit."
{25}
S.McC. Very good. That would be in mind in the type in @2 Kings 4 as to the pouring out of the oil and would fit in with that. It is a question of vessels, and we are to notice in Luke's writings the vessels that are full of the Holy Spirit. Not full of themselves, but of the Holy Spirit.
L.L.C. In Balaam's prophecy he says, "Water shall flow out of his buckets, and his seed shall be in great waters," @Numbers 24: 7.
S.McC. Very interesting. It is remarkable that the types of the Spirit are particularly fluid and moving. In @John 3 you get the wind, and in @John 4 you have the water, all to be noted as fluid and moving types and figures. It says in @John 7 in regard to the one who receives the Spirit, "out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water," verse 38. It is a good thing to find a brother or a sister who is in the gain of the Spirit's presence. What a power for refreshment they would be in this place -- rivers flowing from them.
L.McF. In the beginning of the chapter it says "they were all together in one place." Would you say a word as to being together?
S.McC. Very good thought that to notice, the importance of being together. I am sure there is more than a geographical or physical reference to place. I think the result of the Lord's service is enhanced in that way in that reference. We were referring to His service in the first chapter, and the result of it shines out in this verse that they were all together. Unity is a great thing in Christianity and in the assembly, not being together just physically, but together spiritually, not living independently of one another, but in relation to one another.
E.C.L. In relation to the rivers it is noticeable that in @Genesis 2 "a river went out of Eden, to water the garden; and from thence it was parted, and became four main streams. The name of the one is
{26}
Pison; that is it which surrounds the whole land of Havilah, where the gold is. And the gold of that land is good; bdellium and the onyx stone are there." Quality is seen there in the gold, and the bdellium and the onyx stone.
S.McC. It is, and one has often thought of that section in @Genesis 2 where Christ and the assembly in type come particularly before us in the man and the woman, and reference is made to the rivers -- "and a river went out of Eden, to water the garden; and from thence it was parted and became four main streams." Then as you point out the resources are referred to in the regions in which it is flowing, and I think the book of the Acts shows us that as the Spirit flows, speaking in the language of the figure the resources that are to be employed in the testimony are coming into view so that as we proceed through the book we shall find the gold of that land, and the bdellium and the onyx stone coming into view. If there is to be a testimony over against the broken state of things in Christendom it is to be in the service of God as maintained in the power of the Spirit amongst us. While we do not ignore the rightness of ecclesiastical position (I am using the word in the right sense, the word in its root meaning) there is the right assembly position, the great thing is that in all the service, and in all our activities there should be a testimony to the free unhindered movements of the Spirit amongst us.
H.D. Is it to be noted too how the Spirit governed and controlled the conversation of the saints together? They spoke of the great things of God. Is that one of the features to be looked for today as making room for the Spirit?
S.McC. Very much so. It is a great thing that conversation should be controlled, that we do not allow in our homes and elsewhere our conversation to run uncontrolled. In the early chapters of Luke
{27}
it is the same -- the things that were the subject of conversation in the hill country in relation to vessels filled with the Spirit is interesting.
H.R. Would you link that on with chapter 16 where they went out by the river and there met Lydia? She would be one who promoted kingly features. She was a seller of purple.
S.McC. Yes, she was a very interesting woman, and she is part of our subject; we shall come to it, and I think what you say is right. She is an interesting woman, a woman to be noticed especially as coming under, the Lord's hand, coming under His operations; it is said of her "whose heart the Lord opened to attend to the things spoken by Paul," @Acts 16: 14. A remarkable statement about a woman.
E.C.L. Would the places set out geographically in verses 9 and 10 show the places into which this river was flowing?
S.McC. I think so. The different settings as to the eunuch, and Cornelius, and Saul of Tarsus would show us the distribution of the streams, and the channels in which they are flowing, and that the grace of God is towards every man, "For the grace of God which carries with it salvation for all men has appeared," @Titus 2: 11. The flowing rivers in these chapters have that in mind. I think we should consider for a moment this matter of the Spirit coming upon all, and all speaking, bondmen and bondwomen. How much do the brethren here look to the sisters for a touch in prophecy? What can they say about the sisters prophesying? We are not, of course, referring to what takes place in the assembly, but that does not alter the fact that in the New Testament sisters are referred to as prophesying, and there is ample scope at home for it. It is left to us to look into the matter. Philip had four daughters who prophesied. There must have been
{28}
some time and some where that the brethren got the gain of that. We brothers are so inclined to be occupied with what we say, but we want to bring the bondwomen into the matter. Are there any Deborahs Who can help in these matters? Bondwomen, *subject* women, not any kind of women. Paul speaks of silly women. We do not want to make room for silly women.
S.W.R. What some of the sisters have said has at times helped the brothers in deliberation.
S.McC. I think it is a great matter that in our houses, our homes, and in our conversation we give full weight to what the sisters have to say in matters.
S.S. Reference to King Lemuel: "the prophecy that his mother taught him," @Proverbs 31: 1.
S.McC. Very interesting. What comes out in that chapter is really wonderful especially as the book speaks a lot of the strange woman. Proverbs is a very interesting book we should all give attention to. Chapter after chapter speaks of the foolish, the clamorous, and the strange woman. We want to pay attention to that subtle influence, and not make room for it. That is what is abroad in Christendom, and it refers to the subtle spirit that is abroad that would turn our feet into the paths of hell, the paths that lead to hell. What you refer to is very interesting over against that, that there was a woman of worth. Solomon spoke about searching, and how difficult it was to find a woman of worth.
L.C. You are stressing that the Holy Spirit is available to brothers and sisters alike, and the means of acquiring the mind of God.
S.McC. That is exactly what is in mind, and that we should be more concerned in our contacts with the sisters to get the gain of what they have, and may be passing through in the way of experience.
O.M.R. Speaking is referred to in the three passages we read. Peter "lifted up his voice and
{29}
spoke," then Stephen "cried with a loud voice" and Philip "opening his mouth ... announced the glad tidings of Jesus to him." Then in the Scripture referred to in @John 7: 37, "Jesus stood and cried saying." All in connection with the Spirit's operations. I was wondering whether it is of much importance that not one thing should be lost of what the Holy Spirit is indicating.
S.McC. That is important; the matter of the mouth, and the matter of speaking because there is so much speaking today. It says in @1 Corinthians 14: 10, "There are, it may be, so many kinds of voices in the world, and none of undistinguishable sound." The great thing is we are to see and discern the speaking, and the speaking in Acts is to help us in regard of what is in the power of the Spirit, and therefore what you allude to is a remarkable thing, because it shows the change that has come about through divine operations that man's mouth which is so corrupt according to @Romans 3 has become so changed that it becomes the channel for this authoritative speaking.
I think we should proceed to Stephen in this relation now. Of course, there is much more about Peter that could be referred to because there is so much said about Peter, but there is no time to go into all that is said, and written about him, and I think it would be well for us now to go on to Stephen, so that we might get help in seeing the quality that is expressed in this great vessel. He comes to light with Philip as we know, in regard of the most menial kind of service, and I would like to say in passing to the younger brothers and sisters that whatever work is to be done put your hand to it. It is not a matter of how menial it may be, but if it is in relation to the testimony *put your hand to serving the saints*, and you will find that God will take you on and honour you in the service. There may not seem to be much
{30}
in regard to attending to matters in the meeting rooms, and different menial things connected with the comfort and care of the saints, but as we addict ourselves to these things we will find that God will take us on, and the Spirit will take us on as He took on Stephen and Philip. They took on what was to hand in a small insignificant kind of way, but yet they were honoured in it, and these closing verses of chapter 7 show the glory that is linked with vessels who did what was to hand to be done.
J.R. Quality was seen in Stephen. He was full of faith and full of the Holy Spirit.
S.McC. Exactly. It is an interesting thing how faith is linked on with the Holy Spirit there. Full of faith and of the Holy Spirit. The two great resources in Christianity are faith and the Holy Spirit, and it is a great matter that we should see the place faith has in these things. Full of faith and of the Holy Spirit.
H.F. Do we get the idea of the myrrh seen in Stephen? Suffering enters into the matter so that he comes out like his Master, and dies praying for his enemies.
S.McC. It is important to see how like his Master Stephen is. We shall be like the Lord in glory, that is the great objective before us that we are to be fully conformed to His image, but it is a great matter that we should be like Him now in spirit and in all our ways, and now the subject of sufferings is before us here. It is one thing to be like Him when nothing is taking place, but it is another thing to be like Him when faced with the awful energy of opposition that Stephen is faced with here. These people knew the indictment was against them, and yet in persistency they resisted the truth. It says in verse 54 "And hearing these things they were cut to the heart, and gnashed their teeth against him." Think of that! this vessel full of faith and of the Holy Spirit, and
{31}
it says "But" -- the conjunction "but" is to be noted -- "But being full of the Holy Spirit, having fixed his eyes on heaven, he saw the glory of God and Jesus standing at the right hand of God." I think we are to see what kind of spirit, and what kind of attitude is necessary for this state of suffering that is immediately before us in Stephen's case.
H.F. Accuracy marks Stephen in going through the Scriptures.
S.McC. And think of the intelligence he had in regard of all the ways of God, and that should raise enquiry with us as to how we follow through matters. It is quite apparent that Stephen did, for he begins with Abraham and not with Adam. Why? It shows, I think, the quality that was in the man, the vessel. Abraham is really the new head, the head of the race of faith. Adam was the federal head of the human race, but God began anew and called out Abraham, and he becomes the right head of the line of faith as it says "who is father of us all" (@Romans 4: 16), and Stephen beginning there shows his intelligence.
E.C.L. Before he commences his oration it says "and all who sat in the council, looking fixedly on him, saw his face as the face of an angel," chapter 6: 15. Would that depict the quality that was in Stephen as before the council?
S.McC. I am sure it would. It is the look in his countenance, the very glory was affecting his visage, his countenance, and yet in spite of what there was there they went forward, and Stephen has to suffer, and we have all been called to suffering. As Peter says, "if, doing good and suffering ye shall bear it, this is acceptable with God. For to this have ye been called," @1 Peter 2: 20, 21. We are *called* to it. It is not something we fall into by the way, it is something we have been called to, "For Christ also has suffered for you, leaving you a model, that
{32}
ye should follow in his steps." Stephen would help us in relation to the quality that shines in suffering.
A.E.McC. It says of Stephen in chapter 6: 8, that he was full of grace and power. I was wondering if that does not enter into the position too.
S.McC. I am sure it does. He was a very full man we might say -- full of faith and of the Holy Spirit, and then in verse 8 full of grace and power. It is a remarkable thing about this vessel, and I am sure it is not a question of mere rhetoric in his address in meeting the enemy but it is a question of these resources, faith, and the Holy Spirit, and grace and power. What a combination in a man like ourselves.
J.E.W. He was the first choice of the brethren. It is interesting to see that "they chose Stephen, a man full of faith and the Holy Spirit."
S.McC. Yes, it is interesting, that. "They chose Stephen, a man full of faith and the Holy Spirit," so that he heads the list there, and it is an important matter in these matters of deaconal work that we should take it on in the light of these resources. We sometimes think if the work of a deacon is to be done it might be done by one who knows how to do it naturally, but it is a question of one being full of faith, and the Holy Spirit, and grace and power.
A.E.McC. They were chosen too. The disciples were chosen by the Lord, and here Stephen and Philip and others are chosen by the assembly.
S.McC. Well, I am sure there is something in that because the brethren knew what was there. It is interesting and a remarkable thing that Paul had to call the attention of the brethren at Corinth to what was amongst them. There were certain persons of quality amongst the Corinthians they were not regarding or making way for, and this is a great matter in our localities. He says to them in @1 Corinthians 16: 16, "But I rejoice in the coming of Stephanas and Fortunatus and Achaicus; because
{33}
they have supplied what was lacking on your part. For they have refreshed my spirit and yours; own therefore such." It is a great matter that in looking over the ground we should see what there is in our localities and make the most of what there is, and appraise rightly what there is, and that was the case with Stephen and Philip.
L.C. Varying conditions seem to demand various qualities. I was wondering in connection with the service as to whether suffering connected with it would bring the quality of durability to light seen in a man like Stephen serving in menial circumstances, and as to whether these conditions connected with circumstances of suffering would bring out the quality of the heavenly man in Stephen.
S.McC. I think that is right, and I think all the sufferings of the present time give divine Persons great pleasure because the features of the heavenly Man are coming out. Take the young brothers called into the armed services. Well, think of the testimony that comes before the authorities as to the heavenly kind of man that is present under their eye. It is not a question of a great display of power, but as Abraham set before Abimelech seven ewe lambs, the spirit of Christ in testimony in the type, and such as Abraham, are not easily moved. Try and shift them from their ground, try and change their principles. What tenacity and stability there is in relation to the work of God in them, the features of the heavenly Man. I think it gives divine Persons great pleasure that through suffering circumstances there comes out these heavenly features. If we have another world war the young men will have to face it, and one thing about it to which they do well to take heed, is that the one thing that stands in the testimony before the authorities is *what* you are, not only what you say, but what you *are*. There are persons who have gone before tribunals and authorities with
{34}
much to outline as to the truth of the position, but it did not carry much power, while others have just stated to the authorities that they are believers on the Lord Jesus Christ and it carried power. There was something there. We want to be prepared for every exigency. What we say will flow out of what we are, and it is not the amount we say, but after all it is a question of what Mark says, "for ye are not the speakers, but the Holy Spirit," @Mark 13: 12. Only Mark says the Holy Spirit is the Speaker. Why Mark? I think it is interesting because Mark has a special bearing on young men. He went back from the work as a young man, he was not prepared to go all the way.
D.M.D. Is that why in verse 55 "full of grace and power" is not brought forward, but "being full of the Holy Spirit, having fixed his eyes on heaven, he saw the glory of God, and Jesus." It is linked with the glory of another world.
S.McC. That is right. Full of grace and power would have reference to the testimony in its effect upon men, but the Holy Spirit would bear on the heavenly side, so that our entrance into what is heavenly lies in relation to the Spirit. Then notice the dignity of this sufferer, and the spirit that marked him in verse 59, "And they stoned Stephen, praying and saying, Lord Jesus, receive my spirit. And kneeling down, he cried with a loud voice, Lord, lay not this sin to their charge. And having said this, he fell asleep." What a spirit in a sufferer like Stephen!
J.R. Is that the spirit of the dispensation?
S.McC. That is it, the spirit of the dispensation, and it is a great thing that we should get it into our minds because you know, people do us wrong sometimes, in our businesses, or in our work, and we are liable to be recriminatory in our thoughts, and speak accordingly; we are likely to take up the attitude
{35}
of the ordinary man, but what is to be expressed are features of the heavenly Man -- the meekness and gentleness of Christ. I think we all have to take courage, because these two men, Stephen and Philip appear in the very midst of the apostolic section. The apostles, of course, thought it was below their dignity to serve tables, and while none of us would like to say much that would cast any reflection on the apostles, it is to be noticed what they said, because the Spirit of God seems to leave them for a while and make much of these two men, who were prepared to put their hands to the work, and do it. You find that in so many places there are only a few who put their hands to the work. Those who do not do it, it is not to their honour, it is not to their blessing, because you will always find that persons who put their hand to the work and *do* what is to be done. God takes them on and honours them.
C.W. Do you think the Spirit of God in calling attention to Stephen brings before us the intrinsic quality that you are speaking of over against what is official?
S.McC. That is just the way to express it -- intrinsic quality. It is not a garment to be put on for certain occasions. It is not an attitude to be adopted, but what the man was intrinsically by the work of God, because we are referring to the work of God, and what is coming out is what the man really was according to the work of God, and it is a great matter that we should get the full gain of that in any of us.
H.D. He fixed his eyes on heaven, not on his persecutors, and he "saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God, and said Lo, I behold the heavens opened, and the Son of man standing at the right hand of God." He remembers the Lord's own words, "Ought not the Christ to have suffered these things and to enter into his glory?" @Luke 24: 26.
{36}
S.McC. It is important to see that, if I may use the expression we have used recently, Stephen was occupied with the "unseen world," and I think we all, and especially the younger brethren, want to get our eyes filled with a view of the unseen world. Take this world and all that is against us, the might of man arrayed in all its strength in different associations, trade unions and other things, we do not want to get our eyes on that so much, but on the unseen world. Hebrews tells us "ye have come to mount Zion; and to the city of the living God, heavenly Jerusalem; and to myriads of angels, the universal gathering; and to the assembly of the firstborn who are registered in heaven; and to God, judge of all; and to the spirits of just men made perfect; and to Jesus, mediator of a new covenant; and to the blood of sprinkling, speaking better than Abel," @Hebrews 12: 22 -- 24. We want to get our eyes filled with that view. The young man in Elisha's day had his eyes opened; @2 Kings 6: 17. You remember Mr. Darby in one of his hymns says (there is much of the wealth of these hymns which is not in our book):
<blockquote>"What powerful, mighty Voice, so near, <br>Calls me from earth apart -- <br>Reaches with tones so still, so clear, <br>From the unseen world my heart?"</blockquote>
showing how he thought of the unseen world, and all that was linked with it -- Christ and the assembly, the myriads of angelic hosts that surround us in all our goings. Little do men know the myriads of angelic hosts that surround us; even as we go by car we pray to God for angelic care and ministration. These things are real.
C.W. Stephen saw the glory of God and Jesus, but before that it says, "being full of the Holy Spirit." Is that the power and spring that would occupy him with what is unseen?
{37}
S.McC. That is it; and it is a great matter that, so that Stephen is a choice vessel. Would to God we were like him more, and what is to be noted in his indictment and address is that he makes the most of Moses. The biggest part of his address is surrounding Moses. There is something in that, because Moses made a definite choice to suffer affliction with the people of God, esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt. It is interesting how Stephen makes so much of Moses, whereas Paul makes so much of David in his address at Antioch in Pisidia.
We should finish with a word as to Philip. I think Philip would encourage those who have in their hearts the subject of the gospel, and open air work. It is a great matter that open air work should be carried on. It gives great opportunity to the younger men to develop and to see what they have. We are now in the finishing of the dispensation and Philip would help us as to the evangelical side. There is, maybe, an Ethiopian eunuch to be met, or it may be a Samaria in the principle of the thing, where there is a lot of work to be done. Philip's work had to have a certain amount of adjustment, but he was prepared to get the gain of it.
S.T. Philip goes out and purchases to himself a good degree.
S.McC. We are all to have that in mind, to do things well. After all, especially on this island in view of getting a job in the Civil Service you have to apply yourself, how much more so in the assembly? We are to apply ourselves and do things rightly, and well, and accurately. No one gets anywhere who does not apply himself. Ability to serve does not come suddenly out of the air. J.N.D. said if there was more devotion amongst us there would be more gift.
J.R. Do you think the brethren are especially
{38}
supported in the preaching if they have the assembly in view?
S.McC. I am thankful you have brought us to the suggestion that the assembly is to be in our minds as a background. Philip seems to be going on individual lines, but it is very interesting to see how the work is incorporated in what is going on in the assembly. Peter and John came down and looked over the matter, and Philip does not say to them "this is my work, you have nothing to do with it." He is subject to the adjustment and gets the gain of it, and then the Spirit takes him on in these closing verses. The Spirit would delight to take us on as we are ready to be adjusted in these matters.
F.W. The Spirit speaks to Philip.
S.McC. What can *we* say about the Spirit speaking to *us*? The Spirit is a divine Person, and He can speak, and there the test lies as to whether we are moving in communion with the Spirit, and whether we are sensitive and can discern when the Spirit is speaking to us. The angel spoke to Philip earlier, and the angel would hardly denote what is linked in a distinctive way with the dispensation. Angelic speaking is more in the Old Testament, but the Spirit speaking is linked with the New Testament. The angel represents God acting providentially in speaking to us, perhaps in the loss of a job, or a bereavement, but the Spirit is a divine Person with us and in us directing in regard of the service.
H.D. Philip obeys immediately. When the angel spoke "he rose up and went," but when the Spirit speaks he runs.
S.McC. It is a great thing to be immediately available for whatever the Spirit may be indicating in any line of service. This was *one* man, not three hundred or more, but *one man*, and the Spirit is moving in the area of his service and directing the service in relation to one man, and it is a wonderful
{39}
thing the way Philip is amenable to the direction of the Spirit, "The Spirit said to Philip, Approach and join this chariot." Not join the eunuch. In dealing with souls the thing is to get alongside of them and find out about their circumstances. We never know who God may pass our way. He may pass our way someone to whom He would have us speak about his soul. Some refuse, but others in these circumstances are thankful for a word as to these matters because many realise the need of looking into their links with God, and so the word is "join this chariot." These scriptures point us to how we are to learn from these vessels how to link on with men; how to link on with men having God and Jesus in mind, and the glad tidings of Jesus in mind, and get some opening to speak about their souls.
H.W. We are to be encouraged as Peter tells us, "If we are reproached in the name of Christ, blessed are ye; for the Spirit of glory and the Spirit of God rests upon you," @1 Peter 4: 14.
S.McC. Well, indeed we have to see that, that suffering is our portion, a wonderful favour that has been given to us. You know we are liable to think of it as something awful, but it is a divinely conferred favour, and we are to take it up and go through it in the dignity of having the Spirit, the Spirit of glory, and the Spirit of God resting upon us.
Kingston, Jamaica.
{40}
SPIRITUAL QUALITY (3)
@Acts 9: 1 -- 21; @Acts 11: 19 -- 26; @Acts 13: 1 -- 12
S.McC. We should go on to Paul this afternoon. We have read extensively in regard of Saul, who is called Paul, as we read in chapter 13, but it is necessary because of the detail that enters into the taking up of this wonderful vessel. There are many things that are very fitting at the present time to be called attention to; and while on the one hand we see the wonderful grace of the dispensation in affecting a person like Saul, on the other hand we see the terribleness of the government of God upon a person like Elymas standing in the way of the testimony going forward. I think if there is anything we should fear, it is the government of God, the wheels of which turn slowly but surely. It may take ten, twenty, thirty, or even fifty years, but the government of God will eventually catch up; and that is one thing we have to keep before us in relation to the dispensation, that while it is the dispensation of grace, *the government of God is operating against evil all the time*, and affects all who have to do with God, and affects even the nations, because God is always operating against evil, and always promoting what is good, and I think that should be a comfort and stay to our hearts in the present circumstances. Another thing that should affect us as having regard to this matter of quality, is the place the body of Christ has. Saul of Tarsus has to learn that in attacking the saints he is attacking Jesus, the body of Christ here on earth. That is another thing that should be borne in mind in proceeding with our enquiry, the awful solemnity of railing and speaking against the brethren. The Lord says to Saul, "I am Jesus whom thou persecutest." What is to be noted
{41}
in the opening of the chapter is the conjunction 'but.' Over against the prosperity in the service and the testimony, as we were looking at it this morning in relation to Philip, the apparent evidence that God is blessing His people, and souls were being added to the testimony it says "*But* Saul still breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord." He had stood at the feet of Stephen, and looked on, and seen the glory that had shone in Stephen, and the spirit of grace that bore with the opposition that was present, and it says "*But* Saul *still* breathing out threatenings and slaughter." Notice these words, 'but' and 'still,' and then notice "*But* as he was journeying, it came to pass that he drew near to Damascus; and suddenly there shone round about him a light out of heaven." Notice how heaven is intervening in this matter "and falling on the earth he heard a voice saying to him, Saul, Saul, why does thou persecute me? And he said, Who art thou, Lord? And he said, I am Jesus, whom thou persecutest." Saul thought he was just having to do with ordinary men and women, he thought he was doing what was right. He thought he was even doing God service, so blind was he, so perverted in his way. He thought he was doing God service, and the Lord has to arrest him as He does here, "why dost thou persecute *me*?" What there is in this island in the various localities, the saints as set together is the body of Christ, and think of the awfulness of persecuting that. How the Lord comes in here, and He says, "Saul, Saul, why dost thou persecute me?" All this surrounds the matter of quality in regard to this special vessel that the Lord refers to as an elect vessel.
L.C. Does the fact that Saul has his eye on men and women indicate that the enemy is quite aware of what God has before Him?
{42}
S.McC. Very good; men and women, that is excellent, the component parts of the assembly. Not only is he after the men, but the women, as if the arch enemy was skilled in his designs and methods and was out to destroy the thought of the assembly. It is interesting what you point out.
S.T. Does the "way" here speak of the way according to God, the way of Christianity?
S.McC. That is it. It was an expression that was used in those days to describe Christianity, and Christianity is not a static matter, but a moving matter; and what marks those who go out of fellowship is that you will find they are the same today as they were twenty-five years ago. If you look at the divisions, those who have left the fellowship, or any who leave the fellowship, you will find that they are just the same today as they were when they went out, but Christianity involves "the way" which suggests movement.
H.F. Would you say that Saul reached his limit here as representing the spirit of Jerusalem, but heaven intervened in power, in the power of grace?
S.McC. Yes, that is interesting. He reached his limit. It is marvellous how the Lord suffered the saints to be persecuted. Saul might have said "it is evident that the Lord is not putting His hand upon me, and that I am being helped in my service of persecuting the saints," but he reaches his limit. In @Isaiah 8 there is a reference to Immanuel's land, and it is very interesting as to the waters of the proud Assyrian. "The Lord will bring upon them the waters of the river, strong and many, the king of Assyria and all his glory; and he shall mount up over all his channels, and go over all his banks; and he shall pass through Judah; he shall overflow it and go further, he shall reach even to the neck; and the stretching out of his wings shall fill the breadth
{43}
of thy land. O Immanuel!" Notice, "he shall mount up over all his channels" -- he is going beyond the banks, and notice too, "he shall pass through Judah" -- God's sanctuary as @Psalm 114 says, and notice these words, "he shall overflow it and go further, he shall reach *even to the neck*" -- notice that -- to the neck, but no further. Thus far and no further. Even to the neck but he does not go over the head, the waters do not go over the head; there is a limit reached as God puts His hand upon matters. The neck, suggests that there is a limit reached so that the saints are not completely overthrown or overpowered by the matter. God allows the enemy to go a certain distance, but thus far and no further. I think our hearts should be affected by the Lord Jesus thus dealing with this insolent overbearing man. Think of the audacity of a man to insult the saints, and to speak against them, and think of what the Lord had to say to this man, "I am Jesus, whom thou persecutest." Not "whom thou speakest against," but "whom thou persecutest." That is the word that fits in with the occasion. He is persecuting the saints and the Lord is putting His hand upon him.
F.H. Would the intervention from heaven be sudden, and would that indicate the feelings of heaven in regard of it?
S.McC. I think it does. Heaven is considering this matter. Think of all the way the saints had been persecuted in the chapters before this. Think of how heaven had allowed the enemy to work and to move, and the wonderful attitude of grace; the government of God had held its hand, and stayed its hand, but now the Lord Jesus intervenes personally, not through Philip, the evangelist, or through Stephen, although there must have been some impression there, but the Lord says, "I am taking a personal hand in this matter," and He brings down
{44}
this insolent, overbearing man, as Paul refers to himself many years later.
B.B. Would you say a word about the light out of heaven? Every time Paul refers to this he mentions this light in a different way.
S.McC. He does, his appreciation of what reached him and touched him seems to grow, and that is right, and in keeping with "the way," so that we are not the same next year as we are this year, we are growing in the appreciation of the love and glory of the One who has reached us and brought us down.
J.R. Stephen saw the glory of God and Jesus. And the Person speaking here says "I am Jesus." Is it the way of grace overabounding?
S.McC. That is it. The Lord is here in this matter. Paul refers to it later, he had a personal appearing. This is not a mere manifestation of glory (not that we are belittling that) but he says in @1 Corinthians 9: 1, "Am I not an apostle? Have I not seen Jesus our Lord?" referring to the fact that it was a personal appearing, the Lord taking in hand this matter. We can count on the Lord in regard to these matters, that while He allows them to go a long way, He will eventually intervene in His own way and time.
G.S.R. Do you think the Lord stayed His hand until now to impress Paul with the capacity of men and women who could suffer like Stephen?
S.McC. I think that is excellent, and I think it should touch us, the fact that Saul would get an impression now in regard of all these persons he had persecuted and spoken insultingly against, the wonderful way they had borne it, and the grace of the dispensation that had been manifested. He would get an impression of how the saints could suffer and the capacity in the saints to suffer, and the Spirit is helping them, I think it helps to see
{45}
that in the matter of opposition the Lord is linking Himself with the saints. We often refer to it in the Supper. On Lord's day morning we were thinking of it. All the disturbances we have had, the disturbance this afternoon in the way the saints have been spoken against, and yet how the Lord linked on with us in the Supper, prepared to identify Himself with us and to see us through, and I think it is wonderful to take account of the position in this light.
L.C. Is it not remarkable that in the section relating to Stephen and in this section the saints are described as disciples? Previously it is the apostles, the eleven, and the assembly, but here it is disciplined ones in whom quality is to shine.
S.McC. I think that is good and helps. The matter of disciples speaks of those trained and disciplined, and we have to become accustomed to this kind of thing that the way in Christianity involves following in a disciplined path where things are definitely pursued. That is the thought of disciples -- followers of the Lord.
S.W.R. The thought of accusing comes in. Is that definitely satanic?
S.McC. So that none of us want to be on the side of Satan in accusing the brethren, every one of us should seek to be free from that kind of thing, and the Lord in bringing down Saul impresses him with the universal idea as to the body. Notice how the universal idea and the local idea go together. He first draws his attention to the body, which is the catholic idea, then in verse 6, "But rise up and enter into the *city*, and it shall be told thee what thou *must* do." That is, his attention now is called to what is in Damascus. The Lord has not only His body in a universal way, which Saul was attacking, but He has what is in each of our cities, what is set up in the light of the assembly which we are to give attention to. Paul's ministry, brings in the idea of
{46}
local assemblies, the local assembly had not come into view before except in Jerusalem which was more the metropolitan position, but the idea of the local setting is now coming into view and the Lord is stressing it, and Paul is to get this impression at the outset of the dignity of the saints in Damascus.
H.F. Saul learnt for the first time that the saints are viewed on earth as the Lord's body and the Head is in heaven, so that he would have a dignified impression of the saints.
S.McC. Well, I think he would get that impression, but it is specially to stress the Lord's identification with the saints here right in this scene. The Lord's identification with the saints here in the sphere of testimonial suffering.
D.M.D. Would the idea of the city be that we would understand what God has there, and be subject and work it out together?
S.McC. That is the whole point; great man as Saul of Tarsus was he had to learn that there were those in the city of Damascus that God had under His hand, and the Lord Jesus had under His hand, and he was to take orders from *them*, not from the chief priests in Jerusalem; he was to get directions from *them* as it says, "it shall be told thee what thou *must* do." It is not a question of arguing or reasoning about the matter, but "it shall be told thee what thou *must* do." And it is a great matter for us to learn that, it enters into quality, and into our development, and we are to see that no one of us is any greater than the assembly, the assembly is the greatest thought, and we are to be subject to the greatest thought.
G.S.R. In @Isaiah 11: 16 we have, "And there shall be a highway for the remnant of his people which will be left." Does that correspond with the bringing in of Paul? Are we treading that highway now?
{47}
S.McC. I should say so, the highway is before us, and later in Isaiah we have "a highway shall be there, and a way, and it shall be called The way of holiness," @Isaiah 35: 8. It is a great thing to keep that in mind, the highway upon which everything travels, "and it shall be called the way of holiness." It is the highway of holiness, and we can see it here in this chapter.
H.D. "But rise up and enter into the city, and it shall be told thee what thou must do." Saul has now a moral right to enter as coming under the sway of the Lord.
S.McC. Yes, the Lord has brought him down, and the Lord says, Now the right place for you is in the local gathering at Damascus for the moment. We want to get hold of that, what the local gathering is, and especially to see that the Lord has full confidence in the local gathering. Saul might have said, they have made plenty of mistakes, they do not know what they are doing, but Saul does *not* say that, he had been brought down completely, and that is what new birth does for us, and when the Lord comes in in power there is no more confidence left, as with Saul.
S.W.R. Would you distinguish between "economy" and "dispensation"?
S.McC. Oh, well I think in certain ways both mean the same, it depends on how you use it. The economy goes beyond the dispensation. If we are speaking of the economy into which divine Persons have come that would begin with the coming of the Lord Jesus into manhood, and goes on right into eternity, but if we speak of the economy of grace, it is an equivalent term to the dispensation of grace. Economy just means the way things are administered. You have the economy in Kingston in the Jamaican Government. We have the economy in Washington -- the way things work out in the government. If
{48}
we allude to it in relation to the economy into which divine Persons have come, of course it goes beyond the dispensation.
This section from verses 8 to 21 is most interesting as showing us how the different features of the economy are operated to help us, and it is a remarkable thing that the first thing Saul saw apparently was a brother. It is a great thing to get a right view of the brethren in that light.
A.E.McC. Was there not quality with the brother? I was thinking of his obedience to the Lord. Saul is told to enter into the city, and Ananias is also told what he must do.
S.McC. Yes, and it is very touching to see how Ananias, truly one like ourselves, has certain difficulties, and how the Lord helps him, and he moves in such a way. He is a remarkable person, Ananias. It says in verse 10 "There was a certain disciple in Damascus by name Ananias. And the Lord said to him in a vision, Ananias. And he said, Behold, here am I, Lord. And the Lord said to him, Rise up and go into the street which is called Straight, and seek in the house of Judas one by name, Saul, he is of Tarsus." It is interesting the sensitiveness of Ananias, and I think that ought to raise something with us. If we are out in the world and going on with things casually in the testimony, and have not much interest in assembly life, we can hardly expect to get these touches that will bring us into the operations of the economy, but Ananias was in the life of the testimony and he went. He was available, and that is a word to us as to whether we are all available.
D.B. Ananias must have had a humble spirit when the Lord could be free to tell him that a younger brother was going to be an elect vessel.
S.McC. Very good. Here was a young man coming into line with the testimony. He was going to take
{49}
a lead in relation to the ministry, and the Lord indicates that to Ananias. "And the Lord said to him, Go, for this man is an elect vessel to me, to bear my name before both nations and kings, and the sons of Israel; for I will show to him how much he must suffer for my name." Now, notice this, A great many have difficulty as to appealing to Caesar, and as to how Paul appealed to Caesar, but the remarkable thing is that the Lord told him that he would come before Caesar and Agrippa "to bear my name before both nations and kings" at the very beginning, at his conversion, and I think, as you say, the thought of quality in Ananias comes out in the way he moves immediately to serve in relation to the divine end in regard of this choice vessel.
L.C. The Lord adds, "*I* will shew to him how much he must suffer for my name," the "I" is emphatic. Does that suggest that we are entirely in the Lord's hand as to this matter of discipline where the development of quality is in mind?
S.McC. I think so. It is a remarkable statement, "*I* will shew to him how *much* he must suffer for my name." Think of what enters into these words. We would have thought if any vessel would have been free from suffering Paul would have been as carrying the burdens of the assembly, but let us remember that in these matters it is well to take account of the *capacity* in the saints to suffer, and this would enter into this statement in regard of Saul of Tarsus. The Lord is going to give him a view of how much he must suffer, as if the Lord has great pleasure in this matter of capacity in the saints for suffering, for the idea of a vessel suggests capacity. We have limited the thought of the elect vessel to Paul ministering, but I think it would be well for us to think a little bit more of the elect vessel on the line of suffering, the capacity of this great vessel to suffer, as he says in @Colossians 1: 24, "Now, I
{50}
rejoice in sufferings for you, and I fill up that which is behind of the tribulations of Christ in my flesh, for his body, which is the assembly." That is not atoning sufferings, but the idea of testimonial suffering, and the Lord fits the vessel, as it were, for suffering.
S.T. @Philippians 1: 29 reads, "Because to you has been given, as regards Christ, not only the believing on him but the suffering for him also, having the same conflict which ye have seen in me, and now hear of in me."
S.McC. That is a beautiful word. Read it again, "Because to you has been given, as regards Christ, not only the believing on him but the suffering for him also, having the same conflict which ye have seen in me, and now hear of in me." Mr. Taylor recently in New York drew attention to that verse referring to "it has been given." We are liable to think of suffering coming upon us as a calamitous kind of thing, but the way it is put in Philippians it is a wonderful favour conferred upon us that we should suffer for His name. It has been given to us not only to believe, but to suffer for His name. It is a great thing to get into our minds, and I think it is a comfort, at least it is a comfort to my soul, in the measure of suffering which we have to think of that -- it has been *given* to us.
E.W. Timothy was to take his share in suffering.
S.McC. That is a very interesting passage, and a word to all of us. We are not to shrink from suffering or to avoid it.
S.W.R. Is it a matter that we can glory in? Paul says in @Galatians 6: 14, "Far be it from me to boast save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom the world is crucified to me, and I to the world."
S.McC. Yes, I think we should learn to do that. Paul says in that same chapter, "I bear in my body
{51}
the brands of the Lord Jesus," verse 17. A remarkable statement. What can Judaisers say about that kind of vessel? They did not suffer much, these Judaistic teachers. They were working under the hand of the enemy to hinder in regard of the truth as to Christianity, but Paul faces the whole matter unflinchingly in the very place where it reared its head -- Jerusalem, and he calls attention to his sufferings in that way. We are not only to be like Christ in glory, but now in suffering here below. We shall be like Him above, we shall see Him as He is. It will be in a moment, and how we long for it, but *in the present moment* we are to be like Him, like Him *now*. Stephen was like Him, Paul was like Him, and *we* are to be like Him. When people insult us, when men do despite to us, or do not give us what is properly due to us, in whatever sphere it may be, we are to be like our Master, our heavenly Master.
G.S.R. The suffering and the glory are connected, the more Paul suffers the more he apprehends the glory, so that he speaks of the light in a greater way each time.
S.McC. It is in these chapters where he is bound and in chains that he brings out his ever-increasing apprehension of the light. It is good to see that as the sufferings are intensified, his appreciation and apprehension of grace increases.
H.D. Do the sufferings produce fragrance for God, a sweet savour to God? "For we are a sweet odour of Christ to God," @2 Corinthians 2: 15.
S.McC. And that is said in the great epistle of suffering, 2 Corinthians. The whole epistle in a remarkable way brings out sufferings, the sufferings of Christ, and of the apostles. In chapter 1 he says "even as the sufferings of the Christ abound towards us, so through the Christ does our encouragement also abound," verse 5. Not just one or two, but they "abound."
{52}
O.L. In the prison at Philippi Paul and Silas at midnight "in praying were praising God with singing," @Acts 16: 25.
S.McC. Very good, showing the spiritual quality in these men like ourselves that in the prison, in such sufferings and testings, the service of God was going on. It is a wonderful testimony to the quality in these vessels.
Now we must go on to chapter 11. We will see now how this thought of quality is increasing in that the disciples are first called Christians, and we have the first mention of their being "gathered together" -- *gathered*. Beloved Mr. Taylor was saying in Indianapolis recently that the word 'gathering' was better than 'meeting,' and it comes in here "gathered *together in the assembly*," verse 26. Another thing to be noted which we did not refer to is, verse 20, "But there were certain of them, Cyprians and Cyrenians, who entering into Antioch spoke to the Greeks also, announcing the glad tidings of the *Lord* Jesus." That is a very interesting thing for the Greeks were filled with Alexander the Great, and the mighty exploits of that wonderful general in his thirties, but a youth. What domination he had, how wonderful his exploits were, and the Greeks were filled with Alexander. The disciples were scattered abroad, and they announced the glad tidings of the *Lord* Jesus.
J.R. How do you understand the term "Lord Jesus"?
S.McC. It refers to the excellence of the Person, the One whom God has honoured and glorified. Jesus is the One whom men set aside, and slighted, and disallowed, but Lord Jesus particularly alludes to God's act in glorifying that blessed Man; it is also a great Pauline title. Paul uses it much in his letters.
{53}
J.R. Stephen was the first to say "Lord Jesus." "Lord Jesus receive my spirit."
S.McC. Showing how interesting the setting is there. In the midst of suffering the glory is shining and we find the appellation first on the lips of a disciple. Luke uses it, although we may say Luke alone of the evangelists brings us the term, for he speaks of the disciples not finding the body of the Lord Jesus, but Stephen was the first to say "Lord Jesus."
E.C.L. Does that precious name bring in the Holy Spirit? @1 Corinthians 12: 3 says, "No one can say Lord Jesus, unless in the power of the Holy Spirit."
S.McC. That is to be noted. It requires the Spirit of God to say it rightly. You may watch persons and hear how they speak of divine Persons, and how they address God, and speak of God, and you will find that some are outside of the dispensation altogether, and it is betrayed in the way they speak of Him. "Lord Jesus" is one title that requires the Holy Spirit to use rightly. He officially is in the place of Lord, and it is well to bear that in mind, that while we may refer to the Father as Lord, and to the Spirit as Lord, and the Lord Jesus is officially in the place of Lord. He has been *made* Lord and Christ. That term officially belongs to the Lord Jesus.
S.T. Does this teaching for a whole year bring out quality in the disciples?
S.McC. Yes. It would be the whole year; springtime, harvest, summer and winter would all be encompassed in this year.
E.C.L. Barnabas had seen quality in Saul and he goes to seek him out.
S.McC. Very good. Not many years ago the beloved brother we all love so much and honour, referred to Barnabas, saying he was the unjealous
{54}
introducer of his more gifted brother Saul. It is a wonderful thing to see that spirit in any of us. It may be a much younger man, but love walking in an unjealous way makes room for more gifted men, and that is a beautiful spirit, and it brings out quality in Barnabas. The Spirit of God says of him "he was a good man, and full of the Holy Spirit and of faith," verse 24. He was a man of quality, and he was certainly that here in the way he brings Saul in.
We might finish with a word as to @Acts 13 to show how quality is constantly increasing, so that we get in the beginning of this last section of the Acts, for the book of the Acts is divided into three sections. Those who read the Synopsis will find that out. @Acts 1 is the first section which refers to the time the Lord Jesus was with His disciples in the days before He ascended up into heaven, and then chapters 2 to 12 form another section of the book, where the operations of the Spirit of God are brought before us, and especially His independent operations, independent of Jerusalem in the bringing in of the Ethiopian eunuch and Cornelius, and now in chapter 13 to the end of the book we have this last section in which the great work of Paul is to come before us, and chapter 13 gives us the thought of increase in quality and we find that there are others there who have gift and ability in Antioch, and Antioch as the base and centre of the operations amongst the uncircumcised comes before us.
G.S.R. Does this correspond with @Ephesians 4, the persons are the gifts? Is it to stress the value of the gifts in a locality and in the assembly?
S.McC. I think it is. What a rich locality Antioch must have been in the way they sat together, and the way they were together despite their gift and ability is interesting, that instead of vying with one another as at Corinth, they were ministering to the Lord and fasting. I think it brings out the quality
{55}
of these men that instead of each man looking upon his own things *he was thinking about the Lord* -- ministering *to the Lord*, and fasting, and the Holy Spirit now formally comes into this matter.
L.C. Throughout the book up to this point the thought of being filled with the Holy Spirit seems to be prominent. Even to Paul Ananias said "be filled with the Holy Spirit." Is it that the Spirit may be free as filling the vessel and then filling out the whole position?
S.McC. That is it, and it is important to see that -- filled with the Spirit. It is a great matter the way the Spirit takes things in hand in regard of all these choice vessels. I think we should think more of this matter in view of what the Lord may have before Him, and what the Spirit may have before Him in the finishing of the dispensation.
E.C.L. Is that why in Ephesians Paul says "be filled with the Spirit," @Ephesians 5: 18. Is it that we should take in the full scope of God's thoughts?
S.McC. I think so, and be sustained in the position of our blessing as it is presented in that letter.
J.R. May we look for development in that line in our localities today where the service of God is going on?
S.McC. I think we should, and I think it is apparent, and it is wonderful to see the way ability is coming to light amongst us, and how much there is, and the Lord is helping, and the Spirit is helping, and it should be an encouragement to every young man and woman here to lay themselves out to be available in relation to this great matter, because *there is much to be done and room for all*. Moses said, "Would that all Jehovah's people were prophets," @Numbers 11: 29, and that should be the attitude and spirit of every one of us in this matter.
H.W. Was the Spirit of God acting sovereignly here when He said, "Separate me now Barnabas
{56}
and Saul for the work to which *I* have called them"?
S.McC. Yes. He is in complete control of things in the assembly, and He has marked off these two men, and that shows too, something we have all to make way for, the idea of divine sovereignty. There was apparently no feeling with these other brothers that Barnabas and Saul should have been set forward. Divine Persons have a right in Their sovereignty to dispose of things and persons as They see fit.
H.D. So that the Spirit takes on the first and the last mentioned in verse 1.
S.McC. Very interesting, showing it is not a matter of alphabetical order. How do the brethren follow through the preaching of the word of God? Do they look up a book alphabetically and say he preached two weeks ago and it is his turn now? It is a question of ability and what is best suited to the matter on hand, so that it is not a question of alphabetical order nor numerical order, but it is the first and the last. The word of the Lord Jesus, "Many first shall be last and the last first," @Mark 10: 31, comes out very much in these two.
E.C.L. Do we see quality in the assembly here, and quality in Paul coming out in conflict?
S.McC. That is very important to see. As Paul moves out into the public position he meets this terrible element, "And having passed through the whole island as far as Paphos, they found a certain magician, a false prophet, a Jew, whose name was Bar-jesus, who was with the proconsul Sergius Paulus, an intelligent man. He, having called Barnabas and Saul to him desired to hear the word of God. But Elymas the magician (for so his name is by interpretation) opposed them, seeking to turn away the proconsul from the faith. But Saul, who is also Paul, filled with the Holy Spirit, fixing his eyes upon him said, O full of all deceit and all craft; son of the devil, enemy of all righteousness; wilt
{57}
thou not cease perverting the right paths of the Lord? And now behold the Lord's hand is upon thee, and thou shalt be blind, not seeing the sun for a season. And immediately there fell upon him a mist and darkness; and going about he sought persons who should lead him by the hand. Then the proconsul, seeing what had happened, believed, being amazed at the teaching of the Lord." He had to face the magician -- one who juggled things around and would make you believe that one thing was another thing, and that something was so, that was not so -- a magician. He opposed them, and this is in the dispensation of grace, and it might be well to finish with that solemn word that while it is the dispensation of grace, the government of God goes through, and is *always against evil*, *and promoting what is good*. It is *always* against evil in whatever nation or whatever individual it may be, and the wheels of God's government turn slowly, but surely, and that is a solemn thing to consider.
Kingston, Jamaica.
{58}
SPIRITUAL QUALITY (4)
@Acts 15: 22 -- 28; @Acts 16: 1 -- 5, 14, 15; @Acts 18: 24 -- 28
S.McC. In this section of Acts, chapters 16 to 20, we have the unparalleled energy of Paul, the Holy Spirit acting in him and through him, before us, and it is thought well that we might just briefly look at the passage in chapter 15 before going on to it. The thought of spiritual quality has been before us, and we shall see it greatly augmented in this section, especially from chapters 16 to 21, where we have the unique section that we may call a distinctly Pauline section where there is brought before us the stream of Pauline energy, unsurpassed and unprecedented, and it is a remarkable thing that the section begins with a Cyprian, Barnabas, moving out of the stream, and it ends with a Cyprian moving in the stream -- "a certain Mnason, a Cyprian, an old disciple, with whom we were to lodge," @Acts 21: 16. They were to lodge with him in Jerusalem, showing how remarkable the work of God is in that case. After the dissension between Paul and Barnabas over John Mark, Barnabas recedes into the background, beloved man as he was, and the Spirit of God focuses our attention on Paul, the vessel of unparalleled energy in the Lord's work reaching to European parts, and the work in all its precious quality coming before us in different ones referred to; Timothy, Lydia, Apollos, Aquila and Priscilla, but it was thought well that we should just for a moment look at chapter 15 as to the quality that appears there.
We have been helped in recent times to see the remarkable place this chapter has, and the more you read it and pursue it verse by verse the more you are impressed with the quality that appears in it,
{59}
especially in those who lead as well as in the assembly itself. It is a great matter that there should be spiritual quality in those who lead among the saints, because if there is not spiritual quality in those who lead we may have damaging results and defects among the saints, and issues may be undefined and beclouded, but what shines in chapter 15 in these men who come before us; Paul, Barnabas, Peter and James and others, is the remarkable spiritual quality that marks them, and especially are we to note too in this section the idea of confirmation of the assemblies.
In chapter 14 we have "establishing the souls of the disciples, exhorting them to abide in the faith" (verse 22), and at the end of chapter 15, "confirming the assemblies," and at the beginning of chapter 16 "the assemblies therefore were confirmed," and this is a feature we are to take account of, and especially is it salutary for those who serve the saints in any measure to keep in mind that *the prime object in ministry is to build up*, not to overthrow and divide, but to confirm, and it is a great thing that we should be confirmed in our gatherings, and it is remarkable as Paul's ministry comes into the ascendency in this book that confirmation of the assemblies is stressed. We should look for confirmation on that line but in this section in @Acts 15 where we get "chosen men," and "leading men among the brethren," "our beloved Barnabas and Paul, men who have given up their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ," all that is an intensification of the subject of our enquiry, quality in the assembly and especially in those who give a lead among the brethren. It is important that there should be those who give a lead, and that quality should be in such. It is an important matter that in all the gatherings those who take a leading part should be consistent with the truth, otherwise the truth may be held in disrepute.
{60}
G.S.R. "It has seemed good to the Holy Spirit and to us." Is that a supreme expression of quality in the assembly then?
S.McC. I would say it was. The fact that they linked a divine Person, the Holy Spirit with them in this great matter is stressing quality that is now arrived at in administrative action. Looking over the years, we have to take account of the fact that the gatherings for care often lacked a good deal of quality. But now the Lord is calling attention to the beloved sisters, and has brought them into the matter, this thought of quality is to be intensified, and I do not think we shall find in the gatherings for care the same outbreak of feeling or unrefined expression, perhaps uncouth expressions as may have been in times before.
O.M.R. Verse 6 of chapter 15, "the apostles and elders were gathered together to see about this matter" -- they were those who gave a lead. Is it distinct from verse 22 where it is "the apostles ... and elders, with the whole assembly"?
S.McC. It would look as if, from the way we formerly have taken account of it, without looking into it too specifically that verse 6 implies a different meeting. Notice in verse 4 "and being arrived at Jerusalem they were received by the assembly, and the apostles and elders," and then verse 6 "and the apostles and the elders were gathered together to see about this matter. And much discussion having taken place, Peter standing up," and then verse 12, "and all the multitude kept silence," showing that verse 6 is not a separate meeting as we have been accustomed to think. Verse 6 might appear at the first reading to imply a different meeting, but as we read the context we see it is not a different meeting, because verse 12 says "all the multitude," not the apostles and elders. It is a matter in verse 6 of the apostles and elders taking a lead in the discussion
{61}
which would always be comely in the gatherings for care, that there are those who have certain moral authority. We do not have apostles today nor official elders, but we have what is authoritative in the assembly on the principle of experience and we need to make room for that in our gatherings for care. It does not imply that everybody has something to say and should say something on a matter, but those with experience with God would give a good lead.
O.M.R. I think we have recently been helped on that, and what you say greatly confirms the matter, that there were those who were really giving a lead and seeing about the matter actively and audibly.
S.McC. That is it, while the great governing feature in the chapter is the assembly. Then we find in those who are able to help the saints a remarkable lead. They employ the Scriptures, and have a sound judgment and a sound application of principles based on the word of God, and all this enters into the matter of quality in those gathered for care.
O.E.F. Would you say the word as to the angels of the assemblies in Revelation would be the Spirit appealing to something of quality there?
S.McC. Well, to those in responsibility, the responsible element which is always taken account of however difficult the position may seem to be.
J.R. In regard to confirming the assemblies, is the current ministry as to the Person of Christ and the assembly necessary for that?
S.McC. It is remarkable that this thought of confirming the assemblies comes in in relation to the Pauline ministry. Peter's ministry does not bring it before us, but Paul's ministry does.
A.E.McC. Does quality in these persons stand out in contrast to those mentioned in verse 5, "some of those who were of the sect of the Pharisees who
{62}
believed, rose up from among them, saying that they ought to circumcise them and enjoin them to keep the law of Moses"? Some went out from among them later.
S.McC. That is how the truth stands. As you read Galatians with @Acts 15 it gives us Paul's personal account of the matter and remarkable things come in, and it shows how Paul was not afraid nor stood in awe of those who seemed to have a place. There were those he had regard for who gave him the right hand of fellowship, who were conspicuous as pillars, and I think in a crisis where an issue as to the truth or as to principle is involved, you will always find that what is not in accordance with the truth will show itself, and those that the Lord is approving will be manifest.
J.W. Would we see spiritual quality in Joshua, "Jehovah spoke to Joshua the son of Nun, Moses attendant, saying, Moses my servant is dead; and now rise up, go over this Jordan, thou and all this people into the land which I give unto them," @Joshua 1: 2.
S.McC. Yes, that is so. Moses was a remarkable servant, and Joshua was a remarkable servant. Notice how Jehovah said, "Moses my servant is dead." Attention has been drawn recently to the fact that it is not good to say that a believer or a servant of the Lord has passed away. God does not say that. He does not say Moses has passed away, but "Moses my servant is dead," or as we may say in New Testament language has fallen asleep. Moses was a wonderful servant, and Joshua was a wonderful servant, and it is interesting to see how God comes in to confirm Joshua in regard of carrying on, and God would confirm all the younger brethren as to carrying on. "Be strong and courageous, for thou shalt cause this people to inherit the land which I have sworn unto their fathers to give them," verse 6.
{63}
Think of the brethren in this place, and in other parts of the world who have suffered and stood for the truth, and it is a great thing to be prepared to carry on. It does not matter what is coming up. God will strengthen our hands to carry on, we who are younger.
L.C. The matter of choice comes in here in the beginning of the section, "chosen men from *among* them." In the case of Stephen it was "Look out therefore, brethren, from *among* yourselves seven men, well reported of full of the Holy Spirit and wisdom," @Acts 6: 3. Would that indicate that as we move on in faith we would see quality showing itself among the saints?
S.McC. I am sure that is so. We need to be on the *qui vive* spiritually as to that, to see what is coming in as light. We should look over the ground in our cities and take account of what is there and make room for it, and make the most of it. The Spirit of God had indited this passage, "Then it seemed good to the apostles and to the elders, with the whole assembly, to send chosen men from among them with Paul and Barnabas to Antioch, Judas called Barsabas and Silas, leading men among the brethren." We want to see what quality lies in that, and then we read verse 26, "our beloved Barnabas and Paul, men who have given up their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ." "Given up their lives," the Pauline stream and current as we move in it will bring us face to face with this. Paul says in chapter 20: 24, "But I make no account of my life as dear to myself, so that I finish my course." "Men who have given up their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ." Many of us could perhaps have been far more prosperous in the world had it not been for the call of the testimony, and we have to see what Christ and the assembly involves, and what living in the stream of the Pauline ministry
{64}
involves; it is the principle of giving up our lives in the world.
H.D. Would the way the word 'men' is repeated to call attention to the feature of true manhood?
S.McC. That is the point that the reference in @Acts 15 has in mind, that manhood should come to light. Men suggests those who are fully developed in their faculties and senses, I think we shall see more and more in the light of @Acts 15 quality among the brethren and in the assembly.
J.R. Would it be seen in our care meetings?
S.McC. That is what I am thinking about, that leadership really shines, not just in giving an address or preaching the word of God, but it really shines in matters of conflict, and in the matters of the truth connected with the gathering for care.
D.M.D. These brethren go *with* Paul, "chosen men from among them *with* Paul and Barnabas," and then "Judas called Barsabas, and Silas, leading men among the brethren," as if they were taking on the Pauline ministry and supporting it.
S.McC. That is it, and it is a great thing for all of us because Christendom sets the Pauline ministry aside, and we have to see the proper place it has in relation to Christ and the assembly, because it is remarkable in this chapter, when you look into it at the beginning especially, to see *who* is causing joy among the brethren. Certainly not the Judaistic leaders, they were bringing in distress and burdens more than the brethren could bear, but it says of Paul and Barnabas, "They therefore having been set on their way by the assembly, passed through Phoenicia and Samaria, relating the conversion of those of the nations. And *they* caused great joy to all the brethren." What did they cause great joy by? By relating the work of God, and all that *God* had wrought with them. As someone once said, The Judaising men were *doing all the talking*, they
{65}
were not out in the work with all its diverse sufferings, but were doing all the talking in Jerusalem, but the talkers were met by *the workers* and the position was secured by the workers, those who were working with God. And you will always find that persons who talk too much and do not put their hands to the work do not cause joy among the brethren, but those who put their hands to the work, do.
D.B. Scripture does not mention the names of the Judaising talkers.
S.McC. I think that is significant. All the men who were honoured, their names are given; those who were upsetting the souls of the disciples their names are not given, but we can see how much is made of these men who have given up their lives.
It is always an advantage to have persons of spiritual and moral influence who can give a good lead, and the great thing is to make room for them, I am not speaking of an official lead, any brother or sister claiming to give a lead because, maybe, they have been a certain time breaking bread, but what this chapter is stressing is men who have moral quality. They had apostolic authority, delegated authority, but they had *moral* authority. As James says, "Brethren listen to *me*." Wonderful man James, he was a leader in the assembly at Jerusalem apparently, and he was a remarkable man. What is to be noted in going on to chapter 16 is the unity in the ministry, unity among those in the assembly, and among those who were giving a lead. Notice what James says in verse 13, "Brethren, listen to me; Simon has related how God first visited to take out of the nations a people for his name. And with this *agree* the words of the prophets." He is not looking for something that disagrees. What shines in this chapter is that the brethren are moving in the current of what the Spirit is saying and stressing
{66}
what agrees. "With this *agree* the words of the prophets."
A.E.McC. A legal outlook would restrict. They go back to Moses all the time.
S.McC. That is it, legality is always restrictive, and we want to be saved from it, because the error of legality is worse than the error of the Corinthians. We sometimes think that fornication, and lying and stealing are terrible sins, and by the standards and principles of human and natural propriety we shrink from them; but take a person who is moving on the line of Judaistic principles -- Galatian error is more heinous than Corinthian licentiousness. There is no thought of a holy kiss in Galatians, whereas in the midst of all the worldliness at Corinth Paul brings in a holy kiss. We are oftentimes deceived by pious, godly persons who may really oppose the truth on Judaistic lines, and have a definite judgment of those who have fallen into the sins named and think of them as far below these pious persons opposing the truth, but the sin of the pious person who opposes the truth on Judaistic lines is worse than the Corinthian sin.
It is interesting to see in verse 40, chapter 15, "committed by the brethren to the grace of God," not to the work of God, but to the grace of God. "And he passed through Syria and Cilicia, confirming the assemblies." That was the line Paul was on, and that is the line we ought to be on, confirming the souls of the disciples as it is said earlier.
S.T. So you would say they received the truth with readiness of mind, and searched the Scriptures, they were not criticising.
S.McC. Yes, the first thing about the Bereans, that is often lost sight of is that they received "the word with *all readiness of mind*, daily searching the Scriptures if these things were so," @Acts 17: 11. We often make out that they searched the Scriptures
{67}
before they received the word, but that is not the way it is put. They received it first, and then they searched to get confirmation, I think it is a great thing to have that attitude of mind and heart in receiving the truth as it comes to us. When there is a spirit of readiness to receive the word we always get helped in the truth, but immediately you get a challenge to the truth as it is coming towards us in our minds, it takes all that much longer time to bring us to the truth. The Lord says to the man in @John 9 after he was cast out "Thou, dost thou believe on the Son of God? He answered and said, And who is he, Lord, that I may believe on him," verse 36, I think that is the attitude we need to take on, the Berean attitude.
S.W.R. Would reception of the truth amount to obedience to the truth?
S.McC. Yes, I think so. J.B.S. referred to the importance of being obedient to the truth as it comes towards you, and then confirming the matter from the Scriptures.
Now we come to Timothy, and should dwell on him for a moment. He is a remarkable expression of this thought of quality. Of course, while we have only read these first five verses of chapter 16 by extension as we think of Timothy in other parts we can see what a vessel of quality he was, and yet a young man.
L.C. Does the apostle Paul show his wisdom by the choice of Titus to go with him When conflict was in mind, and the choice of Timothy when it was a question of being an exponent of the truth?
S.McC. I think that is very important. You remember he says to the Corinthians in chapter 4, "For this reason I have sent to you Timotheus, who is my beloved and faithful child in the Lord, who shall put you in mind of my ways as they are in Christ, according as I teach everywhere in every
{68}
assembly," @1 Corinthians 4: 17. It is a wonderful thing to have a young person who is an exponent of the truth, not only in speaking, but a living exponent of the truth and of Paul's ways as they are in Christ. Some of us may imitate the older ones, but Timothy was an exponent of Paul's ways as they *are in Christ*, not as in Adam, not according to the first man, but as in Christ, showing the elevated view Timothy had in regard of Paul.
O.L. Speaking of the value of sisters, it is remarkable that Timothy got his instruction from his mother and grandmother.
S.McC. I think that is good, and it is important to see how the sisters enter into the background of the development of this kind of quality, because it is an important thing in the homes, where the brothers are away so much at work and business, that *mothers* should be true to the ministry and to the truth, true to the light as to Christ and the assembly in holding the children.
A.E.McC. Is it important that Timothy is introduced here as a disciple?
S.McC. I think it is, showing that he was in "the way." It says, "And he came to Derbe and Lystra; and behold" -- notice that word -- "*behold* a certain disciple was there by name Timotheus, son of a Jewish believing woman, but the father a Greek, who had a good testimony of the brethren in Lystra and Iconium." It is very interesting that Timothy is introduced with that word 'behold.' He was *there*, that is, he was in the locality, and then it says he had a good testimony of the brethren. That is a very important matter; he was a disciple, that is he was following up things in a disciplined way, and coming under the view and gaze of heaven, and he had a good testimony of the brethren. That is a word for all of us. It is one thing to go to another place and have a good testimony, but what about the gatherings
{69}
we are in? What about the gatherings we are in in this island? Have we a good testimony of the brethren *there*? That is an important thing.
O.L. He says in the epistle to Timothy, "that I may be filled with joy calling to mind the unfeigned faith which has been in thee"; @1 Timothy 1: 4. So faith enters into the matter.
S.McC. It does. And how many young people are here this morning who have been brought up in relation to that line? Can it be said of every one of them as Paul could say of Timothy "calling to mind the unfeigned faith which as been in thee, which dwelt first in thy grandmother Lois, and in thy mother Eunice, and *I am persuaded that in thee also*." Can it be said that the faith that was in their mothers and grandmothers is in them? Paul said "I am persuaded," it is not a question of what he was told, but what was seen in these beloved sisters was continued in Timothy, and that is a great matter.
E.C.L. Would the word 'him' in verse 3 be important? "*Him* would Paul have go forth with him."
S.McC. It would stress the matter of quality, 'Him,' that kind of person, and I think it is good to say in passing in a simple way that it is important for the younger brethren, brothers and sisters, in view of the regimentation that may take place soon, to look into this matter of having a good report among the brethren. Many of the young brothers were called up in the last war, and some had never committed themselves, and some were not moving very well, and yet they went up and claimed exemption on the grounds of conscience. It is a difficult position; the brethren were called to testify in relation to them, and the young men and women do well to face this matter, and think a long way ahead, and a long way behind too, of what may come up in their lives and having a good report among the
{70}
brethren will be a great support and help in facing circumstances in their lives.
E.C.L. In regard of Samson it says "The Spirit of Jehovah began to move him at Mahaneh-Dan," @Judges 13: 25. His own locality?
S.McC. I think so. He was a remarkable young man and was helped on the line of Nazariteship in connection with the testimony.
L.McF. Timothy is addressed as "O man of God" in the epistle. It seems to be the only time the expression is used in the New Testament.
S.McC. It is very remarkable, and his knowledge of the Scriptures is stressed, from a child he knew the Scriptures. Timothy knew the Scriptures from a child, showing the importance, dear brethren, of the reading of the Scriptures in our houses. Do we all have the reading of the Scriptures in the mornings? Or do we let our children go out as the children of the world go out? How are *our* children going out? Fortified against the subtle attempts of the enemy in the schools? Are they fortified through the knowledge of the Scriptures and the reading of the Scriptures in our households every morning? These things are simple things, but enter into the very life of the testimony in view of its continuance.
G.S.R. Is there something in the expression "him would Paul have *go forth* with him"? I was thinking of the apparent influence and place that Timothy had at Derbe and Lystra, but would this be promotion on the principle of faithfulness, and now he has the great Pauline outlook of suffering and glory.
S.McC. I think that is it. "Him would Paul have go forth with him." A striking contrast to John Mark who went back in the previous chapter, "Paul thought it not well to take with them him who had abandoned them." In chapter 13 it says "John separated from them and returned to Jerusalem."
{71}
It would not look as if there was too much in that, but when you come to chapter 15: 38, it says "him who had *abandoned* them." It is put in a very serious light, not just that he left them, or separated from them, but *abandoned* them; a very strong word.
H.D. Timothy cared with genuine feelings how the saints got on.
S.McC. And how much heaven thinks of these younger ones like Timothy who are praying about the brethren and caring for them. It is on that line that we get advanced in the things of God. Like David who had a secret history and cared for the sheep in regard of the lion and the bear before he slew Goliath.
H.F. Not much is said about Timothy's father naturally, but would we not see that quality depended much on his spiritual father?
S.McC. And we might say that this was a distinct disadvantage to Timothy, and it is remarkable how much *we* will make of disadvantages, and say we have been hindered, but Timothy, despite the disadvantage as it might seem to be, is a disciple, and has a good testimony of the brethren and is going forward. It is interesting what is said in verse 4, "and as they passed through the cities they instructed them to observe the decrees determined on by the apostles and elders who were in Jerusalem." That is a very fine tribute to the line Paul was moving on. He was *promoting unity*, for while they had fought out tremendous issues at the very source and origin of the issue, Jerusalem, he is instructing "them to observe the decrees determined on by the apostles and elders who were in Jerusalem."
S.W.R. Even the circumcision of Timothy was carried out by Paul.
S.McC. It shows the liberty Paul had and what a remarkable man he was. When he went up to
{72}
Jerusalem with Titus he does not circumcise Titus. He was going into the very realm in which these Judaising teachers were entrenched, and he takes with him an uncircumcised person. What could they say? They could say nothing. There was evidence of the work of God in Titus, concrete evidence. There is no issue at stake here and he circumcises Timothy; it is a certain liberty the apostle assumes in the matter.
O.L. Moses was handed back to his mother to train him for the service before him.
S.McC. I think that should bring us to Lydia. God is stressing the place the sisters have, and it is well for them to fill their part in things. Lydia is a wonderful woman, it says of her in verse 14 "And a certain woman, by name Lydia, a seller of purple, of the city of Thyatira, who worshipped God, heard; whose heart the Lord opened to attend to the things spoken by Paul." She worshipped God, a very interesting allusion that to a woman, a sister; you do not often get it in the Scriptures. It says of Hannah in @1 Samuel 2: 1, "Hannah prayed and said." Eli marked her mouth in the first chapter and noticed that she did not speak, but in chapter 2 she says "my *mouth* is opened wide over mine enemies; for I rejoice in thy salvation. There is none holy as Jehovah for there is none beside thee, neither is there any rock like our God." She ascribes greatness to God. But here it says of Lydia that she worshipped God. Where, and how? It is a remarkable tribute that in regard of a sister.
Rem. Timothy's mother is brought forward before his father.
S.McC. It is to specially stress the maternal and sisterly side. Those who follow the Scriptures closely will notice in the book of Leviticus that the mother in different sections is put before the father. Even young people sometimes think they can get an
{73}
advantage from their mothers and not from their fathers, but Leviticus would emphasise the mother first as reverence. There is need for reverence for the mother, she is not somebody we try to get around and do as we like with, but one who is to be feared.
It says in verse 13, "And on the sabbath day we went outside the gate by the river where it was the custom for prayer to be, and we sat down and spoke to the women who had assembled." Now notice this matter in this section of praying and worshipping, @1 Corinthians 11 speaks of a woman praying and prophesying, showing we are to look into these matters, and see the place they have, and how they apply, and that there is room for the activity of sisters on this line, I think this lays the basis for the work at Philippi.
G.O. I was thinking of the mother of Moses, she hid the child when she saw he was a goodly child -- *she* hid him. I was thinking of the activities of the sisters, and how she hid him from the world's influence.
S.McC. That is it, she hid him in the sedge, she did not put him out into the full current of the stream where it was going forward with unabated force, but she hides him in the sedge where the current is broken, and not so strong. That is why there is great concern about sending our children to universities. If they are established in their souls they may come through, but how many have been lost! Education is necessary, of course, but it is a great matter that we do not go beyond what is necessary lest we lose our young people.
E.W. Lydia traded in purple.
S.McC. I do not know that I can say much about that. She had to make a living; we might just be simple about the passage. We have had a good deal said about sisters not working, but we are not to take that to mean that no sister should work, that
{74}
is not the way the truth is presented, for if a sister *has* to work to maintain righteousness, she has to work, and Lydia was what we might call a sales lady, she carried on her business and did it well apparently, because she had a house in which she could care for the apostle, and does, and she wants them to come in and abide with her. She says, "If ye have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my house and abide there." She does not say 'You have got to come and stay with me,' she is not arbitrary, but she says, "If ye have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into *my* house and abide there." Now here is a woman who had to go out to work and to sell to keep herself going. She was a practical woman, and we do not want the idea of super spiritual women, but sisters who can translate the truth into practical results. Lydia was not a super spiritual sister, but an ordinary everyday kind of woman who faced the practical affairs and amenities of life.
E.C.L. Even though she was a busy woman she could find time to think of and attend to the things spoken by Paul.
S.McC. It has often been said that if you want someone to do something for you, ask a busy person. If you ask an indolent person he may not do it at all, but a busy man or woman is a good person to ask to do something for they will always find time to do it. *It is a great matter to be marked by diligence*.
A.E.McC. Lydia would stand out in contrast to the "certain female slave."
S.McC. She does, and she is another person who is apparently working for a living, but what a contrast she is, bringing gain to her masters, but she is the channel for satanic energy to move through, and Paul is not sparing in his remarks in his epistles in regard of such.
J.R. Would Lydia worshipping God suggest that she had a knowledge of God in her soul?
{75}
S.McC. That is important. Worshipping would suggest that. Praying is one thing, but worshipping is another. It is stressing quality in Lydia, that she was not only asking for her needs or for the needs of the testimony, but she has a sense in her soul of the greatness of God, and she is a worshipper of God.
L.C. The Lord Jesus speaks of worship to the woman in @John 4. Does that indicate that this matter was going to concern her, and the women are going to be drawn into this matter of worshipping God?
S.McC. I am sure that is right, and it is remarkable that the very entrance of the truth into Europe should be linked on with a woman who worships God, and I think there is something in that for us today.
S.W.R. Do you think being outside the gate, and by the river side would be two good positions?
S.McC. I think there is something in that. These women were not carrying on gossip or mere worldly conversation as to what was going on within the gates or within the city, but they had the interests of God before them. They were pious women, and Lydia was a hospitable woman. We ought to thank God for the sisters in our localities in whose houses the brethren are ministered to. It is wonderful thing to think of the houses in our cities where the brethren are cared for. There are houses definitely laid out for that and we should thank God for them. You will always find that they will be prospered, they will never be in want.
S.T. Is there something specific in "whose heart the Lord opened to attend to the things spoken by Paul"?
S.McC. I think so. It is the direct operation of the Lord. It shows what a remarkable woman Lydia was, and the Lord had a definite hand in the matter of her heart being opened, not her ear, but
{76}
her *heart*, showing that quality is in mind in this sister, and that is what is coming to light now. There is a good deal we brothers have overlooked in the sisterhood. There is a good deal of quality there, and we need to have our eyes opened to see it.
L.McF. Peter speaks of the hidden man of the heart.
S.McC. Yes. "Whose adorning let it not be that outward one of tressing of hair, and wearing gold, or putting on apparel; but the hidden man of the heart, in the incorruptible ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which in the sight of God is of great price," @1 Peter 3: 3, 4.
Now, our time has gone, but we might look at chapter 18 and see the quality in these persons, Apollos, Aquila and Priscilla. They were a remarkable trio. Apollos is a wonderful man, a man we may well take account of. He is mighty in the Scriptures, though he does not have the knowledge of the way of God accurately. It is important to see that Priscilla is linked on with Aquila in this matter, the oneness of this beloved brother and sister in their links together in the testimony is remarkable. They took him to *them*. It has often been noted the comely way it is done. They did not speak to him in front of everybody, but took him to them.
Kingston, Jamaica.
{77}
SPIRITUAL QUALITY (5)
@Acts 20
S.McC. This chapter is a fitting conclusion to the enquiry we have pursued together in these meetings. It is a very rich and very full chapter, and it gives us a remarkable view of Paul and his great service and especially referring to the subject of love as we have often noted in this chapter. There are a number of things that bear out in the chapter the thought of spiritual quality which we have looked at together, such as the first embrace, then the company that were with Paul, verse 4, the first day of the week, and the breaking of bread, and then the way that Paul descending falls upon Eutychus enfolding him in his arms, and then the remarkable way he goes over things in his words to the elders of Ephesus, and the remarkable feature that he touches upon in his word referring to the assembly in such a unique way, and all the counsel of God, and then referring latterly to the extent of his care for them, and the way he went about in his service in ministering, working with his hands and labouring. All this sets out the idea of quality, and then the finish of the chapter when we get the embrace again when they fell upon the neck of Paul and ardently kissed him; pointing us to the reciprocity of love in this wonderful environment that @Acts 20 brings before us. These thoughts we should keep before us in finishing our enquiry as we look into this chapter 20 together. It is evident that Paul is contemplating the finishing of the apostolic period. There is no such thought as apostolic succession which some claim around us. It is perfectly clear from this chapter that there is no such thought as that, in that Paul appoints his service to no one following him particularly, in fact he leaves
{78}
the brethren in the hands of God. "I commit you to God and to the word of his grace," verse 32. All these things should be kept in mind, so that our period would be particularly in mind by extension. The thought of revival enters into the chapter, and the recovery of Paul's ministry may be set out, so that it is a very full chapter in whatever way we may look at it, whether historically or dispensationally, the chapter is very full in regard of the thought of spiritual quality.
F.W. What is involved in the first embrace?
S.McC. I think it shows us that Paul's ministry, Paul's service and ministry involves this activity of love, and the more we are in touch with Paul and his ministry in this light the more we shall understand this embrace. It says "But after the tumult had ceased, Paul having called the disciples to him and embraced them, went away to go to Macedonia." Paul's commission was not just a mere arbitrary commission to convey certain features of the truth that were in the dispensation that were committed to him, but he is setting out the great feature that enters into the economy, extending from God through Christ and the Spirit and the servants to the saints, the feature of love.
D.M.D. Would the embrace suggest that love would be in circulation?
S.McC. I think it does. The whole chapter would have that in mind, circulation, which is a great thing. The life of the Christian circle as it were lies in relation to the circulation of love. It is all right to speak of the subject of love, but if the thing is not in circulation we know there is not much value attaching to the position. We know what it is in regard of the monetary system, however much wealth there may be if the principle of circulation is interfered with impoverishment sets in, and it is the same in the assembly.
{79}
O.E.F. Do we see love for the brethren here? John says, "We know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the brethren."
S.McC. Well, I am sure he set out love for the brethren in an outstanding way, and in the verse you quote it is one of the things that is a witness to the fact that we have passed from death to life.
H.D. Does the embrace denote Paul's pleasure in them as having taken on the ministry?
S.McC. I think so. What affinity between him and the disciples! Now that is a great thing, and we want to look into it, the feature of affinity between us and the vessel of the ministry, because it is not a cold academic kind of thing we have in the assembly. There is to be real spiritual affinity between the minister and those ministered to, and I think that is what is set out in this matter of Paul here and the disciples.
J.R. Would the opposition and trial connected with the testimony endear us to one another?
S.McC. That is what I thought; especially are we to note "after the tumult had ceased." There is a circle into which we can repair and in which we can enjoy the peculiar blessedness that flows from these links of affinity between the vessel of the testimony and those that are with him in the testimony. It is one thing to assent to the ministry and to abstractly accept it, but it is another thing that there should be spiritual affinity With us in regard of the minister and the ministry.
D.B. The school of Tyrannus preceded this. There is no thought of the embrace in the school of Tyrannus, but the opposite to that. Does that necessarily precede this?
S.McC. That is very interesting because there are different aspects and views of the position, and while we have not had time to go into chapter 19, undoubtedly the school of Tyrannus fits in in a distinct way
{80}
with the subject of our enquiry, quality, because we know that in education, in school, things are pursued in an orderly way, not in a haphazard kind of way, but in an orderly definite and precise way, and I think it precedes what we have in this chapter. It kind of underlies what comes to light in relation to Ephesus.
G.S.R. We might say we have come to the crest of the highway, and for a time the idea of suffering is left aside and the saints are in the enjoyment of love and life.
S.McC. So that there is a certain environment into which we can repair as @Acts 20 shows, and we are here in the presence of the crown of Paul's service and ministry, especially having the Ephesian position in mind, having declared unto them all the counsel of God.
H.F. In verse 4 we get the representatives of different localities coming forward, and the distinctive feature of quality seen and the principle of mutuality.
S.McC. That is very interesting, for in this section, verses 3 and 4, despite Paul's apostolic authority and the weight he carried in the light of his apostolic commission he entered into matters with others, as it says, "and having passed through those parts, and having exhorted them with much discourse, he came to Greece. And having spent three months there, a treacherous plot against him having been set on foot by the Jews, as he was going to sail to Syria, the resolution was adopted of returning through Macedonia. And there accompanied him as far as Asia, Sopater, son of Pyrrhus, a Berean; and of Thessalonians, Aristarchus and Secundus, and Gaius and Timotheus of Derbe, and of Asia Tychicus and Trophimus." Notice how much Macedonia is coming into this section. *Macedonia referring to a choice part where Paul's ministry had borne much fruit*, and he always seemed to have special delight in referring
{81}
to Macedonia, and here it appears in the opening of this chapter. It seems to represent a very fruitful area in regard to the ministry.
L.C. Would you say something in regard to the expression "the resolution was adopted." On their initial visit to Macedonia in the 16th chapter it says "we sought to go forth to Macedonia, *concluding that* the Lord had called us to announce to them the glad tidings."
S.McC. It is a very interesting thing how both these thoughts are linked with Macedonia. Paul said in @1 Corinthians 16, "I will come to you when I shall have gone through Macedonia; for I do go through Macedonia," verse 5. Why does he say that? It shows how much Macedonia was on his mind, and you remember how later in the second letter to the Corinthians he says in chapter 9: 2, "For I know your readiness, which I boast of as respects to you Macedonians," He says in chapter 8, "But we make known to you, brethren, the grace of God bestowed in the assemblies of Macedonia; that in a great trial of affliction the abundance of their joy and their deep poverty has abounded to the riches of their free-hearted liberality." As if there is a kind of fluidity linked with Macedonia, and their movements towards it in contrast to the rigidity that would result from fleshly officialism. I think the concluding and the resolution being adopted suggest that side of things.
L.L.C. The thought of brethren seems to appear quite a lot in relation to those down in Macedonia. At Philippi when Paul left the prison with Silas they went to Lydia. When he came to Thessalonica "the *brethren* immediately sent away, in the night Paul and Silas to Berea." And at Berea "the *brethren* sent away Paul to go as to the sea." Where did they come from?
S.McC. It is an interesting enquiry, the number
{82}
of them here referred to from different parts, showing what a rich field it is in which God is operating. While we may think the territory may seem difficult at a certain time, it is quite apparent that it is yielding fruit as the different references made to the brethren indicate, and in this portion we have "Sopater son of Pyrrhus a Berean; and of Thessalonians Aristarchus and Secundus, and Gains and Timotheus of Derbe, and of Asia, Tychicus and Trophimus." The field is yielding its quota. Macedonia comes into view both in the personnel who are referred to as well as in the reference to it geographically, and I think it points to a certain kind of fluid condition of things particularly linked with Macedonia, and where love is circulating as it is in this section you will always find things more fluid amongst the brethren.
L.L.C. The Thessalonians were taught of God to love one another.
S.McC. That is a remarkable statement in regard of them.
S.S. In chapter 16 the man of Macedonia says "Pass over into Macedonia and help us," and "immediately" they sought to go. Where there is real need we can count on divine Persons to come in.
S.McC. I think that is right, and Macedonia, as we have said seems to represent a certain choice area where the brethren were very poor, but where they were so affected by the ministry and by the service of the apostle among them that we have definite results as is indicated in the second epistle to the Corinthians, their free-hearted liberality could be spoken of as *abounding* in the presence of their deep poverty. That is a word for *us* in regard of the collections in our gatherings, showing that where the truth really is having its way, and where there is affinity with Paul you will find that the brethren give well, and there is certainly more and more room for giving in the collections in the gatherings, I am
{83}
referring to that generally. "In the abundance of their joy and their deep poverty has abounded to the riches of their free hearted liberality." The term seems paradoxical, the one seems to contradict the other -- deep poverty, and riches, but there it is, and I think no doubt the way Paul brings the Macedonians into the 8th, 9th and 10th chapters of 2 Corinthians would bolster the position in regard of giving, for they must have been remarkable brethren in relation to giving, and it is a great thing that there should be right consideration for this matter, because if they were in deep poverty they must have had to budget and look into matters, and have the wherewithal to meet it as need arose, and I think that is what we need help on everywhere.
S.W.R. James tells us, "Has not God chosen the poor as to the world, rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom," @James 2: 5.
S.McC. Yes, that is the position publicly as it stands. God has not chosen the rich but the poor; rich in faith would be that we are in the light of all the thoughts of God.
A.E.McC. The fact that the Macedonians first gave themselves to the Lord would enter into this matter.
S.McC. Very good, I think that lies at the root of such giving, because if we have not first given ourselves to the Lord it will be very difficult for us to put our hands deep into our pockets in regard of giving. When we first give ourselves to the Lord giving becomes much easier. It is when we do not give ourselves to the Lord that the giving is harder.
S.W.R. Does lordship have to do with this? "The *Lord* hath need of him."
S.McC. Yes, the Lord has need of things in the testimony, and this matter of love in circulation and especially the allusion to Macedonia would point
{84}
particularly to the kind of environment in which love seems to be particularly free and fluid.
A.E.McC. Would the word 'exhorted' apply to that in verse 2?
S.McC. It would indeed. "And having passed through those parts and having exhorted them with much discourse he came to Greece." There seemed to have been a particular right of way in Macedonia for Paul's ministry because of the way he refers to it in 2 Corinthians and also in 1 Corinthians -- for I *do* go through Macedonia, which would suggest there was a right of way for the ministry there, so it says, "having exhorted them with much discourse he came to Greece."
E.W. Did he have Europe in mind in referring to Macedonia?
S.McC. Well, Macedonia would be linked with it, I suppose, and that is what I am referring to in regard of the field, that there is a certain area in mind which by extension comes over to Great Britain and the Western world, and these parts, but Macedonia is at the very foothills of that great position, and the truth particularly develops and prospers in it. You remember in @Matthew 13 the Lord speaks of "that field," verse 44.
F.H. In the previous chapter we have "Gaius and Aristarchus, Macedonians, fellow travellers of Paul." Would that bring in the idea of affinity and preparedness to go the whole way?
S.McC. That is good and should help us into the matter of going the whole way. They were fellow travellers *of* Paul, not *with* Paul, the *of* stressing affinity between them. Aristarchus is a remarkable person, he is the only person mentioned by name in chapter 27, "Aristarchus, a Macedonian of Thessalonica being with us," verse 2. Notice the stress on Macedonian here -- a *Macedonian* of Thessalonica, and he goes all the way in the book of the Acts, and we
{85}
want every one of us, and especially the younger men and women to go all the way.
A.E.McC. These persons in verse 5 were preparing the way for Paul's ministry. "These going before waited for us in Troas."
S.McC. I think that is right. Notice the constant allusion to periods of time in this section, and I think the "days of unleavened bread" bear on the position too, because the first man would undoubtedly be disallowed and room made for the kind of man seen in Jesus who gives us the true thought of unleavened bread. And then the choice feature of the first day of the week comes into view. "And the first day of the week, we being assembled to break bread" -- all this flowing out of the active state of love as contemplated in the chapter. The assemblings in this chapter are to be viewed in relation to the active state of love among the brethren.
H.F. Would it correspond with @John 20, the first day of the week.
S.McC. That specially fits in with the side of the truth in this chapter where the crown of the apostle's ministry is in mind. The Lord's day fits in more with the dominical side bearing on the testimony in the scene around us, but the first day of the week points more to the inward, spiritual, and eternal side of things, the doorway into it.
S.T. In the first chapter it is said Jesus "being assembled with them" and here "we being assembled." Would you help as to that?
S.McC. It is interesting to notice the word 'assembled' is used, a very dignified word. The Lord has been helping us as to the use of right words in recent times, so that we do not refer to 'subdivisions,' which word detracts from the great idea of the assembly in a city, and this word 'assembled' has a very distinctive place. It is a dignified word
{86}
particularly fitting in with this section. "We being assembled to break bread."
Now we must go on to Eutychus; we must try to cover the chapter as well as we can. It is interesting to see that in the matter of the circulation of love and quality in which it is viewed in this chapter that persons like Eutychus are taken care of. They are not left to die or to perish altogether. There is the descending with Paul and the enfolding of Eutychus in his arms having the sense that his life was in him. I think that is a wonderful reference to the greatness of Paul that behind his apostolic commission and all his apostolic authority he is a model for us in the way of circulatory love, in the way he can affect the brethren and affect those who do not have much interest in the truth, and how he is prepared to help in view of full recovery.
F.H. Would there be a certain test in the upper room in this setting?
S.McC. I think there is. We are tested as to what we do in these circumstances and it is not a question of arbitrarily going forward. Paul might have said 'We have come here to break bread and are going forward despite what has happened'; but no, the position is held up to make way for what love can do, because as Proverbs says, "Better is a meal of herbs where love is, than a fatted ox and hatred therewith," @Proverbs 15: 17. We all thank God for the love that there is circulating, and for being in the place where it is circulating, especially as it is circulating here. The enfolding I think points to the embrace of love in this particular matter.
A.E.McC. The light of the position alone was not sufficient. Paul was the only one who could meet the situation.
S.McC. It would seem like that, and it is important to see the lead that Paul gives, and especially do our young people need care; we specially need to help
{87}
them in regard of this position. The ministry is so great at the moment, we are reaching the crown of the church revival of things in the dispensation, and our young people are not just posts and pillars of stone; they are persons with souls and with feeling, and they need to feel the circulation of love in order that they may be carried into the channel and stream in which these wondrous thoughts are flowing that come before us in this chapter.
G.S.R. Would it link on with the word in @Ephesians 4: 13, "until we all arrive at the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God at the full-grown man, at the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ"?
S.McC. Very good, as if there is consideration for every one, and we should be concerned as to every one in regard of the matter. They were not going on without Eutychus. The greatness of Paul shines in this matter, because he was a great man, one of the greatest men outside of Christ in relation to the ministry, yet he does not arbitrarily go forward, but holds the whole position up that Eutychus might be brought back into the circulation of love.
S.S. Someone has said the old and the young were going on together, God wants the experience of the old and the freshness and energy of the young.
S.McC. I think so, and in the meetings in London in 1949 the expression was made which was very interesting, that unity body-wise makes way for union. There is not much use of talking about the exalted privileges of union with Christ in heaven if there is not unity body-wise, and I think we have now in this section a suggestion in an abstruse way of the body and the idea of circulation in it, because Eutychus was a definite part of the whole matter and Paul sees what is necessary, that he should be brought back into the flow and circulation of love, and we want our young brothers and sisters to get
{88}
the impression of this wonderful environment and circle they are in where love is free to flow and they are wanted in this circle.
D.B. Is the apostle's spirit here like that of the Lord in @Luke 15 leaving the ninety and nine and going after the one sheep that was lost?
S.McC. I think so. It is the way that love would take to secure what is out of the way; not just brush it aside and say we will go on without him, but we want to think of our young people more and more, and they need to feel the circulation of love, that it is not a question of mere arbitrary light we are going on with, but Eutychus is made to feel the enfolding of Paul. "Paul descending fell upon him and enfolding him in his arms, said, Be not troubled, for his life is in him." That is there is something to work on. Do not let us write off our young people too quickly, let us take a good look -- his life is in him; there is something to work on, and let the embrace come into operation.
A.E.McC. Love would find out what was there and would link on with it, however small it was.
S.McC. That is it. Paul works on that. We might find a lot we can work against, but let us hold them in this vital environment where love in its choice quality is circulating. The Lord Jesus stressed the fatherly side. He was a father to them, and Paul, ere he leaves, stresses the fatherly side in his actions and movements. That is what is needed in our gatherings, not an arbitrary brushing aside of anyone, but bringing them into the warmth of love's circulation, and its flow. So he is now coming into this realm constitutionally. He has not been in it constitutionally before, he had been hearing wonderful things coming out, and had been listening to them, but *was not constitutionally* in them, and so he falls asleep and falls down, but now the thought of food
{89}
implies that he is going to be secured not just physically, but constitutionally.
C.W. Is the quality you are speaking of seen supremely in Paul as he shows skill in discoursing in the upper room, and when it comes to Eutychus he embraces him showing the versatility of knowing what to do in a crisis?
S.McC. I think that is right. You find that the greater a man is spiritually the more fluid he is. We have often noticed that with beloved Mr. Taylor that things that would cause many of us a lot of disturbance cause no disturbance with him. The greater we are spiritually the more we can meet exigencies as they arise. Paul was able to turn from the discourse to meet it -- not with another discourse now. Here are some of our young people and we all know that they have to go through certain experiences in their souls, and they have to find their assembly feet as it were, and we have to remember that we are not dealing with stones, we are not dealing with just wood, but we are dealing with persons who have souls, and therefore there is need not only for mere unfolding of light. You may give them a book of ministry and say read it, it will help you, and we *do* want to get them in touch with the ministry, but more is needed than that. This enfolding is needed to help them in this wonderful environment that so suggests our own time when the crown of things is arrived at. Then this matter of Eutychus is not going to lower the level. There is power to resume the elevated position. Paul goes up to the upper room.
E.W. The matter before Paul was deferred for a while, and the Holy Spirit records that he descended, not condescended.
S.McC. Very interesting that. He descended. He is the great minister as to Christ and the assembly and the great outstanding feature of the mediatorial
{90}
position is the descent of Christ, and the assembly is formed in accord with the mediatorial position, so that she descends in @Revelation 21, and Paul, the great minister, is setting out the idea here, he descends. It is the activity of love in full keeping with the mediatorial actings in the economy of grace.
E.C.L. "And they brought away the boy alive and were no little comforted." They took on now the care that would value this young man.
S.McC. I think that verse is very important. It says "they brought away the boy alive and were no little comforted." We are inclined to speak of Eutychus as if he does not mean much, but apparently the brethren thought a lot of Eutychus despite the fact that he had fallen from the third story, and they were no little comforted. They do not say, 'Oh, well, here is Eutychus back again,' but their hearts were warmed and cheered by what had taken place, and now he would find a constitutional living part in this environment and that is what we want all our young people to feel and find.
S.T. "By this shall all know that ye are disciples of mine, if ye have love amongst yourselves," @John 13: 35. Would that help?
S.McC. Yes, the Lord is indicating the great importance of love and its bearing on the testimony, "By this shall all know that ye are disciples of mine, if ye have love amongst yourselves."
H.F. This is associated with daybreak. Would you say something about that?
S.McC. I think that fits into our day; the day-breaking is almost upon us. We are about to enter the glory and the final position, we are just about to enter finality with Christ in glory. The whole controlling feature of the position is Paul. Everything stands related to Paul and is regulated by Paul. His ministry is the governing light in the chapter.
E.C.L. Eutychus being back we now have conversational
{91}
ministry. Would recovery promote liberty, for mutual conversation?
S.McC. I think so, and dispensationally it alludes to the recovery in our time. There has been recovery to that position as indicated in verse 11, and the conversational side is a remarkable part of these closing days; reading meetings such as these.
O.M.R. Would you say something on verse 9, "Paul discoursed very much at length," and verse 11, "having long spoken." Have you any thought as to the extensiveness and the fulness of the ministry?
S.McC. I think it has to be viewed in the light of the dispensation and the recovery to what governs everything in these last days -- that is Paul's ministry which gives us the Lord's supper and its proper assembly setting, and all that is related to it. It seems as if Paul having long spoken would mean dispensationally that the whole position latterly is covered by the light of Paul's ministry.
L.C. Does this whole chapter suggest in the mention of the embrace and the enfolding in connection with this ministry what is to be introduced in the power of love and warmth and practical encirclement?
S.McC. That is the point. I think we might well say and speak humbly about the position that at the present time love is circulating in an unusual and remarkable way, in a way that it has never done before. In different ways it could be referred to, but the brethren throughout the assembly have generally experienced the circulation of love in a remarkable way in this closing part of the dispensation.
I think now as we go on to Paul's remarks to the elders they would help us to see what kind of a person Paul was, what lay behind his ministry and his service, as he says, "Ye know *how* I was with you all the time from the first day that I arrived in Asia,
{92}
serving the Lord with all lowliness and tears, and temptations, which happened to me through the plots of the Jews; *how* I held back nothing of what is profitable, so as not to announce it to you, and to teach you publicly and in *every house*." A remarkable expression. We get the breathings here of a man who is finishing his service, and what is occupying him is not exactly the great prowess in his service in the previous chapters, but his tender links with them, and his regard for the truth, and his desires that the saints should come into the fulness of the truth.
H.D. He refers to himself not as an apostle but as a bondman. Would you say something about that?
S.McC. You are referring to the note, "serving as a bondman." That is an interesting reference, especially when we think of @Exodus 21. We might write all over this as in the spirit of Christ Paul would say "I love my master, my wife and my children, I will not go free," @Exodus 21: 5. That is he was not in the testimony one week and out of it another week. He was not all worked up and bright and caring for the saints one week, and not bothering about them another week, but he was in it *as a bondman*, entirely and unselfishly committed in love's service *all the time*; and that is one thing we want to emulate in Paul. "Remember your leaders who have spoken to you the word of God; and considering the issue of their conversation, imitate their faith," @Hebrews 13: 7. We have examples in that way put before us.
G.O. Paul says to Timothy, "Thou therefore, my child be strong in the grace which is in Christ Jesus," @2 Timothy 2: 1.
S.McC. I have no doubt Paul was referring Timothy back to the scope of the truth as he had heard it from Paul.
{93}
D.M.D. In verse 31 he says "Wherefore watch, remembering that for three years, night and day, I ceased not admonishing *each one* of you with tears." Would the bondmanship and feelings of the apostle be seen in this?
S.McC. I think it should affect our hearts as to how we view the saints as to whether we view them in the light of the love of Christ for them because that is what Paul did. He thought of the assembly in all his movements, and it did not matter what he came across among the brethren he held them in the light of the assembly and served them in the greatness of that love that was so supremely expressed in Him whose the assembly is, our Lord Jesus Christ. We are tested. It is one thing to be asked to do certain things, to take on certain services, however small, but *what about bondmanship and love for the brethren in this light* as Paul was giving to these elders a model in himself? I think it is to show what eldership involves. In calling the elders over he is trying to inculcate into their minds what eldership will involve. It is not a matter of an official position but of unselfish care for the saints in tears, and sufferings, and temptations. But whatever it may be, whether our service is valued or not, we are to hold the saints in the light of the choice features of quality in which they are regarded here. Shepherd the assembly of God.
C.W. This chapter covers the great scope of the service of the apostle. There is the public side which would be linked on with the meeting rooms, and then there is "in every house," and then here "admonishing each one of you with tears."
S.McC. A beautiful setting altogether. He was a man of like passions as ourselves, and is a model. We are to think of Paul. Of course he came short of Christ, Christ is unique in relation to sufferings and feelings, but Paul comes very near to Christ in this
{94}
matter, and we are to take note of all these things and see how *we* measure up in regard of them.
L.C. Is it not most important to take account of quality in detail? We have in this chapter three years, three months, seven days, five days, and a single day. Would it be quality brought down in concentrated form?
S.McC. Very interesting. The divisions of time are a study in themselves in this chapter, and it is remarkable how things are concentrated. Notice how he says in verse 31, "I ceased not admonishing each one of you with tears"; *each one* of you. What a great person Paul was. It is the concentration of love in that way on each one.
H.F. Do you think the prophetic touch comes in in verse 29, "I know this that there will come in amongst you after my departure grievous wolves, not sparing the flock"?
S.McC. I think so. Now as we go on to verse 34 we have "Yourselves know that these hands have ministered to my wants, and to those who were with me, I have shewed you all things, that thus labouring, we ought to come in aid of the weak, and to remember the word of the Lord Jesus, that he himself said, It is more blessed to give than to receive." In the presence of the crown of things in regard of his ministry he is thinking about the weak and about others, and how he can give to others. What an example, what a contrast to the hierarchy around us and all those around us in the official body of Christendom. Think of the feelings the chapter is charged with! Think of the love the chapter is charged with in a man of like passions as ourselves setting out by example the way to serve the saints. It is a great matter to keep from writing people off too quickly. We want to carry them in the grace of the dispensation, especially the younger ones if by any means we can help them.
{95}
G.S.R. There are two thoughts that seem to stress the idea of love, Paul's face and Paul's neck. I was thinking as you were speaking about the circulation of love of the effect on Paul's countenance reflecting all he spoke *of*, and the recollection with the brethren of all his service and devotedness as they fell upon his neck and kissed him.
S.McC. Very interesting. There might be a suggestion in the neck of the resoluteness of bondmanship. The neck always refers to resoluteness in the Scriptures, and think of what resoluteness was there in Paul's service in bondmanship. He served all the brethren alike, and it is a great thing that we should, without preference or predilection in the matter, serve all the saints.
J.R. Marks of suffering would be in his face as well as marks of love.
S.McC. I am sure there would be that, and the way he speaks here both in regard of his sufferings and in regard of his service brings him very near to Christ, his Master, and *we* want to be like Christ on this line, and especially to be free from what is official. The less we have spiritually the more official we have to be, we have to make up for it officially; the more we have spiritually the less we shall be official, and that is what shines in Paul, the great lack of what is official in him. While he did occupy, and rightly so, an official position, what shines here is practical Christianity in the man. We all want to be practical persons, not to dream and have super-spiritual ideas that never work out practically. The more you are with God and in the crown of things, and in the full joy of Ephesian light, the more practical you will be in regard of your wife, and your children, and the local brethren.
S.W. Would the brethren here take on the features of Paul? "They all wept sore; and falling upon the neck of Paul they ardently kissed him."
{96}
S.McC. That is right, that is how example works in the chapter. If you get a person who is a model like Paul in that way, it is wonderful how infectious it is, and how persons begin to take on things and features as they see them set out in a living exponent of the truth.
O.M.R. So it would be a spontaneous response to what we get in verse 1, "Paul having called the disciples to him and embraced them," and in verse 10, "enfolding him in his arms."
S.McC. I think so.
Kingston, Jamaica.
{97}
SPIRITUAL QUALITY (6)
@Luke 1: 1 -- 80
S.McC. We were pursuing an enquiry elsewhere as to quality in persons in the Acts and it occurred to me that this afternoon we might pursue that further, with the service of God in mind in a general way, in Luke's gospel. The chapter that we have read is rather lengthy but it was suggested that we should read the whole chapter to get the full bearing of the scripture, on the subject of our enquiry. It will be obvious that in the time we have, we cannot go into all the details of the chapter, but it is in mind to keep before us certain persons as setting out certain positive qualities, such as John the baptist, Mary and Elizabeth and finally Zacharias. It is important that we should see what the Lord is aiming at in the present time in view of the completing of the dispensation, that He has quality in the saints in mind. The assembly is a great vessel, a vessel of great quality, being heavenly in origin and heavenly in destiny, and I think we can all see, if we look into the ministry, that the Lord is aiming at bringing us in our souls more and more into the substantial good of the greatness of the truth as to Christ and the assembly that has been brought so much before us. No doubt the emphasis recently on the truth as to the Spirit and as to the sisters is all bearing upon this matter of quality in the vessel that is to share with Christ in administration in the day of glory in the world to come. Luke has the service of God in mind in a special way. When we refer to the service of God we are not thinking exclusively of Lord's day morning, but we are thinking of the whole position relating to it, such as we are in this afternoon. The service of God is in mind in relation to our subject,
{98}
and Luke stresses the moral side, and the priestly side, and I think it is a great thing, dear brethren, that that should always be strengthened with us. We should see that the Lord has constantly in mind to strengthen the moral element in our souls, because the enemy has a great object of attack in any part of the world where the saints may be marked by particular and peculiar interest in the truth, and there is no doubt that he seeks, and will seek, to assail it, especially on moral lines, if by any means he can entrench himself on the position in any of our souls, to rob us of joy and buoyancy in the service of God, because that is a distinct feature of spiritual quality in Luke's gospel, the feature of joy and buoyancy, running through from beginning to end. I mention all this to indicate the general lines upon which our enquiry may proceed, but of course as we feel our way no doubt our enquiry will be enlarged in regard to other features that may be indicated, as in a subject, dependent way we pursue the enquiry together.
John is the first personality that we should think of, as representing according to Luke how the moral line is intensified and has in mind to be strengthened, as is said of him in verse 14, "He shall be to thee joy and rejoicing, and many shall rejoice at his birth. For he shall be great before the Lord, and he shall drink no wine nor strong drink; and he shall be filled with the Holy Spirit, even from his mother's womb. And many of the sons of Israel shall he turn to the Lord their God. And *he* shall go before him in the spirit and power of Elias, to turn hearts of fathers to children, and disobedient ones to the thoughts of just men, to make ready for the Lord a prepared people," verse 14 -- 17. Now this is unique to Luke's gospel, we do not have it with the other evangelists, Matthew or Mark or John, so there must be some special intent why it appears in Luke's gospel.
{99}
Another thing that might be just noted in passing is that Luke has in mind, as one who companied with Paul, the economy of local assemblies and a confirming of the truth relating thereto, especially in the personnel that form the local gatherings.
E.L.E. Would you think that we see the feature of buoyancy and joy marking John the baptist before he was born? "He leaped in the womb."
S.McC. A very interesting thing, showing how early the feature of buoyancy is seen with him, and with his mother, Elizabeth, a very choice vessel in the section that we are referring to, based upon the principle of Nazariteship.
M.S.S. Would you link that too with verse 15, "He shall be filled with the Holy Spirit, even from his mother's womb," the Spirit in that way giving us the thought of joy and what it means in these verses referred to?
S.McC. I am sure that is right and that enters into our enquiry, among the many other things. On the line of quality, especially in relation to the moral side bearing on the truth, it is important that we should learn to make room for the Spirit, and to use the Spirit as in the line of the testimony.
L.A.C. We notice that the expression "being filled with the Holy Spirit" occurs three times in the chapter. First in connection with the child, then in connection with the woman, and finally in connection with the man.
S.McC. That is a very interesting thing because the child, the woman and the man, represent the component parts of the assembly. They set out the elements that compose the assembly, as we know. We have it referred to elsewhere in the gospel as the moral side of exercise is intensified, as in @Luke 8, for instance, the man, the woman and the child. It is important to see that Luke has in mind to focus our attention, not on *one* component part, but on
{100}
the *three* component parts of the gatherings of local assemblies -- the man, the woman and the child. Because if the children are wrong constitutionally, there will be an element of defection entering into the line of the testimony as it proceeds. I am thinking of the wine and strong drink which has a constitutional bearing -- our children kept free from the elements and principles of the world, as held on the line of devotedness to God and His interests.
A.T. There is joy and buoyancy in response to the sovereignty of God?
S.McC. Well, I would say that that is one feature of the truth and an important one, but another important feature that goes along with that is the moral side in our souls. That is, if the moral side is not clear, the element of joy and rejoicing, buoyancy, will necessarily be affected. Luke has that in mind in the priestly way he writes his gospel.
H.O.E. It is noticeable that in this gospel we get the Lord Jesus saying, while yet a Child, "Did ye not know that I ought to be occupied in my Father's business?" chapter 2: 49.
S.McC. Very good, and I think it fits into our subject very well, because it is the only gospel that gives us that statement. We are to note with the evangelists, the distinctive features that appear in each, and the Lord in saying that at the age of twelve, becomes a great example in regard to the element that we have been referring to.
R.S. Would you say that all these references to "child" would suggest that we are to take up these things at the earliest possible time and not to put them off to a later date?
S.McC. I think that is important, that they should have it in mind from the earliest, and *we* should have it in mind. Of course the children are natural, new birth has to take place, they have to take their own stand eventually in confession of the Lord, but we
{101}
should have it in mind from the outset in their training as part of the testimony, because our children are different, "else were your children, unclean, but now are they holy," Paul says, referring to them positionally.
C.B. Do you mean that the environment should be conducive to the Spirit to operate, to produce what we have before us?
S.McC. Exactly, that is what is in mind, and now that you have mentioned that word, it is important to see this whole environment in @Luke 1, that is why we read the whole chapter, to get some little idea of the environment that the truth appeared in. Because we have the incoming of Christ, the incarnation, before us in this chapter, and the whole environment is divinely sterilised in view of the quality that is to appear in "the Holy Thing" which is to be born -- the stress is on the quality, "the Holy Thing."
E.L.E. That itself suggests what is priestly "the Holy Thing."
S.McC. Exactly, and the need for the exclusion of every and any extraneous element that would interfere with this kind of quality and these kind of conditions.
N.M. "Joy in heaven over one sinner, that repenteth." Would buoyancy be in receiving the Spirit?
S.McC. Well, joy is a great feature of @Luke 15, both in regard to the shepherd, and in regard to the woman, and in regard to the father, the thought of buoyancy is in mind all the way through in that section, I think it is especially helpful to see in this immediate part that we are considering, how it is linked with this kind of service and ministry that speaks of the spirit and power of Elias. We might think that *Elisha* would bring in the elements of joy and rejoicing and buoyancy, but it is the spirit and power of Elijah before us here: the powerful authoritative
{102}
ministry of one who sought to recover the people to the rights of God.
M.S.S. Is that very encouraging too as relating to the conditions prevailing publicly?
S.McC. That is what I thought, especially as finding a certain analogy in our time. It is a great thing to take account of the spirit and power of Elijah, because it represents in John the baptist the element of mystery. The Lord said in Matthew, chapter 11: 14, "If ye will receive it, *this* is Elias," there is an element of mystery about John the baptist that we have to understand and we are to see the bearing of it in principle in our time and in the teaching.
C.B. You mean to us it would be the *spirit* of Elias? Not him personally now but the *spirit* of Elias?
S.McC. That is it, the spirit and power of Elias. Another interesting thing in Luke's gospel is to follow through the idea of "power" in the gospel. It is a remarkable thing that the gospel that gives us the Lord Jesus as touching humanity at its lowest point in the babe in the manger, begins with the thought of power and ends with the thought of power.
V.B. Would you say that what follows in that verse (17) "to turn hearts of fathers to children, and disobedient ones to the thoughts of just men," would bear out what you say as regards power?
S.McC. I thought so, it is the effective power of the ministry. John the baptist belonged to another dispensation, but we are thinking of the principle of ministry of this character that makes way for the Lord's coming in, as that is our great expectation, we are being prepared as a people waiting for the Lord to come in.
C.Bl. In that way we would be making room for the Spirit amongst us, would you say?
{103}
S.McC. Well, it is a great matter that the Spirit should be made room for, made room for in us individually as well as in the gatherings. Luke is emphasising persons in whom the Spirit has a *right-of-way*, not just that He is there but that He has a right-of-way. I suppose that most here have the Spirit, but has the Spirit got a right-of-way with us? It is important in view of spiritual quality being arrived at.
A.K.H. Would you say a little more as to the analogy you referred to in connection with Elijah's day and our own?
S.McC. I was thinking especially of "the thoughts of just men, to make ready for the Lord a prepared people." John's ministry seems to be paving the way for the incoming of Christ. And of course *all* ministry that comes from heaven *will* make way for Christ. If in ministry way is not made for Christ there is a defect in it. So there is a certain analogy in that, and of course, Elijah's ministry had to do with apostate times.
E.L.E. Luke is the only one who gives us the names of all those political authorities, Philip the tetrarch, Lysanias, and Herod, he gives them all in connection with the birth. What do you think of that?
S.McC. Well, I think it is very interesting to notice what you now refer to. He first refers to the days of Herod, those who were more local to Judaea and the territory around there, but then in the second chapter he extends farther abroad to Caesar Augustus, and then in the third chapter he opens up the diversified forms of government both in districts and otherwise. I think it is to help us to see that whatever form the government might take the line of quality in the testimony is going through, and I think it helps us at the present time in view of the current situation that we have to do with, to see that whatever may be transpiring in the diversified forms of government,
{104}
that this is going on, we may say, in mystery alongside of it.
R.S. Have you in mind that even in countries and places where governments are not in keeping with the mind of God, for all that the testimony *must* go through, inasmuch as He has promised to Philadelphia an open door to the overcomer till He comes?
S.McC. Oh, I think so, I think it is a great comfort to take account of the fact that God is thinking of the assembly. He is thinking of the testimony. However weak some may think the western nations are, God has got His eye on the assembly in that position, and He will keep His hand over matters definitely until the church is translated.
A.T. Does the spirit and power of Elias stand for recovery?
S.McC. Exactly, as it says, "to turn hearts of fathers to children, and disobedient ones to the thoughts of just men, to make ready for the Lord a prepared people." It is a great thing that we should have the thoughts of "just men," men that are right with God, right before God, *just* men. It is stressing the moral side.
W.T. Do you not think that the conversation on the hill country was a very pleasant one, Elizabeth going up to visit Mary would call for much agility?
S.McC. It would. So it is a great matter that in our contacts and conversation, the heavenly side, the elevated side, should be maintained. The Lord is aiming constantly to keep us on the heavenly line, elevated above all that is connected with this poor world.
H.O.E. Is that what you meant by using the word 'sterilised' just now?
S.McC. Exactly, that by divine action the realm here is kept clean from any alien or extraneous
{105}
influence that would impair the great transaction that was taking place.
H.O.E. In the naming of John, it is very noticeable that Zacharias said, "His name is John" and that settled it, all the natural relations had to retire.
S.McC. Exactly, and it is noticeable how definite they are about the matter, because that was a matter of light from heaven. The naming of John was contrary to all that was traditional, to all that was native to the Jewish mind, but heaven is intervening in the matter and Elizabeth is in full accord with heaven, and Zacharias is in full accord with heaven and the light shining out of heaven, and so they say, "His name is John."
R.S. Is not that in keeping with Luke too, the positive way in which the thing is stated, his name is John? He had written to Theophilus, "most excellent Theophilus," about things well believed among us, that he might have the *certainty* of them.
S.McC. Showing the quality that is in mind, do you not think, in this gospel. Accuracy is a great thing in regard to quality. We know how it is stressed at the present time in so many different ways, in so many different fields, but it is a great matter in regard to the truth that there should be accuracy in it, and Luke has it in mind.
N.M. Would you define for us "the spirit and power of Elias" and how it is seen in the local company?
S.McC. Well, I am thinking of the principle of it as appearing generally in the wonderful work of recovery that we have to do with in our day, that there *is* this kind of thing, there is this kind of recovery going forward, where our hearts and our minds are being recovered to what Elijah's ministry had in mind -- the spirit and power it had in mind. Because Elisha really is a counterpart of Elijah.
R.A.E. Is Elijah's ministry referred to again in
{106}
chapter 7 where the mourning and the dancing is spoken of? Does Elijah's ministry produce the mourning and does that lead on to the buoyancy that you are speaking of?
S.McC. Exactly. Elijah's ministry, do you not think, would thoroughly search us on the moral line, and I do not think that we can emphasise that too much, because what the enemy has sought to assail in all the local gatherings throughout the world is the moral line in the souls of the saints. He has not been able to diverge us on cardinal features of the truth, for instance those as to the Spirit, and as to the sisters, but he *will* assail the position along the moral line, as we know he has done, especially where there is vigour in the testimony in relation to youth and the like.
C.B. You mean the enemy has no power against these moral features seen in the saints because they are features that were seen in Christ, which he could not overcome.
S.McC. I think that is the point. We want to see the idea of the environment here and to keep in this environment because there are those that can help us. There is Zacharias and these women, Elizabeth and Mary, they were in the house of Zacharias, but were they overcome by the disability of Zacharias? Not a bit! They were a great means of help to Zacharias in the disability under which he was suffering in the government of God.
C.B. That is the value of an environment that is so powerful that it brings about adjustment of any defect.
S.McC. Exactly. And so the Lord is stressing the sisters, and especially that the *sisters* should be vessels in whom the Spirit has a right-of-way. It is a great matter that in our houses, and in our contacts in a general way, the sisters should be vessels of the Spirit to maintain this kind of environment.
{107}
B.St.J. And we notice that both Zacharias and Elizabeth were advanced in years.
S.McC. Well, I think it is to show us that age is *not* a disadvantage in the things of God. Some of us were looking the other day at Caleb, he says, "I am this day eighty-five years old," and he says, I am as strong this day as I was then, showing that age is not a disadvantage in the things of God. I should say that age is a distinct advantage in the things of God. Although in Zacharias we have a certain defection appearing, yet his wife Elizabeth represents one in whom the line is maintained, so that *he* comes under the power of the environment, and breaks forth.
W.H. Would you say that the quality in Elizabeth is because she is of the tribe of Aaron, the priestly family?
S.McC. Well, that would intensify the thought, I am sure.
H.L.H. So that Zacharias's liberty came when the period of exercise was completed, that is to say, the time came for her to bring forth a son. It was the completion of a period of exercise.
S.McC. Very good. Showing the necessity, which Luke would stress (it is a feature of his teaching throughout) of the completing of moral exercises. And it is a great matter with each of us, brothers and sisters alike, that moral exercises in our souls *should* be completed in view of our own practical gain, and in view of the gain of the gatherings in which we are set.
H.L.H. So the fulfilment of God's thoughts in connection with John was connected with the completion of an exercise?
S.McC. That is right, and so on this road, as we might refer to it, this moral road, quality in the sisters is stressed. It says of Mary in verse 38, "And Mary said, Behold the bondmaid of the Lord;
{108}
be it to me according to *thy* word." Now it is very interesting how this reflects over against Zacharias, he had doubted the word of Gabriel, he said in verse 18, "How shall I know this, for *I*" (notice the emphatic "I" in this passage) "for *I* am an old man and my wife advanced in years." Now notice how Gabriel takes this up, "And the angel answering said to him, "*I* ... " (the emphatic "I" over against Zacharias's "I") "*I* am Gabriel who stand before God, and I have been sent to speak to thee, and to bring these glad tidings to thee." But Zacharias failed in regard to the authority of the light in his soul, but Mary represents a counteraction to that, she said, "Be it to me according to *thy* word." Not according to *God's* word, but according to *thy* word. Of course it was God's word through Gabriel.
E.L.E. It reminds us of what Elijah said, There shall be neither dew nor rain, but according to *my* word.
S.McC. Exactly. It is the authority of heavenly light in the ministry bearing on particular exigencies, or on given circumstances.
H.L.H. And as coming through vessels, it is the recognition that God has decreed to give an authoritative ministry through vessels.
S.McC. That is it, exactly. That is the thought, it is "thy" word. It is the authority of the word, the ministry, in those who have been commissioned in the matter.
R.S. And so there was the case when a woman said to Elijah, "The word of Jehovah in *thy* mouth is truth," @1 Kings 17: 24.
S.McC. Very good. In *thy* mouth -- the importance of oracular ministry. It is a great matter to be at the meetings where the brethren are together, because we get the truth coming out orally, by word of mouth.
{109}
E.L.E. If any one speak -- as oracles of God; @1 Peter 4: 11.
S.McC. Exactly.
H.O.E. And Mary shows the capability to take on things, as recognising God's sovereignty.
S.McC. Exactly, and so Mary says, "Behold the bondmaid of the Lord." It is almost an indirect reference she makes as she calls upon Gabriel to *behold* the bondmaid of the Lord. A wonderful thing that in Mary's soul, that she could call upon Gabriel to behold the bondmaid of the Lord, "Be it to me according to thy word." I think Mary had arrived at something very definitely.
E.L.E. Yes, she was entirely at the disposal of the Lord, she held herself for Him.
S.McC. Exactly, and that is one great side of "strengthening" on the moral line, obedience complete, obedience as bondmanship would signify, do you not think?
S.K. Would you say that we see what great results come from faith and obedience to the word, when Peter told the Lord, "At *thy* word," @Luke 5: 5.
S.McC. Very good. Luke intensifies that side, "at *thy* word we will let down the net." We know that Peter was not the most passive kind of a man, because the Lord in another section of Acts, chapter 10, had specially to help him, but it is interesting to point out in that touch that he had in @Luke 5, the obedience that was there, "At *thy* word." And the centurion in @Luke 7, "Say a word." He had a sense of the Person that was there and what could be done, the importance of the word of Christ as regulating matters.
R.A.E. So would you say that our moral state has a great bearing on our ability to be able to discern the mind of God?
S.McC. Well, it certainly has, it is not just a question of keen mind in any of us that can follow
{110}
the truth through the literal reading of the ministry. It is a question of a moral state, as Mary suggests, of active obedience, but yet it is not only active obedience, but obedience all the time, a state of it.
J.M. There was unbelief in Zacharias and he suffered from it.
S.McC. He did. A very solemn thing, a word to every one of, us, do you not think, as to what unbelief may lead to. We often think of what sin, fornication, stealing and other things may lead to, but think of what unbelief may lead to! The way the sisterhood come in here is important, as providing a channel for the divine right-of-way where disability was present in Zacharias. That is, the line is kept open in these two beloved women.
W.R. The Lord could say to Thomas, "Blessed they who have not seen and have believed," @John 20: 29.
S.McC. Exactly.
L.Br. So it shows how a local meeting may be kept up by having sisters of quality. There may be disability in the brothers, but it is kept up if there are sisters with such qualities.
S.McC. That is the point. Some of us in visiting a certain place the other day were impressed with the features of the work of God in sisters. It refreshes your soul to contact them. And it is a great thing for the sisters to see, in this holy environment, this priestly environment, their part and their place, as making room for the Spirit in view of the maintenance of what is right.
E.L.E. All you are saying now impresses us with the thought that we can no longer talk about being in the right company, and being in the right doctrine, and having the truth, and all that, and still having moral qualities lacking, but without putting all these things aside it is a question of being built up in moral qualities.
{111}
S.McC. Well, that is the point. The great thing is that we should not occupy ground pretentiously, there is right ecclesiastical ground from the standpoint of the pursuit of right principles, but @2 Timothy 2 stresses the moral side, "follow righteousness, faith, love and peace, with those that call on the Lord out of a *pure* heart." It is all the intensification of the moral side.
M.S.S. Does that underlie spirituality?
S.McC. Oh, I am sure it does.
M.S.S. I was thinking of Mary, how she seems to be specially marked by spirituality, in view of what the angel says in verse 35, "The Holy Spirit shall come upon thee ... " and so on, and then what she says in verse 46 onwards, whether she would not represent special maturity in a spiritual way, adding what is spiritual to what is moral.
S.McC. You mean in the substance of her remarks? Yes, I am sure that is right. As has often been noted Elizabeth represents the free action of the Spirit at any given time. Here they are in the house of Zacharias. It is a great thing that in our homes, in the houses of the saints, that we should have this kind of quality, the quality that was seen in Elizabeth and Mary. Elizabeth suggests the free action of the Spirit in given circumstances such as this, in the home circle, and Mary represents the sustained, substantial, contributive side in her thanksgiving.
E.M. Do you not think the position of the house here, in the hill country, is very noticeable and significant?
S.McC. Oh, I think it is. It is a great thing that our homes should be elevated morally above the current matters around us.
J.H.H. In verse 24, it says, Elizabeth after she had conceived hid herself five months, saying, "Thus has the Lord done to me in these days, ... " and so on. I was wondering if the moral side is not
{112}
stressed there, she *hid* herself. There were certain things the Lord had done to her, but would the hiding suggest that she was desirous of coming into moral accord with what the Lord had done?
S.McC. Very good, I am glad you referred to that. Along the way some have been enquiring how sisters would take part. Some thought that they should take part with brothers in the care meeting, just in an ordinary way, but there is the idea of comeliness -- the hiding, the whole environment is charged with comeliness, and Paul's word as to sisters is to be borne in mind as governing *all* our public gatherings, that the women are to be silent in the assemblies. And the hiding that you have been referring to speaks of comeliness. While the Lord has been stressing the sisters, we are to remember that comeliness is to mark the whole public position, that the sisters have to recognise *their* place in the divine arrangement, and comeliness marks it.
L.A.C. Is that borne out in verse 42, "Blessed art thou amongst *women*, ... " not amongst men?
S.McC. Very good, I think it is, showing the position of Scripture in these matters.
L.A.C. Does it indicate too that anything marking us in an outstanding way in the eye of heaven is going to be taken account of as it is in accord with quality that is in accordance with the mind of heaven?
S.McC. Exactly, I am sure that is so. Jael, the wife of the Kenite, links on with what you say, does she not? A good deal of allusion has been made to Deborah, and it is interesting to see the intelligence of Deborah. She says, "Blessed above women in the tent," above *women* in the tent. She refers to Jael.
H.O.E. You mean she does not get out of her place?
S.McC. Exactly, it is an important thing that,
{113}
that we should see the comeliness as Paul presents it in his ministry in relation to the sisters.
H.O.E. The order of the assembly under the eyes of the angels.
S.McC. Exactly; @1 Corinthians 11 alludes to the particular interest of the angels in the divine arrangement in regard to God, Christ, the man, and the woman.
C.Bl. Sisters who are spiritual and who are enlightened as to divine purpose understand the order suitable to the economy.
S.McC. Exactly. But what scope there is for them in the houses, and in the matter even of prophesying, conveying the mind of God, or giving help -- because it is a house setting here, it is the house of Zacharias. And another delightful feature which underlies the quality of the sisterhood here is their unjealous relations with one another. It says, Mary *saluted* Elizabeth. A delightful thing! She did not think that she was spiritually superior to Elizabeth, she salutes Elizabeth. There is a system that would give us to think that Mary is supreme, in the horrible heterodoxy connected with it, that she is supreme among women, but she comes in and she salutes Elizabeth.
E.L.E. And she was a much younger woman, too.
S.McC. Yes.
R.S. Scripture shows too how sisters *do* have part in conversations. In gatherings such as this, in a public way, their part is in silence, but in the house they have an audible part in the conversations.
S.McC. Well, exactly, in our family readings and the gatherings we have from time to time, after the meetings, it is a great thing to get the gain of what the sisters have, and we should not ignore it.
M.S.S. Paul speaks of the younger women ruling the house, does that suggest there is a peculiar scope for the influence of sisters in the house?
{114}
S.McC. Well, exactly. And then along with that the thought of the *elder* women, teachers of what is right. Well, someone may say, did not Paul say in 1 Timothy, I suffer not a woman to teach, and now he is saying to Titus that they are to be *teachers* of what is right? Surely he is not contradicting himself, it is the circumstances that he had in mind, in regard to the women, that the *elder* women in deportment are to be right, and that they are to be *teachers* of what is right.
M.S.S. Does one passage (Corinthians) refer to the public setting of the assembly and the other (Titus) the household setting?
S.McC. Yes.
L.A.C. Do we get a practical example of a woman prophesying in the house in this chapter? Would it be normal for a sister to express the mind of God with brothers present?
S.McC. Well, in the house setting, it is the ability to impart these matters in a comely way, as covered, for the very idea of covering suggests what is comely. It is not just a mere formal, literal idea in itself, although it involves that, but the very idea of a covering suggests what is comely in the sisters position, do you not think?
L.A.C. Praying or prophesying, then, being covered?
S.McC. Exactly.
C.Bl. What about baptisms?
S.McC. Well, if the baptism is in the home, and there is conversation over the Scriptures, why should there not be liberty for the sisters in a comely way, if there is any enquiry into the truth, just as in our morning household readings or in the after gatherings in houses at different times?
H.O.E. In the house of Mary the mother of John, who was called Mark, they were praying about Peter
{115}
but Rhoda comes in with a message that he was at the door.
S.McC. Very good, and she is really the one who is a great help in the matter there because she insists, she stoutly maintained her ground that it was the voice of Peter. Showing what young sisters may do in any given circumstance like that.
E.L.E. Quite so, she was in the good of Peter's kingdom ministry.
S.McC. Exactly. The matter of the naming of the child, the matter of circumcision would all have its significance, it says in verse 59, "And it came to pass on the eighth day *they* came ... ", now who are the "they"? Apparently there are persons coming into this matter and exercising some influence that they should not, and that is what has to be challenged. It says, "*they* came to circumcise the child, and *they* (that is, the neighbours and kinsfolk, as it says in verse 58) called it, after the name of his father; Zacharias." They are going beyond what is comely and proper in the matter. "And his mother answering said, No; but he shall be called John." Now that is very plain. And so *they* say (they have got a lot of boldness. You will always find that in elements like this), "*They* said to her, There is no one among thy kinsfolk who is called by *this* name. And they made signs to his father as to what *he* might wish it to be called." That is, they would put a wedge between Zacharias and Elizabeth. They might get a different answer from Zacharias they thought, but no, it says, "And having asked for a writing table," he is going to be very plain about the matter, "he wrote saying, John is his name." The matter is put on permanent record, and then it says, "And they *all* wondered. And his mouth was opened immediately, and his tongue, and he spake, blessing God." It is a lovely ending to this exercise as to the matter of quality.
{116}
S.K. The neighbours were wholly ignorant but God was working and in spite of all these contrary elements God is pleased to continue His work?
S.McC. That is right, showing us that the moral line is maintained in such as Elizabeth, and then Zacharias comes into it, for he is a just man, we must keep that in mind.
R.S. So as he is disciplined for unbelief and is recovered, capital is brought out of it and is put on record in writing?
S.McC. Exactly, and very clear, no ambiguous expression that would becloud the truth, just simply, "His name is John." That is a great matter in the truth, that we should be clear and decisive and not go all around the position.
H.L.H. Particularly when the claims of nature are being asserted. In the salutation of Elizabeth to Mary she says the mother of my lord, she does not say, my cousin, as if she puts it on a high level.
S.McC. Very good.
J.H.H. The result of Zacharias's faithfulness produces material for the subject of conversation, it says, "And in the whole hill-country of Judaea, all these things were the subject of conversation."
S.McC. Very good, showing that as we become clear as to the issues in regard to the truth it will furnish a good basis for promoting holy, spiritual, and heavenly conversation.
M.S.S. In connection with the service of God we have a feminine contribution from Mary, and a masculine one from Zacharias, does that show that all these moral exercises are to have their culmination in the service of God?
S.McC. Exactly, the service of God is in mind, and its enrichment, and *all* these exercises, the strengthening of the moral line, are all leading to that -- the strengthening of the service of God and the enriching of it.
{117}
A.K.H. That is why it says, "we should *serve* him without fear, in piety and righteousness ... ."
S.McC. Exactly, showing how the moral line is strengthened in Zacharias's word.
A.T. I was thinking of what Mary said, "My *soul* magnifies the Lord, and my *spirit* has rejoiced in God my Saviour."
S.McC. Very good. Showing that it is a matter of inwardness, do you not think? It is not just a matter of the external behaviour and attitude of Mary, she is inwardly right in things and that is what the gospel according to Romans, Paul's gospel, has in mind, that in the clearing of the moral side in our souls we are right inwardly.
B.A. That is why he could say, No, to his name being called Zacharias?
S.McC. Exactly, the reason why we are not definite in saying no to these kind of influences is because the moral line is not right and clear in our souls.
Chapman Street, Bridgetown, Barbados.
{118}
SPIRITUAL QUALITY (7)
@Luke 2: 22 -- 40; @Luke 9: 28 -- 36
S.McC. Yesterday afternoon we looked at certain persons in the first chapter of this gospel -- John, Elizabeth, Mary and Zacharias, keeping before us the thought of moral or spiritual quality as is stressed in these persons in the opening of the gospel, and reference was made to the way that Luke in his ministry stresses the moral side, and how his gospel, generally speaking, has in mind the service of God. This afternoon in the first passage that we have read in the second chapter, we have Simeon, and Anna the daughter of Phanuel, both remarkable persons, and particularly fitting into our subject because of the features that mark them. We have persons also referred to in the ninth chapter that set out the thought of spiritual quality, and what we should keep before us now in our enquiry in the first section that we have read is more the *outward* bearing of the service of God, and in the second passage that we have read, the more *inward* bearing of the service of God. Quality is essential in those features of the service. The scene in @Luke 2 is particularly affecting, inasmuch as it has to do with the incoming of Christ in such *lowly* circumstances, as Mr. Darby has said "Oh, strange yet fit beginning to all that life of woe." That in itself, in the setting of the testimony in that way, should call for our attention, because Simeon and Anna are fitting into the particular setting of the testimony at the moment; and so are Moses and Elias in chapter 9. Peter and James and John are brought into it there by the Lord, but Moses and Elias are already with Him, and we should keep in our minds in our enquiry this thought, how persons fit into the line of the testimony in correspondence
{119}
with what may be obtaining at a given time. So that Simeon who comes first into our consideration is referred to as "a man in Jerusalem," and then in verse 25, "And *this* man was just and pious," again stressing the moral line. To be "just and pious" seems to be a feature that Luke would make a good deal of, and especially must we keep in mind the affinities that would seem to be there between the Spirit and Simeon.
J.H.H. Would you say what you mean exactly by the inward and outward bearing of the service of God?
S.McC. Well, the meeting this afternoon fits in with the outward bearing of the service of God, and our other readings during the week, and other meetings, fit in with that side. But this morning, moving on to the spiritual side of the service, we have what we referred to as the inward bearing of the service of God. The mount of transfiguration links with it.
M.S.S. Would you connect the terms "man-ward" and "God-ward" with these two thoughts? Is what is man-ward prominent in the first and what is God-ward prominent in the second?
S.McC. I would think so, although we would not shut out in the first passage the way that God is before the soul of Simeon, but as you point out, generally speaking, the bearing of what we have in this second chapter is in relation to what is testimonial, the bearing on man, whereas in the second passage it is the glory scene, in which we are drawn into the secret of the Father's thoughts about Christ, in the exalted, divine surroundings of the holy mount.
L.A.C. Does it appear from the first chapter which we looked at yesterday that divine Persons would immediately set themselves to see this matter through to completion as to quality in the saints? I was just noting the many times in which all three divine Persons are referred to under various names
{120}
in the first chapter; the Holy Spirit is referred to several times, and the Lord Jesus under the designations of, the Word, and Jesus, and Son of the Highest, and finally, Son of God. And then the Father referred to as God, and as the Mighty One, and as the Lord God. Would that bring divine Persons before us as taking on the matter immediately and seeing it right through to completion?
S.McC. I think what you refer to is extremely interesting and throws fresh light on what we had before us yesterday afternoon. What you refer to is important to notice because it adds to the richness of the subject. It adds to the greatness of what there is in the opening chapters of Luke, we might say, behind the testimonial setting and character of things that Luke has in mind, and which was referred to earlier. The manger and the reproach linked with it all has a bearing on the testimonial side, but lying *behind* it is refinement in the spiritual intelligence in the apprehension of divine Persons, all Three of Them.
N.M. Is what is outward the product of what is inward, as we see in verses 23 and 24?
S.McC. Well, these are very interesting verses, because you notice how the thought of "law" is stressed, "according to the law of Moses" (verse 22), then "according to what is said in the *law* of the Lord" (verse 24), opening up the great range of the teaching in the beginning. We have not got time to go into it now, but the great teaching of Romans is to help the believer, as enjoying deliverance, to delight in the law of the Lord. "I delight in the law of God," it is said, and the law of God is regulatory, and it is a great matter that, in what has to do with the public side of the service of God that our thoughts and our words should not be without control. The law of Moses and the law of the Lord represent controlling light in regard of the position.
{121}
H.O.E. Would you say a word as to "the consolation of Israel" and "the Lord's Christ"? Would the first be the public or outward illustration and the second, the inward?
S.McC. I think so. You mean, the Lord's Christ? Particularly referring to the Psalms, which bear on the service of God in all its richness and fulness in an inward way. For instance, in @Psalm 2, what a blessed allusion we have to the Lord's Christ; and all through the Psalms it can be traced. But "awaiting the consolation of Israel" would be like our position publicly now, in awaiting the coming of the Lord, so that what we did this morning really had a testimonial bearing on the public position, in view of His coming.
H.L.H. You spoke of the affinities of the Holy Spirit with Simeon, were you referring to "the Holy Spirit was upon him," and "it was divinely communicated to him by the Spirit," and "he came in the Spirit"?
S.McC. Yes, exactly, I think it is an important matter with regard to the public side of the service of God that these affinities with the Spirit should be understood better, and be more in evidence with us, because it is not a question now, this afternoon, of academic teaching -- we will not get anywhere on that line. We may have orderly exposition and the like, but the important thing, the great line of demarcation between what is true and the mere profession, is this matter of affinity with the Spirit: that there is continual liberty in the meeting and in the persons in relation to the Spirit.
J.H.H. Is that why it says, "And *behold*! there was a man in Jerusalem whose name was Simeon"? As if heaven would call attention to a man in whom the Spirit of God had a right-of-way at all times?
{122}
S.McC. That is it exactly, because, what is the difference, people say, with what we have here and what is around? Well, if there is any affinity at all with the Spirit we shall soon know the difference, because the Spirit has *not* a right-of-way in these conditions around us, and we can thank God humbly and unpretentiously, without any thought of spiritual presumption, that the Spirit of God has a right-of-way amongst us.
H.O.E. And we are in the attitude of enquiry?
S.McC. That is it. That is the whole attitude of our minds as we are together. It is not the idea of the setting up of any one or ones that arbitrarily go forward with the truth, it is a question of affinity with the Spirit, as making room for what there is in this environment, the wealth that is latent in it in getting at the truth.
H.L.H. You referred to the law of the Lord. It is mentioned at the end too, "and when they had completed all things according to the law of the Lord, they returned to Galilee to their own city. Nazareth," but in between their coming to do what was referring to the law and their having fulfilled it, you get at what Simeon and Anna represent. Is it not a suggestion that nothing is completed without these conditions?
S.McC. Well, I think so. I think that is the point, and if we may so say, the epistle to the Corinthians, especially the first epistle, would correspond to the law of the Lord, the law of God in that way as governing our assemblies, and governing our position in the very centre of things as is in mind here. So that our minds and our thoughts are not loose, they are not uncontrolled, we are together on the principle of being governed by the light that governs the position. That, as I understand it, is the law of the Lord, it is the light that governs the position.
H.L.H. Quite so, what Simeon and Anna did
{123}
was not prescribed in the law but was born out of the observance of the law, would you say?
S.McC. Well, that is what we want to see, that as we are together on the principle of being regulated, we may look for spiritual enlargement, both in viewpoint as to the truth, and in spiritual substance in the apprehension and appreciation of Christ. That is exactly what takes place here.
H.L.H. So these conditions as represented in Simeon and Anna would furnish an environment in which the Spirit can be free?
S.McC. That is it, and that is what we have in mind in this matter of quality, that in our public gatherings where the truth is being enquired into, and meetings for prophetic ministry too, it is important that there should be affinity with the Spirit.
E.M. And would you say that what is moral largely underlies it, in that he is referred to as being just and pious?
S.McC. Well, exactly. What an important thing it is to have just and pious persons! We think of what the testimony owes in these parts of the world to just and pious brothers and sisters. We who are younger need to keep that in mind, and however much *we* may arrive at the truth with keen minds, with minds perhaps marked by greater alacrity, in arriving at the truth, we must *always* remember, and God will help us in remembering, that the ground has been held on moral lines before we came into it.
S.K. Would you say that right moral conditions would give life and power to our service?
S.McC. Well, they certainly do. Where would there be *any* testimony carrying any power if there was not piety amongst us? The bringing in of God, "pious and just," would refer to uprightness in our businesses, etc., in *all* our dealings uprightness would mark us, and piety, the simplicity of trust and dependence on God.
{124}
A.K.H. Why is there a man and a prophetess in connection with the outward bearing of the service, and there are only men in connection with the inward bearing?
S.McC. On the inward bearing of the service there is neither male nor female. It is a question of the arrival at manhood in these glorious surroundings that the holy mount refers to, and alludes to brothers and sisters alike. But in the public setting we have distinctions and variety in the service of God, although we also have distinctions and variety on the inward side in the apprehension of the knowledge of God; but I am referring now to the service as in @1 Corinthians 12, and @1 Corinthians 14, that there is diversity marking the operations and the constitution, and so you get that coming into our section -- diversity in Simeon and in Anna.
L.A.C. Simeon is referred to in verse 25 as, "*a* man" and as "*this* man." I was thinking of the blessedness of being in any measure distinguished in moral and spiritual quality.
S.McC. That is a great matter, I think, because we want to bear in mind that the stressing of moral qualities that is before us in our enquiry, and that distinction, from the standpoint in which we are viewing it, is not so much from the viewpoint of knowledge or spectacular ability, but from the viewpoint of what persons are substantially, what they are in affinity to the Spirit.
H.A.L. Is that why we get the statement, "And the Holy Spirit was upon him," would that be the anointing?
S.McC. Well, I suppose if we were to carry it into our way of thinking, it would correspond somewhat with that. Simeon, of course, does not belong to our dispensation, but what we are alluding to bears in principle on our position, and the Holy Spirit *upon* him, in verse 25, would allude to the liberty that the
{125}
Spirit had in resting upon Simeon in this way, and also the dignity that would mark manhood in this relation in the very centre of divine operations -- in Jerusalem.
M.S.S. I wondered whether there is teaching in the order in which the Spirit is presented, three times in connection with Simeon? First it is *upon* him, then it was divinely communicated *to* him by the Holy Spirit, then he came *in* the Spirit. I wondered if, having the Spirit upon us and listening to His communications, in that way we are enabled to move in the power of the Spirit?
S.McC. Exactly. I think that is right, and what a power for good and for spiritual richness are persons who come this way, who come *in* the Spirit *into* the temple. The "upon," and the communication to, would especially stress the affinity of Simeon with the Spirit, because there was something there that the Spirit could link on with. So that it is evident that if there is anything in any of our hearts, or in our lives unjudged, that the Spirit will *not* have liberty in linking on with us.
A.Y. So as moving in the liberty of the Spirit we are at liberty to speak to God, and speak to God in appreciation of Christ, in such glowing terms.
S.McC. Yes, it is remarkable how it says, "He blessed God," as if the first consideration he had was for God. This is the mark of a true priestly man.
C.B. I was thinking of Simeon waiting for the consolation of Israel. Whether that would mean that he had God's thoughts and carried them in view of what would be the consolation of Israel, and connected that with the Lord Jesus who had come in?
S.McC. I think it is a very interesting matter that he was awaiting the consolation -- not of Simeon -- he was awaiting the consolation of Israel, showing how enlarged the man was. As a man in Jerusalem, at the very centre of divine operations, he was, what
{126}
we would say in our way of speaking, governed by an assembly viewpoint. He was thinking in assembly thoughts and in assembly ideas -- the consolation of *Israel*.
C.B. And, would you say, at a time when there was outwardly scarcely anything to be said for Israel, he had in his heart the whole position?
S.McC. That is it, and it is particularly fitting at the present time, that we have the whole assembly in our minds. The Lord has nothing less. In Philadelphia He has not got a remnant in mind, He has not got a particular few in mind, He has got the whole assembly in His mind.
C.B. I was thinking of what Paul says, before Agrippa, "our whole twelve tribes serving incessantly day and night," it was the whole thought.
S.McC. Exactly, so that what is a help to see now in these things we are referring to is, that as you find brothers and sisters who are marked by particular affinity with the Spirit, they have an enlarged viewpoint, not a circumscribed viewpoint, but it is an enlarged viewpoint, an enlarged outlook, in regard to the saints and the truth.
H.L.H. That is why Simeon refers to "a light for revelation of the Gentiles" I suppose?
S.McC. Well, there it is, light is expanding and extending in this section, and when we come together in our readings like these, and in our local readings, we will find that as persons come this way, and marked by these qualities, the truth enlarges and extends on our view.
R.S. And so he is speaking of the consolation of Israel, but yet when he is speaking of the Gentiles he puts them first as to order, "for revelation of the Gentiles and the glory of thy people Israel."
S.McC. Well, do you not think that that refers to the particular intelligence of Simeon as moving on this line, that he saw that God had humanity in
{127}
mind? Because in Luke humanity is in mind and the Lord Jesus Christ is coming in as the new Head of the race on the side of humanity and Simeon as in the current of divine feelings and the divine mind apprehends that, do you not think?
R.S. I think so.
D.L.E. Would you say that this was a great reward for a man like Simeon? He is rewarded by seeing the Lord's Christ.
S.McC. Oh, I think it is, and I think we shall find that we are more than compensated as we are more on this line, that there is particular help on the line of pursuing divine interests as indicated in Simeon.
A.T. Simeon, though he does not belong to this dispensation, was just and pious.
S.McC. That is interesting as fitting into the moral side that we have been stressing, and it is important that these features of uprightness, piety and integrity should support the public position of the testimony.
S.K. Noah was a just man too, although he did not belong to this dispensation.
S.McC. Exactly. Simeon does not belong to our dispensation as we say, and he is marked by justness and piety, and Paul stresses it to a young man, Timothy, the idea of piety -- the whole of the first epistle to Timothy breathes of piety.
A.Y. Is it not noticeable that Simeon blesses God, and after blessing God he now turns to the father and mother of the child and blesses them also?
S.McC. Well, he does, as if he is conversant with what is in the divine mind. It says, verse 34, "And Simeon blessed them, and said to Mary his mother, Lo, this child is set for the fall and rising up of many in Israel" -- not among the Gentiles notice -- but the fall and rising *up* (notice that word 'up'), "and for a sign spoken against (and even a sword shall go through thine own soul); so that the thoughts may be revealed from many hearts." Simeon in speaking
{128}
to the parents in this way seemed to realise the great diverging line that there would be in the matter, "even a sword shall go through thine own soul," alluding to the division between what is natural and spiritual.
C.B. Would you say that it is significant that all this took place in the temple. We get the temple in Corinthians, and Simeon's and Anna's being in the temple antedates our day, do you not think?
S.McC. Well, it would, so that the principle of the thing is what we carry in our minds. For instance, this afternoon, the principle of the temple is operating in regard to our enquiring into the truth, and it is specially important to see the relation of the Spirit to the temple, "Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and the Spirit of God dwells in you." That is, the link is with the Spirit in @1 Corinthians 3.
A.Y. You referred just now to Simeon speaking of the dividing line in connection with a sword going through Mary's own soul; do we see how, in verse 43, the Lord cut the ground where what was natural was concerned?
S.McC. Well, exactly, that would be one principle of it, that the Lord maintains the great dividing line when it comes to the asserting of natural claims, but yet what should touch our hearts is, that in these circumstances the Lord goes down with them and is subject to them, which is a feature that is running through this section. As we saw it in Mary yesterday, "Behold the bondmaid of the Lord!" stressing subjection.
J.H.H. The intensification of the moral line would be stressed in the fact that Simeon received him *into* his arms? As the parents brought in the child Jesus, he received Him into his arms, as though to suggest there was no reserve with him whatever, but he was wholeheartedly committed to the position.
S.McC. That is it, he set out in that way how we
{129}
are to be ready for the reception of Christ, ready for impressions of Christ, and to take them on in this way. Notice what is says, "and as the parents brought in the child Jesus that they might do for him according to the custom of the law," notice how all through the section the regulating side is stressed. That is, things are not just running loosely, our thoughts are not running loosely on matters, and so when we sit together as we are now, the principle of control enters into our way of thinking and taking part: so that we do not have wild gourds, we do not have wrong or inaccurate suggestions as to the truth. As we make way for the Spirit we shall be kept on the line of what is proper and right according to God. So Simeon represents persons who have a peculiar link with the Spirit, who not only *have* the Spirit, but are making use of the Spirit, and are in communion with Him.
H.O.E. Mary gets the good of that in the second of John. She says, "Whatever he may say to you do," @John 2: 5.
S.McC. Exactly. The sword, as it were, must have entered into her soul somewhat that time when the Lord said, "Woman, what have I to do with thee? Mine hour has not yet come." The Lord was helping Mary to see what was proper in the matter of her approach to him.
L.A.C. The communication here is from the Holy Spirit, but in verse 29 Simeon acknowledges it as to God, and refers to it as "*Thy* word," would you help us as to that?
S.McC. Well, I think verse 29 shows us what Simeon did. He says, "Lord, now thou lettest thy bondman go, according to the word." It was divinely communicated to him by the Holy Spirit that he should not see death before he should see the Lord's Christ, and now he says, "Lord, now thou lettest thy bondman go, according to thy word, in peace;
{130}
for mine eyes have seen thy salvation, which thou hast prepared before the face of all peoples." He seems to be governed by the mind of God in regard to his going out, his exit.
L.A.C. He is not addressing the Spirit here though, is he?
S.McC. You mean in verse 29? No, "the Lord" here is God, it is the general way in the Old Testament of referring to God.
H.A.L. In the Authorised Version it reads just as if he was making a request, but in Mr. Darby's translation it says, "*Now*, thou *lettest* thy bondman go." Is not that very beautiful?
S.McC. I think it is, and it helps very much, in that we see how much he was in the current and stream of divine thoughts. He says, "Lord, now thou lettest thy bondman go according to thy word," as if he is in full correspondence with the divine mind.
R.S. Is there not also suggestive teaching in it, that with Christ in our arms we are ready to go out of sight?
S.McC. That is it. What a wonderful sight it is, is it not, to see this man receiving the child into his arms. It should touch us to think of what was in that small compass. We speak of the manger and the small compass that was there, but look at this small compass -- the Babe in Simeon's arms! The infinite greatness of what is compressed into our gatherings and within our reach, and in the light of the greatness of it we are prepared to go out, as you point out.
M.S.S. The "he" is emphatic in verse 28, "*he* received him." Would not that suggest the quality that you are bringing before us in this man?
S.McC. I think it would. It is very touching as we get it here, it is not that he *took* him into his arms, it is "he *received* him into his arms," as if
{131}
the child was moving towards the position. Not that we want to put too much into the passage, but it is a wonderful thing to take account of this, that in John's gospel where the Person of Christ is peculiarly in mind, it says in @John 1: 18, "No one has seen God at any time; the only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared him." The Lord is viewed there as coming *into* the bosom of the Father. He was *received* in the bosom, the word 'bosom' as some of us may know, points to a receptacle. It is the idea of *receptivity*, as the word in the original conveys. The preposition 'in' denotes the movement towards, but the bosom itself denotes receptivity. In Luke Jesus is particularly on the side of humanity. And now we get humanity in Simeon, rising, in principle, to the matter in that the child is received into his arms. And that is a very touching matter, he received confirmation and that enters into his reception of Christ.
M.S.S. Does it not involve moral correspondence between Christ and the man Simeon?
S.McC. Well, it does, I think it involves (to use the word that we have been using), that there is not only affinity between Simeon and the Spirit, spiritual affinity, but that there is affinity between Simeon and the babe.
H.L.H. So that expressed in Simeon was what God had in mind, and what the angel predicated, that God should visit Israel -- seen in the way that he received Christ, is it not?
S.McC. I am sure that is so, that carries with it a view of humanity in Simeon, a *man* in Jerusalem. Humanity according to the divine thought, we might say, making way for this wonderful advent of Christ.
C.B. Do you think that he goes out in great dignity? Although he had said so much about this child in his arms, there was no desire to stay to see all these things develop in the child -- he goes out as
{132}
perfectly satisfied, he goes out in dignity, is that right?
S.McC. That is a good point. It is wonderful to have been in the testimony all the time *you* have, but it is a great matter, is it not, that we go out, not in a resigned kind of way, full of misgivings, and full of sorrow, but like Simeon who in going out is finishing, as it were, the period of his testimony, in full correspondence with divine Persons and what they are doing and going on with. It is wonderful to see it and what it means to us, in that way.
R.S. In the scripture you referred to in John, is it not the *Father* who is receiving into His bosom, but in Luke it is a man receiving Christ?
S.McC. That is what I have been trying to say, but you have put it better than I, it is just what I had in mind.
M.S.S. There is much in Simeon to take account of, for instance, the fact that he takes the ground of being a bondman after having this wonderful privilege.
S.McC. Very good. I think that is very interesting. He does not take any high ground, as it were, pretentious ground, he says, "Lord, now thou lettest thy *bondman* go" -- I think that is beautiful! To see a person like Simeon held to the end on the line of bondmanship.
W.H. Is that a real feature of manhood?
S.McC. I think so.
E.M. Would you say that Simeon, although not belonging to this dispensation, had the full thought in going out? I was thinking of Moses, he went out having the full thought, and we next see him on the mount in relation to this dispensation and the full thought.
S.McC. Very good, I think that is very interesting. Beloved Mr. Taylor said recently (and it is a great thing to keep in mind, because we often refer to the saints as passing away) that the saints do not *pass*
{133}
*away*. Moses did not *pass away*, neither does Simeon pass away. He may have gone on before, but God says, Moses my servant is *dead*. We should not be afraid to use that word. When we come to the New Testament the saints "fall asleep" in Jesus, but it is helpful to see, in that way, that the saints do *not* just "pass away" -- they are not going out into oblivion, they are just going on before. We will eventually be called up with them, "We are in no way to anticipate" them; @1 Thessalonians 4: 15.
V.B. Would you say that Simeon had the full thought of God's salvation before him?
S.McC. Exactly, salvation in a Person. A helpful thing to see that.
H.L.H. Simeon was waiting for the consolation of Israel, but Anna spoke to those who waited for redemption in Jerusalem.
S.McC. Well, I think that is a great matter as to our own position, because we are waiting for redemption. That is what *we* are waiting for, as it says in @Romans 8, we are waiting for adoption, to wit the redemption of our bodies. And it is a great matter, because redemption involves our bodies of glory. That is, redemption not only applies to our souls, the redemption of the soul is precious, as in @Psalm 49, but it applies to our bodies.
R.S. Sonship involves the necessity of having a body of glory?
S.McC. Exactly. We are sons of God by faith, but sonship in actuality involves what you say, our bodies of glory.
L.A.C. You referred yesterday to the thought of component parts, as bearing on this subject of quality. Anna here is referred to as a prophetess, and as a daughter, and the mention of her having been a wife is stated, and then her being a widow. Is the idea of quality there, indicating that quality
{134}
is to be seen in relation to any such sphere or capacity in which we may move or serve?
S.McC. Oh, I think so, I think that the fact that Anna's tribal relation is alluded to (Asher as you know has a peculiar and choice place in the blessing), and the fact that her years are referred to, and the period of her life *before* her marriage is referred to, and the period of her life *after* her marriage, and the period of her life after her widowhood, since her husband departed, is important. We can see that there must be something very special about this woman, in the way of quality in all that has been alluded to.
H.E.B. And would you say in connection with both Simeon and Anna, according to what you have been stressing in connection with the Spirit, that things are timed? It is said of Simeon that he came in the Spirit, into the temple, as the parents brought in the child Jesus to do for him according to the law, and then it was said of Anna that she came *in that hour* -- as though to suggest that things are timed as in the hands of the Spirit.
S.McC. It is very interesting that in verse 38 it says, "she coming up the *same* hour." We want to see the sisters fitting in to the current of the truth, in the way that Anna is referred to here. That is, these persons are fitting in to the light that is governing the position at the moment -- the incoming of Christ. They are fitting *into* it, and they are not fitting into it in an awkward kind of a way, as if they have got difficulty in adjusting themselves to it, they are fitting in as belonging almost to what is going on, and as part of it.
H.L.H. Reference was made to being "maintained" in all these things, they are not just for special occasions.
S.McC. That is very interesting in regard to the night seasons, "serving night and day," suggesting
{135}
that if Anna awaked during the night, she was not thinking of missed opportunities but she was thinking of all that was going on, and all that God was going through with in relation to the matter of the testimony.
H.L.H. She would be conversant with all the things that would be happening in Israel.
S.McC. Exactly. And notice it says, not "day and night," but "night and day," and "fastings and prayers." The night represents the negative side of things, but yet Anna is moving in positive buoyancy in relation to what God was bringing in in connection with the day; and then the fastings, meaning that all that was linked with natural predilections and desires would be shut out in regard of man, but God brought in.
C.M. In her giving praise to the Lord and speaking to Him, she is doing homage to Christ rather than God, is she not? That "Lord" there referring to Christ Himself?
S.McC. I think we have to keep in mind that, as Mr. Darby points out in the note, *God* is in mind in these appellations.
E.B. Would you say that none of the meetings that are convened are optional for us?
S.McC. No, they are not. We may be missing what divine Persons are doing. Of course there are persons who suffer from bodily illness that cannot come, but you will generally find that if they are in the main stream they know what divine Persons are doing and going on with. But we want to keep in touch with the brethren in all the assemblies to get the gain of what is going on. We might think, Well, I shall get as much at home -- never. None of us will *ever* get at home what we get in the presence of the brethren in the assembly.
W.H. Would you say, with Anna and Simeon, it is a heart matter?
S.McC. I think so, and faithfulness. We should
{136}
learn to honour such amongst us. Persons who hold the ground and *have* held the ground. It is not a matter of gift, though of course Anna was a prophetess, but what is stressed in these persons is the moral quality and the piety that marks them, and we should learn to honour that amongst us, that means so much in holding the ground. Now we should finish with an allusion to chapter 9, where the mount of glory comes before us. It is very interesting that Peter in his last days refers to it as "the holy mount." Beautiful reference! But in carrying the impression in his soul he must have gained something further, and the holiness of the scene must have impressed him in the way that he refers to it in the first chapter of his second letter, and the way he refers to "the excellent glory." And that is the way with us, that our apprehension of the truth becomes added to as we carry it forward in power in our souls, in affinity with the Spirit. And now here in verse 28, notice the statement, "and it came to pass after *these* words." The Lord had been speaking from verse 19 right through to verse 27, and when you look into all that He said, it was certainly morally searching, as to the losing of our life, and as to the saving of our life, and "what shall a man profit if he shall have gained the whole world, and have destroyed, or come under the penalty of the loss of himself"; and so on, and now this last word as to the kingdom of God. Then it says, "And it came to pass after *these words*." Now Luke is the only one that gives us this, and he is the only one that gives us the "eight days," showing that there is a moral link between the teaching of the previous verses and the holy mount -- the mount of glory; stressing what we have been keeping before us in our enquiry, that the moral side is the basis of our progress in the truth and of our part in the service of God in this exalted way.
{137}
M.S.S. Would you stress too the matter of prayer? The words we have referred to follow on the Lord's praying alone in verse 18, now it says that He went up into the mountain to pray; verse 28.
S.McC. Well, exactly. Prayer is an outstanding feature in Luke's gospel in regard to our Lord Jesus Christ, in the position that He was in here as Man, and we are to note that and to learn from it, that we shall never get on if we do not pray and follow the Lord's example in regard of prayer. Mr. Raven said, If I had my life to live over again I would read less and pray more. And I think that is a word to us, as to the time we spend in prayer. If we are going to get on in our souls we have to be praying men and women.
A.Y. So we see the Lord marked by dependence as Man, praying.
S.McC. Exactly, dependent manhood is what is before us in Luke's gospel. Notice that it says, "that *taking* Peter and John and James," and notice when it comes to Moses and Elias in verse 30, it says, "And lo, two men talked with him." They are not being taken, according to the record, they are in the scene, wholly conversant with current light as to what is proceeding according to the mind of heaven. I think it is wonderful to see in Simeon and Anna, and Moses and Elias, how they are fitting into current things that heaven is going on with in such a becoming way. Peter and James and John, of course, stress quality. Moses and Elias stress quality in the Old Testament, and Peter and James and John stress quality in the New, and they are under the Lord's hand for this position into which they are taken.
R.S. This gives a link very plainly between the Old and New Testament. Peter, James and John, and Moses and Elias are put together.
{138}
S.McC. Showing how they fit together, and serve in relation to one another.
R.A.E. What is the special point in emphasising that Moses and Elias are there, they are not taken? Do they represent the saints of the assembly?
S.McC. Well, we are applying the type as bearing on our position, as it says, "two men." That is, we are thinking now of manhood in glorious conditions. Luke contemplates the eternal setting where men will be in relation with God and in the secret of His thoughts in regard to Christ. So that it is right, I suppose, to think of ourselves in relation to Moses and Elias too.
E.B. It says here of the Lord that as he prayed the fashion of His countenance became different, what would we gather from that?
S.McC. Well, I think it is to help us to see (we speak guardedly of the Lord, of course) that the change is there as *we* have to do with God.
A.T. Would the presence of Moses and Elias here be an evidence of God's power and glory?
S.McC. Well. Moses has been referred to as a type of the sleeping saints and Elias of the raptured saints, but I am thinking particularly of manhood in glory in this setting here, and it really gives us a view of the liberty of men in these kind of conditions, which involves our being drawn into the secrets of the Father's thoughts about Christ.
J.J. Do Moses and Elias represent the saints then in a heavenly way? Not only that they appear, but they are speaking to Jesus.
S.McC. Well, that is the point, we are in the presence here of what is heavenly. It is a great matter to see their liberty in the surroundings in which they are. It says, "And lo, two men talked" -- not '*to* him' -- but "*with* him, who *were* Moses and Elias." Notice that. "Who, appearing in glory, spoke of his departure which he was about to
{139}
accomplish in Jerusalem." It shows you after all, that in heaven, what wonderful things we may look forward to. It is not a place of inactivity, it is a place of holy converse, heavenly converse in regard to divine thoughts.
H.A.L. Why do you emphasise the "were"? "*Were* Moses and Elias."
S.McC. Well, they were not angels, they were not spirits, they were actually Moses and Elias.
H.A.L. I was wondering if that is not a very important matter, to see that we do not lose our identity?
S.McC. Yes, the identity is linked with both the body and the spirit. In the Acts, while we may say that Stephen was with the Lord, we have to bear in mind that it says, "pious men buried *Stephen*," not the body of Stephen, but Stephen. Of course it was the body of Stephen, but his personality was linked with it.
L.A.C. I would like to know if the two men, seen in Moses and Elias, would in any way represent the finished product along the line of quality, to which you have been referring, and the three men whom the Lord Jesus took with Him, would represent full and complete testimony: not only as adequate in two but now as in three, the mind of God is to have such testimony to quality in this dispensation by the Spirit.
S.McC. Very good, I think what you say is the truth. So that when we come to the Acts, what is put first in the public testimony in the Acts? Not Moses and Elias, but Peter and John and James, they are carrying on. The Lord is taking them on here, but then we see the wonderful features of manhood fully testified to in the Acts in these men.
Chapman Street. Bridgetown, Barbados.
{140}
SPIRITUAL QUALITY (8)
@Luke 15: 1 -- 24; @Luke 24: 33 -- 53
S.McC. While in the readings that we have had before we have considered the thought of quality as seen specifically in certain named persons, such as John the Baptist, Elizabeth, Mary, Zacharias, Simeon and Anna; in @Luke 15 there is no person named, and therefore we have to keep before us in our enquiry that it is more a general thought rather than in specifically named persons, although we shall see the suggestion of quality in the service of divine Persons themselves in @Luke 15, and that their service has in view certain definite, known features of quality in the saints, as in the sheep, and in the lost drachma, and in the younger son. Then, in @Luke 24, the book ends with remarkable suggestions of fulness on the line that we are considering. Simon is specifically named in the passage that we read -- choice vessel that he is -- and we shall see in that portion the added thoughts which come into view and which involve in the saints added enrichment in the service of God, just as in @Luke 15 too, in the quality of the service and in the quality of the results, there is added enrichment in view of the divine pleasure being secured in the service of God. We shall see in @Luke 24 how the Psalms are added, and how the scope of the preaching comes into view; how the thought of power from on high is added; and then the final touch as to our Lord Jesus Christ, which gives us a wonderful sense of what marks the whole dispensation, as He goes up with hands uplifted in blessing. That in itself is to put an impression on our spirits in view of our part in the dispensation. In @Luke 15 we should keep before us now, not just the thought of sinners away from God, getting their sins forgiven,
{141}
but @Luke 15 presents the highest point in the gospel from one view-point, it corresponds with the teaching of Ephesians. So that quality is in mind in the teaching of it, and what should affect our hearts is that the whole Deity is engaged in this matter of securing in the saints that which is so essential for the service of God, whether as in the sheep, an object of care; or the drachma, an item of value in the house; a figure of that which is linked with the system of circulation, with the trading or purchasing power of the system that the house suggests; or in the younger son, upon whom is put the best robe (itself a marked suggestion of refinement and quality) and the ring and the shoes. That is what is in mind to pursue in our enquiry. The Deity is to be viewed by Itself in Its own abstract greatness, as in light unapproachable, but It is also to be viewed in Its operations in relation to creation, and also in relation to redemption. And our subject in @Luke 15 brings up the matter of the Godhead in relation to the salvation of men, involving that *men* are set up in the blessedness of known, happy relations with God.
R.A.E. Is that why in each case here the service issues in the house?
S.McC. I thought so. The current evangelisation around us failed in that great respect. All the service of grace, linked with the system of grace, has in mind the idea of the house, the assembly; the very word 'dispensation' in @1 Timothy 1, as Mr. Darby points out, carries that thought. The meaning of the word has the thought of what is house-wise in it.
B.St.J. The Father seemed to know that the son was coming, he was anxiously awaiting him and he went out and met him.
S.McC. The whole chapter should affect us as charged with the holy interest and feelings of each of the Persons of the Deity, employed in this matter of securing us in relation to the assembly, for the
{142}
pleasure of divine Persons. Whether it be in the thought of the Lord Jesus Christ as the Shepherd, or of the Holy Spirit typified in the woman, or in the thought of God the Father, as is before us in the father in the last passage.
H.O.E. Have you any thought why the Persons of the Godhead are typified in that order?
S.McC. Well, it is very interesting that they are not presented in the order of @Matthew 28. The Name of God in @Matthew 28, involves the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. But in Ephesians, which is our heavenly light, you will find that the order corresponds with what we have in @Luke 15, "Through him (that is Christ) we have both access by one Spirit to the Father." Ephesians corresponds with what we have in @Luke 15 in a remarkable way in the matter of drawing near in relation to the service of God; whereas in the revelation of God in @Matthew 28, introducing the baptismal formula, it is the Father, the Son and the Spirit. When it is a question of the revelation of God, what is coming toward us, it is presented that way, but I think in @Luke 15, the great thought is to secure us on the inward and upward line.
S.K. Would you say that the first case of the shepherd seeking the sheep shows it is the purpose of divine Persons to maintain "flock" conditions?
S.McC. The sheep in that way represent the great idea of the work of God in the saints, and what the saints are as the subject of divine care. We are living in a day of recovery, and the great end in recovery is not to low levels as man thinks of it -- that man's need should be relieved -- but to the exalted level of the pleasure of divine Persons. A knowledge of the Psalms and the reference that is made to the flock in the Psalms would show how the thought of divine pleasure is linked with it. For instance, in @Psalm 68, where David seems to have
{143}
such peculiar liberty, reference is made to the flock in a wonderfully refined and glorious setting.
C.Bl. Would the shepherd seeking the sheep correspond to the death of Christ according to the purpose of God?
S.McC. No doubt the purpose of God, from the standpoint we are considering it, in relation to His pleasure, would be the background of all in this matter, but the moral side is particularly in mind in this chapter. The very word 'recovery' contemplates the moral idea.
A.K.H. Would you be free to allow the suggestion that the feature of the sheep and the drachma and the son, correspond to the three things to which we are said to be called in 1 Peter? In reference to "called to suffering" -- "for to this have ye been called," and later on in the same section there is the reference to the sheep; and then, "to show forth the excellencies of Him who has called you," the thought of the excellencies in connection with the drachma; and then it says, "called to blessing," that we should inherit blessing in chapter 3.
S.McC. I am sure that is very interesting, and I think there is something in what you say in regard to the matter of suffering, because Paul says, you will remember, quoting from @Psalm 44: 22, "For thy sake are we killed all the day long; we are reckoned as sheep for slaughter." He quotes that in @Romans 8. The thought of suffering is peculiarly linked with the idea of the sheep, and there is something about the drachma which is important to notice, and I think it fits in with the thought of quality in the passage you referred to in Peter. It says of the drachma first of all, "What woman having ten drachmas, if she lose one drachma, does not light a lamp and sweep the house and seek carefully till she find it?" In that passage in @1 Peter 2 it says, "That ye might set forth the excellencies of him who
{144}
has called you out of *darkness* to his wonderful light" (verse 9) that is, the lighting of the lamp is to be noted, because it is not just a question of looking for the drachma in the darkness, it is a question of lighting a lamp, and sweeping the house, and seeking carefully till she find it. So that I think that what you say fits in in some way, and may become enlarged as we think over it.
A.T. The drachma does not lose its own value although it is not in circulation?
S.McC. No, it does not. Its value is lost to the *house*; that is, the saints, the assembly loses its value for the moment. Because if anything gets out of circulation we know that there is a definite depleting of the resources. We can take account of that financially and otherwise, in material goods, that when things get out of circulation, it depletes by so much the purchasing or operating power of the system. And that is what we want to note here. There are many who might say, it does not matter whether they are doing much or whether they are in circulation or not, but it matters a good deal, because there were ten before and there are only nine now, and that means that the purchasing and operating power is depleted by that much.
S.K. It would seem then that divine Persons cannot afford to lose a thing, they are bent on recovery?
S.McC. I think so, and I think that the great thing in the chapter is that we should be affected by the concentration of feelings in this chapter, because it is a chapter that is filled with feelings as to the matter, in divine Persons. So that as we think of the brethren, especially as the subjects of recovering and restoring grace, as is in mind in this chapter, we think of them on exalted lines.
H.O.E. Is there something to learn from the
{145}
distinction of the numbers here, a hundred, ten, and, one?
S.McC. I think there is, that as the chapter proceeds from the standpoint of shepherd care, through the careful searching of the woman in regard to the piece of silver, down to the matter of the person, it comes down to *two*. When we come to the idea of actual persons we come down to the number *two* to show us the concentrated interest of God in this matter of persons.
C.Bl. What is the suggestion of the woman searching for the piece of silver as connected with Christianity?
S.McC. Well, in the way we are now thinking of it, we are thinking of it in relation to the Spirit in the assembly, and how the Spirit has part in the great matter of what is taking place in relation to the assembly, in the securing of what is essential to carry on the affairs of the house, the service of God in other words.
C.B. Is what is said in verse 2 an answer to the statement, "This man receives sinners and eats with them," divine Persons going about recovery in this way so as to bring into effect the recovery in man, in spite of all that man has fallen into, all the degradation, divine Persons are moving to bring about recovery independent of that?
S.McC. Exactly, and to get man on to the elevated line, the heavenly line of divine thoughts in this chapter. It is a wonderful thing to see the elevated line that is running through this chapter, that it is not just a mere question of the extrication of man in view of his relief, but the *pleasure* of divine Persons, "*Rejoice with me*" is the word in verse 6, and in verse 9, "Rejoice with me," and then again in verse 23, "Bring me the fatted calf and kill it, and let us eat and make merry." That is, it is a matter of divine joy in this setting. We do not think enough
{146}
of divine joy, of the joy of Christ, of the joy of the blessed Spirit and how He would speak to us, how He would call us into having part with Him in the wonderful joy of the maintaining of the complete idea in circulation.
M.S.S. Would it be right to suggest that the actions of divine Persons here are intended to serve as examples to the saints, in relation to each setting? For instance, the service of the Lord as an example to us in connection with the sheep, and the example of the father in causing the son to be clothed, would that not suggest that we are to clothe one another with divine thoughts? As being taken into sonship ourselves we are to act like God Himself?
S.McC. Well, exactly, and that is what I meant by saying that we are to be affected by divine feelings as entering into this chapter, so that we ourselves become marked by the same kind of feelings. The very words "Rejoice with me" in these sections that we have alluded to, "rejoice *with* me," show that divine Persons are bringing us alongside of them in this matter. The preposition 'with' is to be noted.
R.A.E. In the matter of securing men for the pleasure of God, would it be right to say that the Lord Jesus has taken the lead in His lowly stoop into manhood, and in all the grace and service that marks Him from that time onward?
S.McC. Well, I think that is interesting in regard to Mr. E.s remark as to the order of the chapter. It is interesting to see that the Lord Jesus came into manhood on the line of recovering man, and then the Spirit comes in in @Acts 2, but then the supreme idea in the economy heads up all in the Father, as Paul says in @1 Corinthians 8: 6, "Yet to us there is one God, the Father." So that the Father would be the fountain-head in the chapter here.
E.L.E. Do you not think Luke got a good deal of what he wrote from Paul? I mean the tenor
{147}
of his thoughts, their moral quality, and so on?
S.McC. He did, and there is no doubt that the Gentiles are in mind in this chapter. Paul's light as to the assembly as presented in Ephesians, I think, is covered in this chapter. We are not to be content with less than what *our* light, Ephesians, has in mind.
E.L.E. "Arise, shine, for thy light has come."
S.McC. Exactly.
L.A.C. Does it appear that God is bringing in and developing this matter of quality on the lines of recovery, that which is indicated in this chapter seems to be that which is got on the line of recovery? I am thinking too of chapter 10, where the man who was on a wrong course is brought under the influence and care of the inn-keeper.
S.McC. I think there is something in that. It is a very interesting thing that in the great chapter of the cleansing, the restoring and cleansing of the leper in @Leviticus 14, the great thing to see is the sympathy that enters into his restoration. We might just refer to it now as we are talking about it. It says in verse 10, "And on the eighth day." We saw yesterday how Luke would give a touch as to the eighth day. He only of the evangelists mentions the eighth day in regard to the mount of transfiguration, that is, he links us with another world and the eighth day here is linking us on with another day, a new day, the eighth day, as it says in verse 10, "He shall take two he-lambs without blemish, and one yearling ewe-lamb without blemish, and three tenth parts of fine flour mingled with oil, for an oblation, and one log of oil. And the priest that cleanseth him shall present the man that is to be cleansed and those things before Jehovah, at the entrance of the tent of meeting." Now notice at the beginning of the chapter, it has been the leper until now, it says in verse 1, "This shall be the law of the *leper* in the day of his cleansing," and in verse 3, "when the priest
{148}
looketh, behold, the sore of leprosy is healed in the *leper*," but notice when you come to verse 11, it is not "shall present the leper" but "shall present the man" -- "How much better is a man," the Lord said, "than a sheep," @Matthew 12: 12. We are now in the presence of the value of a man, "present the man that is to be cleansed and those things before Jehovah, at the entrance of the tent of meeting." Then in verse 21, where provision is made in a certain way for a poor one, it says, "But if he be poor, and his hand be not able to get it, then he shall take one lamb for a trespass-offering, for a wave-offering, to make atonement for him; and one tenth part of fine flour mingled with oil for an oblation; *and a log of oil*." What one would like to point out is that there is no difference in regard to the log of oil. Whether it be in the one who *has* the means, or whether it be in the one who has not got the means, when it comes to the log of oil, the measure is the same, which I think points to this element of quality that we are now considering, linked specially with the Spirit. The log of oil, as we know, is a twelfth part of a hin. That is, it is part of something else, part of a whole idea, and that is what this chapter is impressing us with. While persons get estranged from whole ideas, the whole bent of divine activities is to bring us *back* to these whole ideas -- a hundred sheep, or ten drachmas, or the two sons, while the elder one elects to put himself out of it, that is his matter.
M.S.S. Would there be a similar thought in connection with the redemption money, which was all the same, and which, if I remember rightly, was half a shekel, a fraction?
S.McC. I think that is right. There is no disparity in the standard in that relation, be it rich or poor. I think divine Persons would specially impress us with whole ideas, deliver us from individuality, in
{149}
the sense in which it would lead to isolationism. We are to see that we are a part of a system, part of a house-system, part of the assembly, and brothers and sisters alike are all to be in it for the service of divine Persons, filling their part in the quality that belongs to each feature of the service as seen here, whether it be a sheep, or a drachma, or the younger son.
T.G. Is that why Paul was able to speak to the Corinthians in that way, as having arrived at the thoughts of God in the service he then seeks to bring them in line with it? He clothes them with the value of the thoughts of God?
S.McC. Well, it is interesting to see how he approached them with whole thoughts in mind, they had divided thoughts among them. Some were saying they were of Paul, others saying they were of Apollos, still some more saying they were of Christ -- these are all divided ideas, but the great thing that Paul keeps before them is *whole* ideas, "If the *whole* assembly come together in one place," and so on, that could be referred to.
N.M. The references to "I" are very distinct; "I perish," "I have sinned," "I will arise" -- would you think it suggests individual exercise?
S.McC. Exactly, repentance is always on individual lines. It is a question of each one of us getting help in our souls on the moral line.
J.M. What do you think about the best robe?
S.McC. The best robe is Christ. God has the best thoughts in mind for us, and what could be better than Christ? God has this in reserve, held for the opportune moment, so that in Ephesians the saints are presented in all the value of what Christ is to God, they appear in that -- "accepted in the Beloved."
S.K. Would you say that this is sonship's robe?
S.McC. Well, it is the robe of righteousness, I would say, and Christ is our righteousness. Mr. Darby, you remember in his wonderful hymn.
{150}
says, "God's righteousness with glory bright, which with its radiance fills that sphere -- E'en *Christ* of God ... ", he says, "Our title is that light to share" (`88:4). I think it is a question of righteousness, the robe is the robe of righteousness and Christ is our righteousness.
A.T. Would you say the clothing of the son here is for the Father's pleasure?
S.McC. Exactly.
L.A.C. You mentioned the value *of man* as stressed by Luke, and the remarkable way in which it comes into the gospel, "How much better is a man than a sheep," and again it mentions, "How much better are ye than many sparrows," and again in relation to the clothing, "how much rather you." Is that what is stressed particularly in relation to man, that God has set a value upon him, and is pursuing it?
S.McC. Well, I think so, and it would specially help us in regard to moral exercises, the matter of expending time and labour. It would help us to see the need to promote the moral line, the repenting line. Not that these persons are viewed as coming back on their own terms, or being set up in relation to God on their own terms, but the repenting line is the great balance and there is nothing like proper and right clearance on the moral line to give tone, and value, and quality to the service of God. You will always find that where gatherings are weak on the moral line they are weak on the upward and heavenly line.
M.S.S. Is that thought not seen in the chapter to which you referred, about the leper? Before the eighth day he had to go through a process of seven days in relation to his tent, would that not suggest the completion of moral exercises?
S.McC. Oh, I think so, that chapter is remarkable in that way in the wealth of it, its typical teaching,
{151}
and it is to impress our hearts with the pleasure that God has in each one of us as set up, delivered from sin and its awfulness, its workings, set up in happy, known, blessed relations with Himself, because that is what is in mind.
R.A.E. I would like to enquire about verse 9, the woman says, Rejoice with *me*, does that indicate merely the general pleasure that the Spirit has in securing men for God, or would it be a warrant for us to see that there is a specific portion for the Spirit in the service of God on the Lord's day morning?
S.McC. Oh, I think so, I do not think that we should ever lose sight in our souls that the Spirit should be specifically referred to in the service of God. Not that we are suggesting a specific phase of the service to Him, but that He should be specifically before our minds, and references to Him specifically, not in a kind of general way only, but in a specific way, "Rejoice with *me*," He says.
H.L.H. In a specific way, but at any time in the meeting?
S.McC. Exactly. Whether at the beginning, or the middle, or the end.
J.M. Is the best robe for the son's pleasure or for the father's pleasure?
S.McC. Well, it says, "And the *son* said" -- we are now in sonship's realm here, the sons says in verse 21, "I have sinned against heaven and before thee; I am no longer worthy to be called thy son. But the father said to his bondmen, Bring out the best robe and clothe him in it," it is not a question now of infantile thoughts, or undeveloped thoughts, it is a question now as to the *full* thought as to the best robe, and the ring, and the sandals on his feet. "And bring the fatted calf," another full thought and another suggestion of quality, "and kill it and let us eat and make merry; for this my son was dead
{152}
and has come to life, was lost and has been found."
A.Y. Would you say that this is a service now into which we have been called, along with divine Persons, to clothe persons with the thoughts of divine grace? He says to his bondmen. Bring out the *best* robe -- Christ.
S.McC. Exactly. So that there are those around in the realm that are working with God in what He is doing. But as to this matter of the Spirit, which we have been diverted from once or twice, I think it is important, the "Rejoice with me" in verse 9, "Rejoice with me, for I have found the drachma which I had lost." We are inclined to lose sight of the personality of the Spirit. The *personality* of the Spirit! "*I* have found," "Rejoice with *me*." As we have often said, the Spirit is not just an influence. He is not just some operation of divine power, He is one of the Persons of the Godhead, He has a distinct personality, and He is equal in deity with the Father and the Son, and these pronouns "Me" and "I" stress the personality of the Spirit in the figure.
L.A.C. The Lord Jesus as typified in the shepherd, and the Spirit as typified in the woman, would stress the idea of what is connected with the economy and their relative places, would it?
S.McC. I think it would. We have always got to keep in mind that the Spirit has taken a place of relative obscurity in the system, serving behind the scene, so that in @1 Corinthians 8, in the statement as to the economy He is not mentioned. And in Colossians, where His work so wondrously appears He is only mentioned once, and we have always to keep in mind in the order in the Trinity as in @Matthew 28, that the Spirit is last. He is not first, and there is something in that that would regulate us as to the place that the Spirit would have in the service of God, so that there is a proper balance.
R.S. I suppose you would remind us that while
{153}
it is a fact, borne out in Scripture, that the Spirit has taken a relatively inferior place, nevertheless it is a place and we speak to Him according to the place that He has taken? Because the place is relatively inferior, our tendency is not to notice the place at all.
S.McC. Well I am sure it is important that we should see the place that He has taken, because it is a balance in the service of God. And it is well for us to keep in mind too that while He has come into a subordinate position it never changes who He is. His Person is unchanged and unchangeable. He is God, and it is not correct and intelligent to speak of the Spirit leaving the Deity any more than it is correct or intelligent to speak of the Lord as leaving the Deity.
R.A.E. You have said that in the service of God there would not be a *phase* to the Spirit but that He might be addressed at any time, do we understand from that that when the Father is before us or when the Lord is before us it would not be what we speak of as oscillation, to speak to the Spirit?
S.McC. No, that is exactly what is in mind, that there is liberty to refer to the Spirit at any time in the service of God, bearing in mind His augmentary service, whether as the Lord Spirit, in relation to the dominical side, or whether as the Father's Spirit or the Spirit of adoption in relation to the side of sonship. At the same time, always keeping in mind that He Himself is God, and therefore may be addressed in that light too.
S.C. Could we say that the Spirit was always in service but we knew nothing of it till the Lord Jesus became Man? In Genesis we get the Spirit hovering over the waters, etc.
S.McC. Well, I think, of course, that we have to keep in mind that everything contemplated Christ coming into Manhood. Even the Spirit's place as
{154}
we now know it hinges upon the incarnation, on the manhood of Christ. But everything looks back, of course, the divine Persons acted mediatorially in creation, in different ways, but that in itself did not necessarily mean that they were in positions involving inferiority, the mediatorial operation does not always imply inferiority in place as to the Persons that are acting.
H.A.L. Would you say, in view of the question that Mr. E. asked, about the order in which they come in this @Luke 15, the Lord is the first one to move in the economy, to come into a position, and then the others take their relative positions as soon as He moves?
S.McC. Well, it was referred to a little while ago, that as the Lord Jesus comes into Manhood, then the Holy Spirit descends upon Him, and then the Father's voice is heard; we get the inauguration of the economy. And then we have the Lord, moving in service and going out by way of death, and the Spirit coming, and then the service of God established with the Father in the prime place of God in the economy.
Ques. What is the difference between "There *shall* be joy in heaven," and "there *is* joy"?
S.McC. Verse 7 says, "I say unto you, that thus there shall be joy in heaven for one repenting sinner," he says, "Rejoice with me for *I* have found my lost sheep," he is referring to what is in the house down here. And he says then, "I say unto you that *thus*" -- that is, corresponding with the joy in the assembly here there is joy in heaven. And then in verse 9 it says, "Rejoice with me, for I have found the drachma which I had lost. *Thus*, I say unto you, there is joy before the angels of God for one repenting sinner," We are now reminded of the place the angels have in this great matter.
S.K. Would you say these things take place in the assembly and heaven rejoices in it?
{155}
S.McC. Well, exactly, we can see how near heaven is to the whole matter, as in @Matthew 18, whatever is bound on earth is bound in heaven, that is, there is no distance morally, you might say, in relation to heaven and the assembly. Heaven is interested in all that is transpiring, so wondrous is the assembly's realm.
R.S. So that shows that in the repenting sinner already material is secured for the assembly?
S.McC. And that is what should be in mind, do you not think, in *all* our service, especially in the preaching of the word of God, that we have nothing less than that in mind.
R.S. The material is thus followed, the case is followed right out to a conclusion.
S.McC. That is a good way to put it, "followed right out," and then the whole chapter is impressing us with the *care* that is spent in regard to following the matter right through. We are very careless at times as to matters on moral lines, the thing is to follow the matter right through to a heavenly level as the chapter has in mind.
H.O.E. Are we not in the spirit of repentance right through our lives, carrying an appreciation of Christ with it?
S.McC. Very important that, because where the moral side is maintained, as we were saying earlier, it is an effective balance in the service of God. You remember in the Old Testament in regard to the musical instruments that they were seven on the Sheminith and eight on the Alamoth. The seven on the Sheminith are linked with the lower octave, that is the basic idea as connected with the moral side in our souls, whereas the eight on the Alamoth are linked with the upward, the soprano voices, the higher side linked with the assembly.
R.S. Voices of the young women.
S.McC. Yes, and it is important to keep that in
{156}
mind. And another interesting thing in the types is that in the very height of the festive year the day of atonement was set. It was not set in the month Abib, it was set in the seventh month, the crown of the festive and spiritual year, right in proximity to the feast of tabernacles, and that is something to bear in mind, as @Ephesians 2 impresses us, that we are not on heavenly ground in a kind of stilted, academic way, there is a moral background to the whole matter.
H.O.E. "In whom we have redemption, even the forgiveness of sins."
S.McC. Exactly, and even in chapter 5, which we were looking at the other night, where we get the assembly presented in such a wonderful way as the object of Christ's love, the value of that vessel and what it was to divine Persons, yet the moral side is blended into it, is it not?
E.L.E. That is why he says to the Ephesians, "Wherefore *remember*"?
S.McC. Exactly, that is the whole point, it is a balance, it saves us from mere mental phrases, and an academic way of carrying on the service of God.
D.L.E. With reference to what you mentioned as to what is moral just now, would you say that as we go on we get more sensitive to what is evil, and it is not like a building where our foundations are built once for all? But they are carried forward and bolstered up?
S.McC. Oh, I think so, I think we never really leave the foundation in that way, the foundation is always there on the moral side, and the line of repentance is ever deepening in our exercises and our links with God. That can be traced quite easily in Paul's history, it seemed to deepen with him all the time: not only did the light increase on the one hand, but the sense of his own sinfulness increased on the other.
{157}
E.L.E. He says, "Sinners, of whom *I am* chief," not 'I was.'
S.McC. Exactly, that is what I am referring to. Now in Luke, chapter 24, just to refer to it briefly, we can see how in the matter of the Lord's service the whole service of God, and the fulness of its scope, is enriched by what He does and the way He serves them, and in the added touch as to the Psalms, in verse 44. There would first be the bringing into the assembly of the touch that these two had, and then the touch that Simon had (verse 34), and now the Lord comes in among them and He finds certain things there, and then we get the enlarging of knowledge as to the word of God, the Psalms, verse 45, "Then he opened their understanding to understand the scriptures," then you get the scope of the preaching, the wealth of the preaching, that "repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name to *all* the nations beginning at Jerusalem," verse 47. And then you get the thought of power from on high, and then the thought of the blessing, the whole section from verse 50, charged with the idea of blessing, so that you are impressed with the fulness on the line of quality that enters into the closing of the gospel.
M.C. So you would say that divine feelings are in full circulation in connection with the recovery of man?
S.McC. Exactly, and these feelings are to be in circulation in the assembly.
J.M. The gospel was to start first at Jerusalem, the place where He had died.
S.McC. In the place where the guilt was greatest, that is the point. It is to intensify in our souls the grace of the dispensation. Never let us forget that -- the *grace* of the dispensation -- how it can overcome the bitterest and vilest opposition.
S.C. Would we see God's love shining out there
{158}
as He said the gospel should begin from Jerusalem?
S.McC. Well, in @John 3: 16 it is a great system in mind, it is not the world in moral corruption, it is an ordered system of things that God has in mind, that He had, and that sin had marred, but that He will ultimately secure again. As the Lamb of God takes away the sin of the world. God will again have before Him an ordered scene in which His pleasure is found. That would be the idea of "God so loved the world." In the glad tidings here the operations would have in mind the securing of man in relation to it.
L.A.C. Is it not very wonderful to see the close and climax at the end of this gospel which has taken up and dealt with so many persons of various characters right through, most of them taken up from the lowest reaches of humanity; persons from the street and under the power of demons, and others, and now resulting here in this blessed climax of divine power so manifestly seen?
S.McC. Well, I am sure there is something in that. It is to impress us with the greatness of divine operations and what *can* be done, and what a help it would be to us in the matter of our having part in the economy, because the economy not only involves divine Persons, it involves the saints, that the *saints* are doing things but they are doing things on the lines on which divine Persons are doing things.
M.C. Would the "ye" in verse 48, refer to the saints?
S.McC. I suppose we might by extension think of the saints, but I suppose it particularly alludes to the apostles, "And *ye* are witnesses of these things," as being particularly linked with the inaugural side of the dispensation.
A.K.H. You referred to the Psalms as linked with the prophets and Moses. Had you in mind that that was referred to only when there was a company
{159}
present? With the two going to Emmaus it was Moses and in all the prophets, but later in the chapter when the company is there the Psalms are included. Would you say just a little what you had in mind in stressing the Psalms?
S.McC. Well I was thinking of the service of God particularly, the Psalms link with it. The Psalms are part of what is generally known as the Hagiographa, which includes all the poetical books. Of course, it includes more than the actual Psalms, it includes Chronicles, and the book of Ruth, but it is specially dealing with all the poetical books where the service of God is particularly enlarged upon. There is a particular wealth and bearing on the service of God.
H.A.L. Would you say too that the personnel, the two going to Emmaus and Peter, would have experiences that would be valuable linking on with the Psalms?
S.McC. I think so, so that the Psalms intensify the moral side. The Lord spoke in the fourth of Luke of the acceptable year, and now as He is finishing His service we can see how the matter is crowned as He ascends with His hands uplifted in blessing.
M.S.S. Would there be a suggestion in the ending of this book of the local position giving way to the universal, suggested in the last verse, their being in the temple praising God? Although we know it is limited to the Jewish setting, would it suggest, following on to the room to which the Lord came, the local position, that as being led on by Him we reach the whole sphere of the service of God in the assembly?
S.McC. I think so, and especially alluding as it does to Bethany, the place of love, we know how wide the outlook of love is, love is not limited in its outlook, and Bethany would stress that side, "Having lifted up his hands he blessed them."
{160}
A.T. We get earlier in the chapter, "The Lord is risen indeed," and then, He showed them His hands and His feet. Would you say that knowledge and feelings would enter into the service of God?
S.McC. I am sure it would, and the wealth that these experiences bring should give character to the service of God, should lend itself to its enrichment.
Chapman Street, Bridgetown, Barbados.
{161}
SPIRITUAL QUALITY (9)
@Numbers 7: 1 -- 5; @Numbers 10: 33 -- 36; @Numbers 21: 16 -- 18
S.McC. I was thinking of the work of God in the saints as equal to the light that may be presented at any given moment in relation to divine thoughts. The passages that we have read give us several free responsive movements that are not prescribed, they seem to come voluntarily at the moment. The book of Numbers gives us a lot that is prescribed and a lot of governing light as to particular circumstances; such as the law of the Nazarite and other things, but there are certain movements in these passages which seem to come spontaneously at the moment, in regard to the scope of the divine mind as it is coming before the saints. We are particularly tested by light from God as it comes to us at *any* given time. The more that the work of God is in liberty in our souls, unhindered by things that the enemy would use to hinder it, the more free and responsive we will be to light as it comes from God. You will note that in the verses read in the chapter the princes were not instructed as to what they were to do at this given time. Moses had completed the setting up of the tabernacle -- a wonderful type of the assembly -- and had anointed it and hallowed it and *all* the furniture thereof, and the altar and *all* its utensils, and had anointed them. We are in the presence of great thoughts in this passage, the whole idea as to the divine mind in the tabernacle. We are not to lose sight of whole thoughts in our part and place in the testimony. The princes are particularly affected by them, and it says of them that "the princes of Israel, the heads of their fathers houses, the princes of the tribes, they that were over them that had been numbered, offered; and they brought their offering
{162}
before Jehovah," showing an immediate, responsive movement that has not been prescribed in the law, but comes in answer to what is presented in the setting up of the tabernacle, and all the furniture, and the altar and its utensils; as if it represents a movement through the work of God in the saints that is prepared to commit itself fully to the scope of the truth, as typified in these opening verses. Then in @Numbers 10, we get another movement that has not been prescribed, for Moses had been a little bit off the line in the earlier verses in what he said to Reuel, the Midianite, his father-in-law, when he had said, "Thou wilt be to us for eyes," that is, he was putting this man in the place of guiding them and leading them through the wilderness, and immediately we get the 33rd verse in which there is the remarkable movement of the ark, as if there is an immediate movement from the divine side to counteract what was said in these previous verses. And we see how the work of God, as seen in Moses, typifying what there may be with us as God's people, is equal to the movement and gets the full gain of what is involved in the movement and the fresh phase of light involved in it. So that immediately we get the ark moving Moses says, "Rise up, Jehovah, and let thine enemies be scattered: and let them that hate thee flee before thy face. And when it rested, he said, Return, Jehovah, unto the myriads of the thousands of Israel." And then in @Numbers 21, we get the wonderful responsive movement suggested in regard to the word, "Spring up, O well, sing ye unto it; at a particular juncture of the wilderness when the people were tested by the circumstances that are contemplated in that section, we find how the work of God is viewed as asserting itself, in regard to the light which governs the position at the moment, because the word of the law-giver is brought into the matter, which would represent certain light
{163}
which is shining in upon the position. I thought that these suggestions might form a basis for a profitable enquiry tonight.
A.K.H. Do you have in mind the first scripture that what is described in @Exodus 40, is what is summarised in the first two verses of @Numbers 7?
S.McC. Exactly. In chapter 40 we get a wonderful presentation of the finished work of Moses in setting up the tabernacle, and the glory comes in and fills the position. It is a very interesting thing that @Numbers 7 compresses it into a matter of two verses, and then extends the chapter to 89 verses to make way for the wealth of the princes, in responding to the light of the position into which God had come and was claiming for Himself. I think @Numbers 6 gives us a kind of background to all this, which I think should encourage our hearts. The matter of Nazariteship is an important background in responding to the *full* thought of God in regard to the assembly as typified in this section in the tabernacle.
H.L.H. What is offered here by these princes in Israel is to be used, according to what God said to Moses, for the performance of the service of the tent of meeting. Is it not the suggestion that the way things are maintained in regard of what is for the pleasure of God is substantially supported by the work of God in us?
S.McC. I think it is an important thing to see that, and what you now refer to in that section, for the "performance" of the service. That is, it is not just a question of admiring light objectively, the scope of the divine mind objectively; what these princes have in mind (and note that God is interpreting what they are doing), what they have in mind according to God's interpretation of it is the performance of the service, that is, the carrying out of the service of God in relation to the assembly in the type.
{164}
V.B. Did you have in mind to say something about Nazariteship in the chapter before as underlying what we have here?
S.McC. I think it is very important that we should see the place that Nazariteship has in the book of Numbers. It is not in Leviticus, it is not in Exodus, it is divinely placed in the book of Numbers where things are so difficult but where full light as to the assembly in the opening chapters is shining in the wilderness position, because the first few chapters are giving us light as to the position in relation to the assembly in the wilderness. And if you do not have Nazariteship, if you do not have the principle of devotion and consecration to God, well, the question is as to whether you will have these free, liberal, responsive movements that come into view in this section.
A.K.H. Is what is moral linked up with the idea of Nazariteship?
S.McC. Well, it certainly is because Nazariteship will have no bearing exactly in eternity, it stands related to the scene where sin has entered, that is, there are certain things that have to be abstained from and the like, in order that we might hold ourselves entirely devoted to God and to His interests here.
A.T. The princes here were not told what was to be done, and yet they do the right thing?
S.McC. Well, that is what we are stressing, you see, the performance, that they were not merely admiring the light of the system objectively but they were concerned about the performance of the service, and God sees that and takes account of it, and He comes right into the position immediately without Moses going to enquire of God. There are certain sections of this book, in different parts of it where matters arise, and they are held in abeyance for the moment while Moses goes near to enquire of Jehovah,
{165}
but in this particular matter God comes *immediately* into the position and says to Moses, "Take it of them, and they shall be for the performance of the service of the tent of meeting, and thou shalt give them unto the Levites, to each according to his service," verse 5.
N.M. Would you say that everything has been provided by God that He should be served? Would true Nazariteship be a qualification for the service of God?
S.McC. Well, Nazariteship underlies it, but what we are trying to stress and to emphasise, is what is provided from *our* side; that we have the light of the divine mind in the tabernacle set up and anointed, and the glory that filled it, but then what are *we* doing? What about *our* side, and the wealth that is latent by the work of God in the saints, on our side? It is coming into view in practical committal here in support of the whole system of light typified in the tabernacle.
V.B. Is that what you meant by the work of God being equal to the light given at any particular time?
S.McC. Exactly, it is not just a question of merely admiring the wonderful wealth of the ministry, which has come to us in the last 50 to 100 years in these days of revival, but we are *always* tested, in all our gatherings, as to the practical preparation on our side to commit ourselves to the whole scope of the divine mind, especially on the line of supporting it and carrying it on.
H.E.B. Do I understand that you are carrying forward the thought of Nazariteship to that of the princes?
S.McC. I think morally you would have a continuation of the thought in the princes, that chapter 6 in Nazariteship proves a wonderful background for this free, responsive movement of the princes.
{166}
H.E.B. Is that suggested in the thought of the waggons being covered?
S.McC. Well, it is interesting to note in this book what is covered. That in itself is a very interesting study in the book of Numbers. For instance, in chapter 19 where we get unusual light brought into the book of Numbers (you would think it belonged to Leviticus), as to the red heifer, we get the idea of every vessel that has a cover *bound* upon it is free from defilement. A very important thing that our children in our tents, in our houses, should be covered, the covering *bound* upon them, as is going to be done this week in the matter of baptism, our brother is in principle going to *bind* the covering. Of course, it does not only involve the formal act of baptism but the *teaching* of baptism, as the binding of the covering of the vessel so that it is held free from defilement. Then we get the covering of the different vessels, articles of furniture; and the princes have got the idea. That is, there is a certain suggestion in the covering that the princes have taken on, and it is coming in in their contributions.
H.A.L. There are twelve princes and they all move, but would you help us as to the *six* covered waggons?
S.McC. Well, I think the idea of the "twelve" is a delightful suggestion, because it is a matter of love entering into these great responsive movements. The twelve is the great love number and also sets out the ability to work with one another in relation to the light that the Lord is giving. Instead of pulling away from one another, the number twelve suggests that we are merging together in love, in responsive movement to the light that may be given at any given moment.
W.H. Speaking of the princes, they were not only those that were separated but they were willing-hearted, and intelligent in their offerings?
{167}
S.McC. They were very intelligent with what they had, and the thought of unity in the offering is stressed throughout the chapter.
H.A.L. Do you think the idea is that there were two princes to one waggon?
S.McC. Well, I think so, I think the thought of unity is stressed in the chapter and the ability to work with one another. That is, if there are six waggons it does not mean that every one is given a waggon, there is the matter of their ability to work with one another in support of this system of light that is represented in the first two verses.
H.L.H. It is a feature of mutuality, is it not?
S.McC. Exactly.
R.S. So it says "*an* ox," they pull together just as one man.
S.McC. Very good, it says, "The princes of the tribes, they that were over *them that had been numbered*" (that in itself is a very interesting thought, that is, it is a question of those that had been taken account of in relation to the tabernacle system) "offered; and they brought their offering before Jehovah, six covered waggons, and twelve oxen; a waggon for two princes, and an ox for each." It is very interesting that, *six* covered waggons, *twelve* oxen, a waggon for *two* princes and an ox for *each*: the ability to work with one another and yet the distinctive personality of each, as it says, "an ox for *each*."
H.E.B. Have you in mind the characteristics of the ox as linked with the service of the princes?
S.McC. Well, the ox suggests that there is hard work involved in the matter, and the work of the ministry involves hard work. Anybody reading 2 Corinthians will be impressed with that, the need of the ox feature, ox-like strength and character, as Paul delineates chapter after chapter of sufferings.
{168}
He says, "The sufferings of the Christ abound toward us," in the first chapter.
L.A.C. Have you in mind that what we have here in the beginning of this chapter is really a ready response to the way that God is presented in the end of the previous chapter in the poetical section connected with blessing?
S.McC. I think so, the remarkable thing is that God is before us in the end of the Nazarite chapter, and He comes into the end of the chapter of the princes. He comes into the beginning of the chapter of the princes and He comes in at the end, you will notice, in the matter of giving a word. Where you get Nazariteship among the saints you may count on a fresh accession of light. As we come together in our gatherings, where there is devotedness and the desire to hold ourselves free from *all* natural and worldly influences, you will find that the brethren will get fresh accessions of light, and that is what these verses that you referred to bring out -- "*Jehovah* spoke to Moses, saying ... ", and we have this wonderful touch as to His favour shining upon His people.
L.A.C. I was noticing also that the other two sections read in chapters 10 and 21, are set in connection with poetical sections, I was wondering whether it is not a feature that is outstanding in the book of Numbers, all associated with the idea of ready response to God?
S.McC. I think it is. There are the three poetical sections in the book of Numbers. It is interesting to note that, because when you get poetical contributions the matter of feeling is entering into them, and richness, it is not just ordinary perfunctory remarks, but the matter of *feeling* lies behind poetical utterances. And it is interesting that over against the dark background that Numbers presents in regard to the wilderness, we should have these suggestions as to feeling and spiritual emotions in the presence
{169}
of it all. Moses displays remarkable intelligence in the distribution of what was brought, and instead of dividing it equally among the three levitical families, he puts it where it is most needed. That is a great thing in the matter of the testimony, that we should put things where they are needed most.
H.A.L. "According to their service." Would that be in keeping with that?
S.McC. That is it, according to their service, it is a matter of the carrying on of things, and the princes are giving a lead. That is, there are those that give a lead in regard to committing themselves to the full position as outlined in the first two verses, or the first verse.
L.A.C. What exactly do you mean by putting things where they are needed most? How is this scripture applicable to our day?
S.McC. Well, it shows how gift is taken account of, and ability to serve is taken account of, and it is supported in the way that the service would call for it to be supported, whatever service is being carried on in any of the gatherings. It says in verse 6, "And Moses took the waggons and the oxen, and gave them to the Levites. Two waggons and four oxen he gave to the sons of Gershon, according to their service; and four waggons and eight oxen he gave to the sons of Merari." Now notice that it takes a lot more waggons for the levitical side as caring for the persons, than it does for the levitical side -- as caring for the principles. It says, "Four waggons and eight oxen he gave to the sons of Merari, according to their service," whereas in regard to Gershon it is *two* waggons and *four* oxen, it is just half what was needed for Merari. As we know, Gershon represents the side of service that maintains and carries the principles forward, whereas Merari represents the great matter of carrying the persons that are alluded to, the boards. Gershon has the
{170}
hangings, what goes *around* the courts, the principles.
N.M. Would this be diversity of gifts as seen in the assembly?
S.McC. Well, it might be applied that way, I suppose. There are different applications to it in that relation. I think it is an important matter to see that the carrying of the persons is well provided for.
H.L.H. Referring back to chapter 3, where it says the charge of Merari "consisted in the oversight of the boards of the tabernacle, and its bars, and its pillars, and its bases, and all its furniture, and all that belongs to its service," that is connected with the persons you say?
S.McC. Exactly, the boards are typical of persons, believers who have been set up in relation to God in this world, on the basis of righteousness; whereas Gershon has to do with the soft materials, as it says in verse 25, "And the charge of the sons of Gershon in the tent of meeting was: the tabernacle and the tent, its covering, and the curtain of the entrance to the tent of meeting. And the hangings of the court, and the curtain of the entrance to the court, which *surrounds* the tabernacle, *and* the altar" -- that is, they are concerned about the principles that govern the whole position, the soft materials that surround the whole position.
H.A.L. The most precious things were committed to Kohath, the ark, as our brother referred to, being borne on their shoulders, I wondered why they were left out?
S.McC. I think their service takes on a much higher and refined kind of feature in relation to the tabernacle, and we might say, that the Kohathites merge in the idea of the priesthood, that is it merges into a kind of a priestly service, carrying things in prayer.
A.K.H. Is it so then that we can count on what the work of God will produce in any given place to
{171}
help in every matter that may come up, whether it be in regard to principles or in regard to persons?
S.McC. I think so. Fresh features of the truth come out in regard to divine service in the assembly, and there are those in whom the work of God would express itself in a dignified way in giving a lead, committing themselves to the position in view of the *performing* of the service. Take the matter as to the Spirit, light was given as to it, but then what about the performance of the service? It is a question of those who can give a *lead* in regard to the performance of the service.
H.L.H. So the more development, the more evidence there is of the work of God, the more it is going to call for intelligence in regard to how things are taken on, as Moses here is marked by intelligence in the way he disposes of what is brought. There is a constant stream of exercise proceeding.
S.McC. Well, exactly, and when light is given in regard to the divine mind for the moment, we may be tested as to what we shall do and how we shall do it, as these princes were, but the work of God was equal to it and God honours it *immediately*, He comes right in immediately and He says, Take it of them. How important it is that in relation to the mind of God as revealed to us, the scope of the truth as in the first verse of this chapter (for that is what is in mind, the scope of the truth as we are viewing it in the tabernacle system) there should be the preparedness to commit ourselves *fully* to it in view of the support of it, not just objectively but on the line of performance.
E.Me. Does the "tent of meeting" suggest our present position, the recovered state of things?
S.McC. The tent of meeting suggests the idea of the assembly, where God's presence is known, where God has taken up His abode. In Leviticus He *called* out of the tent of meeting.
{172}
H.L.H. So the principles that you referred to would be connected with the light that God gives to us, in connection with what is prescribed, but the persons, the material in which the work of God comes to light is not confined or prescribed, it is something living in itself, is it not?
S.McC. Well, that is the point, that the work of God is equal to the moment, there is nothing prescribed in the way of a law describing what they were to bring. Leviticus abounds with prescriptions as to what they were to bring, but not in this relation, and we are always tested as to how we shall act and what we shall do, and how we shall take part in regard to the truth at any given time.
H.L.H. In Simeon and Anna we saw that very same thing, did we not, in the section where much is made of what is connected with the law of Jehovah, yet we see features that are not provided for in that law.
S.McC. Exactly, so that Christianity is a *living* system of things, not just a system of ritual where you have to consult a book as to what you should do and how you should proceed. How many of us in regard to this matter of the Spirit would have liked a book to just tell us *when* to speak to the Spirit, the exact time, the *exact* moment, and the *exact* terms to use, but we are to make room for the work of God in us as being equal to the light presented to us.
H.L.H. New Wine in new bottles.
S.McC. Exactly, a *living* state of it.
R.S. Would not the six *covered* waggons also imply that? That the thing is not opened out right away, so that you can see all of it, and think of it all in a moment and get on to it by heart?
S.McC. Very good, I think that is a very good suggestion, because it is interesting to note in different types of the Spirit in the Old Testament
{173}
how the thought of the covering appears. You will remember how it appeared in regard to Rebecca, as in the servant's presence when Isaac came forward, but in the Psalms, @Psalm 68, where we get a wonderful touch as to the Spirit, the Lord says, "Though ye have lain among the sheepfolds, ye shall be as wings of a dove *covered* with silver." It is a reference to the idea of the Spirit and what the saints are as *characterised* by the Spirit, that they are *covered* with this thought, whatever the silver suggests. Then in the book of Nehemiah where the gate of the fountain is referred to, the fountain gate (we might just look at that in the third chapter of the book of Nehemiah, because there is an interesting suggestion there, it does not appear in relation to any of the other gates), in verse 15, it says, "And the fountain-gate repaired Shallun the son of Colhozeh, the chief of the district of Mizpah; he built it, and *covered* it," now you do not get that allusion to any of the other gates, and I think in what you have referred to there is something suggested in that that the idea of what is hidden, what is covered, is linked with the present light as to the Spirit.
R.S. Is not that suggested too in the place that the Spirit Himself has taken in the economy? We cannot see the Spirit and yet we know Him?
S.McC. That is it, and in @1 Corinthians 2, Paul enlarges on the matter, that it is not a question of the mind of man, it is not something that he can take account of and look into, it is a question of what is hidden, as that chapter brings out, the Spirit searching even the depths of God. Now in regard to @Numbers 10, again we see in a chapter that brings before us fresh light in the testimony, because the chapter opens with the two trumpets of silver, it is a question of the ministry and fresh calls to rally to it in the light of the assembly. The trumpets of silver have that in mind, the clarion notes that may
{174}
be sounded at any time in the ministry as to different features of light that divine Persons may be calling attention to. And it is in this chapter that Moses seems to fail somewhat in his appeal to Reuel the Midianite, and yet God graciously comes in, we might say, in what transpires in the closing of the chapter in that the ark immediately moves forward without any reference to its being carried or the like, and then Moses immediately recovers himself to the blessedness of the position and sees just what has happened, and he says, "Rise up, Jehovah, and let thine enemies be scattered."
H.A.L. It is marvellous that he should have failed and then have been recovered so quickly.
S.McC. Well, that is the point in the passage, showing that men that are with God, like Moses, a priestly man like he was, if he should make a mistake he quickly recovers himself. Take David, how quickly David always recovered himself. The very fact that we do not recover ourselves quickly when we do something out of the way shows that we are not morally as great as we should be.
R.S. That is the characteristic of a spiritual man, the quickness of his recovery, he catches up to the position although he could not see it at first.
S.McC. Exactly.
V.B. It is the work of God asserting itself in a believer, would you say?
S.McC. I would say that, in this wonderful touch, "Rise up Jehovah, let thine enemies be scattered; and let them that hate thee flee before thy face." A remarkable word this as to the position, because Moses must have been taking a tremendously extended view when he said this, because *where* were the enemies and where were those that hated God at that particular moment? And then when it rested *he* says (notice that the stress is on *Moses* -- not the
{175}
people said, but *Moses* said) "Return, Jehovah, unto the myriads of the thousands of Israel," verse 36.
L.A.C. The previous section is connected with service as we have been seeing, but this is connected with the finding out of a *resting* place, have you anything in mind as to that?
S.McC. Well, I think it is suggestive in regard to the progress of the testimony in the wilderness, that there are resting places in which the light that has been vouchsafed to us, the light that has come to us, can be worked out, and move responsively in relation to it, do you not think?
M.S.S. In regard to chapter 7, is it not the local position, the working out of the truth in localities suggested in the twelve princes being named separately day by day, whereas in chapter 10 now we have rather the whole position of the testimony, the whole assembly moving together universally?
S.McC. What we have been impressed with of late has been the unity of the saints in regard to the matter of the sisters, how quickly throughout the world the brethren responded to the fresh feature of light, so that the sisters immediately came into all the care meetings, in response to it.
R.S. I was going to ask just now if in the movement of the testimony in the early days Saul of Tarsus did not act as an enemy, and then the ark acted in challenging him, by way of bringing him into blessing, coming in in that way so that the testimony might go on; and then it says that the assemblies had rest.
S.McC. I think that is the idea, because in the beginning of the Acts we see the progress of the ark going forward in relation to the testimony, and the overthrow of God's enemies. It is interesting in this passage how the mountain of Jehovah is brought in because it is not really mentioned much in Numbers at all, but yet it is brought into this section, "and
{176}
the ark of the covenant of Jehovah went before them in the three days journey," as if we get certain spiritual touches that appear over against verses 29 to 32.
H.L.H. You mean Moses had dropped in his thoughts to a lower level than what the mountain would suggest?
S.McC. Exactly. When you come to Deuteronomy he certainly has not dropped there, the mountain in all its blessedness is before him, suggesting an expression of the rights of God in His holy love in relation to the people. But he had dropped in these verses 29 -- 32, he forgot that they were God's property, he says to this man in verse 31, "Leave me not I pray thee" -- leave me not! This is not God he is speaking to, it is Reuel the Midianite. He says to him, "Leave me not, I pray thee, because thou knowest where we are to encamp in the wilderness, and thou wilt be to us for eyes," he forgot that the mountain of Jehovah suggests *God's* rights to the people, that *He* in the covenant has pledged Himself to see them through, in principle, into the land, the realm of His own choice thoughts, but Moses dropped from that, therefore the mountain of Jehovah is immediately moved on to our view in verse 33, and *the ark of the covenant* of Jehovah is moved into the position in verse 33 to remind us of God as faithful to His committals.
H.L.H. "If *we* are unfaithful God abides faithful, he cannot deny himself."
S.McC. That is it, that is the point.
F.H.P. And in verse 34 we get the cloud.
S.McC. Exactly, following on the mountain of Jehovah, and the ark of the covenant of Jehovah, we then get the *cloud* of Jehovah. The public protecting side surrounding the movement, "was over *them* (notice) by day when they set forward out of the camp."
{177}
W.H. The ark setting forward is the thought of recovery?
S.McC. Well, it is a remarkable thing the way it is put, it says, "And the ark of the covenant of Jehovah went before them," as if there is a kind of holy resentment of what took place in verses 29 -- 32, and divine love enters into the matter and goes forward.
A.T. Does the camp represent the place of protection?
S.McC. It says, "and the cloud of Jehovah was over them by day when they set forward out of the camp." I suppose the allusion would be to the encampment in that matter, and God, of course, protected them in *every* encampment.
L.A.C. I am wondering if the idea of consolidation is suggested in this section, whether as fresh light comes from God, as you have been referring to it, in relation to the light as to the Holy Spirit, and such, whether there is not need for the consolidation of every advancement in our own souls.
S.McC. I think that is the teaching in all the passages, I think the princes represent that idea in the beginning of chapter 7. They are prepared to see the consolidation of the position in their movements to support the whole position in relation to what they bring. And again we see in @Numbers 10, the movement to consolidate the position on the part of divine Persons Themselves, but then Moses recovering quickly to the matter he comes into it in verse 35. So nothing is lost, you might say, it is enriched, in fact, and the whole position is consolidated as the chapter ends.
H.E.B. While all the truth is to be maintained in relation to all the people of God, still there are those persons who stand out, as was the case with Moses here. You were referring first of all to the work of
{178}
God being equal to the position, but it is on the part of the people, would you say?
S.McC. That is right. And I think it is important, this matter of the consolidating of the gains in any fresh accessions of light, because if the gain is not consolidated the enemy might follow it closely and steal the gains. The great matter in any military movement such as Numbers contemplates in relation to the wars of the Lord, is that gains secured should be consolidated.
R.S. Is not that to take place during *each* encampment?
S.McC. Exactly.
R.S. We are to consolidate what ground we have taken.
S.McC. Well, that is what we are thinking of in referring to the end of the chapter, when it rested, he said, "Return Jehovah, unto the myriads of the thousands of Israel." It is a matter of resting now, and the working out and the consolidating of the gain that has come from the fresh movement forward.
H.E.B. Is that suggested in the thought when the Lord called the disciples apart to rest awhile? There was so much coming and going that they could not even eat bread.
S.McC. I suppose you get the same idea there. Now the time is gone and we should just refer to @Numbers 21, because we cannot finish without a reference to this wonderful section here where we get this free, responsive movement in verse 17, "*Then* Israel sang this song, Rise up, well, sing unto it: Well which princes digged, which the nobles of the people hollowed out at the word of the lawgiver, with their staves. And from the wilderness they went to Mattanah." It says in verse 16, "And from thence to Beer: that is the well of which Jehovah spoke to Moses, Assemble the people, and I will give them water. Then Israel sang this song." I
{179}
think it is remarkable in these circumstances, how the work of God in the saints, typified in Israel here, is equal to the light that is entering into the position, because reference is made to the light, "the well of which Jehovah spoke to Moses." You get "the book of the wars of Jehovah" referred to in verse 14, and then you get "the well of which Jehovah spoke to Moses," and then you get this: "Then Israel sang this song, Rise up well; sing unto it."
H.E.B. How does the thought of spontaneity, that un-prescribed movement you referred to at the beginning, link with the word of the lawgiver?
S.McC. Well, it says in verse 18, "*Well*, which princes digged, which the nobles of the people hollowed out at the word of the *lawgiver*, with their staves." That is, the well itself was drawn attention to by the word of the lawgiver, through the exercise of the princes; but the singing to it, the word to Rise up, sing to it, is from the people, it is spontaneous from them: so in the matter of the ministry as to the Spirit, we get the Lord superintending matters and the princes and the nobles bringing the well before the people, bringing the well to light in its proper dignity and glory, but when it was a question of what the saints would *do*. So it was often wondered why Mr. Taylor did not speak to the Spirit when he was first drawing attention to it, but said he was waiting for the saints to move, that is the point here.
R.S. That is a prince, patience, digging with staves -- slow work, and yet doing great work all the time.
S.McC. That is it, going on quietly and drawing attention to the well, bringing it into view -- the digging, and then the word of the lawgiver -- the authority of Christ superintending the whole matter.
H.E.B. The accession of light in relation to this matter is a very distinct help.
{180}
S.McC. Well, the question is the performance. What do they do here? Have the brethren got the liberty to speak to the Spirit in the performance of the service? That is the great matter that these free, responsive movements have in mind, that the light presented objectively is being responded to through the work of God in the saints, in a *living* way, not in a ritualistic way, or in a studied way out of a text book, in the living movements that these scriptures refer to.
H.A.L. I was wondering whether the question of the singing does not count largely now, calling for a revision of the hymn-book in connection with the light?
S.McC. Well, I think so, I think that is what it amounts to.
R.S. I do not think that there is anything more helpful than the remark, that the work of God in the saints makes them capable of taking on any light that is given them by God. It relieves us from effort and worry and wondering what we are to do, and we get to be restful and rely on God's own work in us. It is commensurate with the light.
S.McC. That is it.
E.Me. So that not only Moses sang, but the children of Israel.
S.McC. That is it, they responded to a good lead.
Oistins Town, Christchurch, Barbados.
{181}
SPIRITUAL QUALITY (10)
@1 Kings 7: 13 -- 39, 45 -- 47
S.McC. I thought that this passage might help us to see the great provision that was made in the vast system of glory that is in mind in 1 Kings, to maintain what was suited to it on the public side. You will notice the stress on "brass" throughout this section. In the very last verse that we read it says that the weight of the brass was not ascertained. The first part that we read speaks of a man of Tyre as a "worker in brass," verse 14. I think we would all freely admit that one of the things that tests us most is moral questions, which the working in brass suggests. Brass always has to do with the judgment of evil, that is, it is linked with the altar and these other vessels that have to do with cleansing and purification. 1 Kings in type bears on Christianity more than 2nd Chronicles which contemplates Israel, and the millennium more. The description of the temple setting in 1 Kings is much greater than the description in 2 Chronicles, and there are also things that are mentioned in 2 Chronicles that are not mentioned in 1 Kings, as for instance, the altar and the veil. The altar and the veil are not alluded to in 1 Kings, meaning that in the typical teaching for us, it is not so much the idea of approach that is emphasised in 1 Kings, as the idea of God's dwelling, God dwelling in the system. And we can understand, dear brethren, that as the light increases, the responsibility increases, as to the maintenance of what is right and proper in accordance with the dignity of the system, the assembly, that we are linked with. The provision for different things is *much* greater under Solomon in relation to the temple than it was for instance in relation to the tabernacle under Moses, because the
{182}
testimony has moved forward, the light has increased through David, and now under Solomon, the service of God has been *greatly* enlarged upon, the light as to it has greatly increased, especially in the Davidic regime, and as the light increases in regard to the assembly, in regard to God's house, we must expect correspondingly that the provision for the maintenance of suitable conditions must increase. And therefore, we find that with the increased light that we have received in this period of assembly revival, in these last few years a great many moral questions have been raised which were not raised before, and a good deal more details in regard to the principles of separation have been raised in the minds of the saints. And that enters into this section, that as the light increases and the glory of the system becomes greater in our souls, the provision for the maintenance of purified conditions is greater, and therefore the great stress in this chapter on the works in *brass*. And I think the Lord might help us to enquire a little on the wealth of this particular section we have read as providing in the public position -- the court's position in relation to the temple system, the means whereby what is suited to the house of God can be maintained. It is in mind first just to refer to this man and what characterises him, and then just an allusion to the *pillars* and their importance, and then the *sea*, and then to dwell somewhat on the lavers and the richness of ornamentation that is linked with the lavers, the *bases* of the lavers; all very suggestive as fitting in with the increased light in regard to Christ and the assembly in our time.
M.S.S. Would you say whether there is anything to be learned from the "sending for a workman" in verse 13? I was thinking of the first tabernacle system where two are named, Bezaleel and Aholiab, who are said to be skilled for the work of the tabernacle, which would seem to be a similar thought.
{183}
S.McC. Yes, so the Lord has stressed a good deal in recent times the idea of being "sent." Hiram is not coming into the matter from the voluntary standpoint exactly, he is coming in as under commission, sent for and fetched, in regard to this matter. And the fact that he is a widow's son would fit in, perhaps, with a certain feature of the teaching, and that he is of Naphtali, "he was a widow's son of the tribe of Naphtali, and his father was a man of Tyre, a worker in brass, and he was *full* of wisdom and understanding and knowledge, to do *all* kinds of works in brass." Now what is to be noted here, in this immediate point, is that while Moses was given a pattern on the mount as to the tabernacle system, there is no pattern mentioned here. Of course, David had the pattern by the Spirit, of all the things for the house of God. A very interesting thing that allusion is made to him as having it by the Spirit, but there is no allusion to a pattern here, it seems to stress the side in manhood here in this person "full of wisdom and understanding and knowledge, to do all kinds of works in brass." I think *that* is where we are tested when moral questions arise as to uprightness and what is right in the house of God, we would all like a book to give us some lay-out of precedents, but what tests us is this matter of being full of wisdom and understanding and knowledge, to do *all* kinds of works in brass.
L.A.C. Did you have something more in mind as to his being a widow's son?
S.McC. Well, it would seem he comes in along the line of certain sorrowful exercises, which the widow would suggest. While linking on with the system of glory, there is the suggestion of what he has had to do with in his own soul on this line, do you not think?
F.H.P. Do you mean deep feelings would enter into this work?
{184}
S.McC. I think that would be one of the things as, for instance, Paul -- what a worker in brass that great vessel was! As he writes the first letter to the Corinthians he is working in brass. Of course, the gold was there, and we could have another reading on that, but that is not our subject tonight, we are not forgetting that side, it is there in the chapters before, but what is now in mind is the *moral* question -- the working in brass. And the skill with which Paul wrote that first letter to the Corinthians, you might say he was full of wisdom and understanding and knowledge, to do all that was connected with the works in brass; but in the second letter he unveils the fact that he wrote it out of many tears, that anguish of heart lay behind it, showing how the letter was couched in feelings that marked Paul.
E.L.E. In the days of recovery we read of "two vessels of copper, precious as gold."
S.McC. Very good. "Two vessels of *shining* copper," the only place in Scripture that we get *shining* copper alluded to, precious as gold. We might just look at it, in the 8th chapter of Ezra, verse 27, "and twenty basons of gold, of a thousand darics, and two vessels of *shining* copper, precious as gold." I think that is a very good reference, as fitting in with our subject, because do you not think it suggests, in the days of recovery, the high standard on which moral matters are set -- "precious as gold." That is, they are not simple, ordinary kind of matters that we are not to pay much attention to; *all* these moral questions that have come up in recent years, so much among the brethren, and have tested the brethren, they are put on a high standard of value.
H.L.H. So that there is something for God in the way that they are resolved, do you not think?
S.McC. Exactly. "Precious as gold" would show how the moral side is to merge in with the spiritual side, and what there is for the pleasure of God.
{185}
C.Bl. When the apostle Paul says, "Let him that nameth the name of the Lord withdraw from iniquity", he uses the brass to separate from evil, in that way?
S.McC. Yes, that is the line, @2 Timothy 2, "Let every one who names the name of the Lord withdraw from iniquity ... " (verse 19) "*and* pursue righteousness, faith, love, peace" (verse 22). The first principle in our charter is *righteousness*, "pursue righteousness, faith, love and peace." You cannot put faith before righteousness in the matter of our charter for the last days, righteousness *must* come first, then faith, love and peace.
H.O.E. Is Hiram here like Timothy and his father like Paul?
S.McC. Very good. I believe there is something in that, because Timothy had a mixed parentage, just like this man here, this man had a mother of the tribe of Naphtali, but then his father was a man of Tyre, and Timothy's father is said to have been a Greek, so that there is a certain semblance in what you say. And then in relation to what you were referring to, Timothy came along the line of tears, "being mindful of thy tears."
H.O.E. As a young man the apostle put a good deal into his hands, did he not?
S.McC. He did! And that is the point here. Solomon was the king, but think of what he put into this man's hands to do, with confidence that the work would be carried on, and especially is it all the more testing in that it is works in brass, that is, it is work that had to do with moral questions.
A.T. Would you say there is a certain process the brass has to pass through before being formed?
S.McC. Well, I am sure there is something in that. So that is why we read that last section as to the plain of Jordan. Notice when it comes to the casting of the vessels Hiram is not mentioned. It says in verse 46, "In the plain of the Jordan did *the king*
{186}
cast them, in the clay-ground between Succoth and Zaretan." Now these two places are very interesting in themselves, but we have not got time to go into all the rich typical detail of this chapter, but it shows the environment in which the forming took place. Jordan is a good place to live in proximity to, from this view point -- I mean, the matter of works in brass.
C.B. Do you mean that there has to be the answering of all these moral questions that the standard might not be lowered in the progress of the truth?
S.McC. That is what I am thinking about. You take the epistle to the Romans that deals with the whole moral question in our souls first. Romans precedes Corinthians in the history of our souls. It is no use our going on and trying to work out moral questions in our local gatherings if they have never been worked out in our own souls. The teaching of Romans is that I first face the moral question in my own soul, become a *bondman* to righteousness -- a marvellous expression, a *bondman* to righteousness. Righteousness has such a place that I am in bond service to it, and the whole epistle is stressing the moral line in regard to our deliverance from the world, the law, and the flesh. It is stressing the moral side, but it has to be worked out in my own soul first, do you not think?
H.E.B. You are associating then the worker in brass with the brass itself?
S.McC. Well, a worker of brass, he is dealing with the *brass* side of things, not the *gold* side of things, I am not seeking in any way to detract from the gold side of things, I was saying there could be another reading on the gold side of things, but tonight we are enlarging on the *brass* which links with the public position more, and when you look over the past few years (I can only speak from what we are working out up in the north) it is tremendous the variety of
{187}
exercises that have confronted us in care meetings as to moral questions.
M.S.S. Would Solomon be viewed here rather as "Son over God's house," I mean, the Lord as that, rather than "Son of the Father's love"?
S.McC. I think so, although we cannot exclude the other, but I think he is viewed in this particular chapter particularly as being over the system, as it says, the stress in verse 48 is, "And Solomon *made* all the vessels that were in the house of Jehovah," and verse 51, "And *all* the work was finished that *king* Solomon made for the house of Jehovah." The stress is on the authority of Solomon over the realm and yet it is the authority of love which "Son over God's house" would perhaps stress.
G.B. It says, "Full of wisdom, understanding and knowledge," is the thought in mind that we should become individually qualified to deal with all moral questions that might arise, and the basic principle for that is self-judgment?
S.McC. Well, I should say that is just what the brass suggests -- self-judgment. It is a matter of judgment in a discriminatory way, and self-judgment is an important thing in all of our hearts. That is what the teaching of Romans is intended to help us on, that the moral question is first resolved in my own soul, then we proceed to Corinthians where we find it solved in the economy of the local assembly.
E.L.E. Now the father of Hiram was a man of Tyre, he came from the business world, did he not?
S.McC. Yes. So you can see how much this man would, in a way, have to face in the matter, the line was not very clear in his genealogy, but nevertheless from the maternal side, he is of Naphtali, and Naphtali gets a goodly word in Genesis and in Deuteronomy, "Naphtali, satisfied with favour, and full of the blessing of Jehovah, possess thou the west and the south." So that the line of Naphtali represents
{188}
a substantial line, as in the joy and gain of things in a certain light. So there is that advantage to him, although there is what might seem to be this other disadvantage, but it is not a disadvantage because he is very skilled in matters.
E.L.E. Showing that we can be occupied with the commerce of the world to a certain extent, if our calling is there, but nevertheless we can go in for the making of the brass.
S.McC. I think so, and it would help us to see that certain things that we might think a disadvantage can be overcome, we are very prone sometimes to excuse our deficiencies by making a lot of certain disadvantages, but the point is that we have to overcome in regard to disadvantages. Now this matter of the two pillars which we should look at briefly is an important thing in regard to the public position; the one Jachin, meaning "He will establish," and the other Boaz, meaning "In him is strength," There is amongst the saints in the system, in the light of these two pillars, the resources to carry things through. We are never, as it were, to be faced with things uncompleted, as if they cannot be carried through. Jachin and Boaz would, in the impress of them on our minds, mean that we see that things are to be carried through; not in human strength, but in strength which is divinely supplied.
E.L.E. The promise to the overcomer is that, "He that overcomes will I make a *pillar* in the temple of my God." Is that a reference to this, you think?
S.McC. No doubt. Reference to the idea of a pillar is very interesting in that way, particularly fitting that the Lord should bring it in in speaking to Philadelphia.
S.P. Would you say a word on the pomegranates on the capitals in relation to these pillars?
S.McC. Well, the pillars suggest that things are to be carried through. That is, we are never to be at
{189}
a loss, in that sense, things are going to be carried through. As Paul says in his very approach to the exercising moral questions in Corinth, "Christ the wisdom of God and the power of God." That is, there is a means to carry things through, but the pomegranates suggest certain features in the saints that are essential, as Paul says right in the midst of that, "Now I exhort you, brethren, ... that ye *all* say the same thing, ... that ye be perfectly united in the same mind and in the same opinion," That is, the pomegranate, along with the working in brass, in 1 Corinthians, is to stress all the way through the need of practical unity among the brethren.
S.P. I was wondering if in the pomegranate we do not see the need of unity for the carrying out of all these moral conditions?
S.McC. Yes, and another thing along with that to be noted, running through the pillars and the sea, is the numeral twelve. That is, it says, "a line of *twelve* cubits encompassed the second pillar," and then it says further down in verse 25, in regard to the sea, "It stood upon *twelve* oxen." We are reminded of love as underlying and entering into these great matters which involve the public side and the moral side in relation to the truth.
H.L.H. What would the capitals suggest?
S.McC. I think the capitals suggest a certain kind of dignity that attaches to the principle on which things are to be carried through, the capitals upon the two pillars -- a kind of ornamental setting on the top of the pillars.
H.L.H. It suggests that the thing is carried through to a finish, would it not?
S.McC. Exactly.
E.L.E. They would be very incomplete without those.
S.McC. They would. It is like @Psalm 133, that the oil runs down to the hem of the garments. That
{190}
is, a finished idea is in mind in the songs of the ascent. The songs of the ascent give us the moral and spiritual exercises of the remnant in the days of recovery in the ascent, and they finish with this idea, that a completed side of things is in mind, that the oil is running down to the hem of the garment.
H.L.H. So every matter in which moral issues are raised is to be taken to a certain conclusion, is that not so? There may be the danger at times of dropping matters at a certain time, but the thought is that they are to be carried right through.
S.McC. Well, that is what these things would stress, and what we were referring to, that we are not at a loss, and not to say that we cannot carry things through. If our souls and minds are imbued with these two pillars, we can see that there *is* provision in the system to carry things through; "not in strength which is of men, but in strength which is of God."
H.L.H. He that establishes and gives strength is the resource of the believer in any given circumstance that may arise, is He not?
S.McC. Exactly, and so as Paul opens up the first epistle to the Corinthians, he calls attention to the rich way in which they had been furnished, it is a question of their laying hold of the matter. For instance, at the end of the first chapter, in regard to Christ, he says, "Christ Jesus, who has been made to us wisdom from God, and righteousness, and holiness, and redemption," Christ of God has been made that to us. Well, surely there should be no lack in regard to all these matters, righteousness, wisdom, holiness and redemption. They represent all that is needed for the moral side of the position.
E.Ms. In the book of Ruth, do you think there is suggested in Boaz carrying the thing through to a finish, those features that are seen here?
{191}
S.McC. That is right. Naomi says, "The man will not be at rest until he hath finished the matter this day," and so it goes through.
F.H.P. It says, "And upon the top of the pillars was lily-work; and the work of the pillars was finished," verse 22. What have you to say of the lily-work?
S.McC. Well, I think it is a great matter that the lily-work should be in evidence amongst us -- the thought of purity. And then the lily-work stresses divine workmanship, but stresses the idea of purity, that our motives are pure, there is no opaqueness with us, no ulterior motives in the solving of moral questions. What is impregnating our minds is, "*God* will establish," and "In *him* is strength." It is not a question of me or anyone else seeking something for our own gain, the lily-work would suggest the idea of purity adorning all these matters.
F.H.P. And glory too, would you say? I was thinking of the comparison between the lily and the thorn.
S.McC. Exactly, that is what I was referring to in divine workmanship.
N.M. Would you connect the great house in @2 Timothy 2 with this? "In a great house there are not only gold and silver vessels, but also wooden and earthen; and some to honour and some to dishonour. If therefore one shall have purified himself from these in separating himself from them, he shall be a vessel ... serviceable," would that be connected with the thought before you?
S.McC. Well, it is connected with working in brass, that we have got to separate from the vessels to dishonour, "If therefore one shall have purified himself from *these*, in separating himself from them, he shall be a vessel to honour." That is, it is facing the moral question, whatever it may be that we have to leave, we have got to face it in our souls, and get
{192}
help in the working out of the exercise linked with facing it.
C.B. We get in Revelation, "His feet like fine brass, as burning in a furnace," @Revelation 1: 15. What place would that have here?
S.McC. Well, that is very interesting, because it shows, does it not, that the judicial side is in mind in the opening of the Revelation. It is not the free, unhindered side of love's responsive movement, but "His breasts as girt about with a golden girdle, and his feet like fine brass," showing that the moral side is particularly in mind in certain things unjudged in the history of the assembly, do you not think?
R.S. Even in connection with taking the Supper we are called upon to examine ourselves, that would not be the gold, that would be the working in brass, but the gold would be there nearby to furnish us with a greater reason for self-examination.
S.McC. Well, that is very interesting, I think it carries the thought of brass into it, because it is a question of self-judgment. A solemn thing to take up the Supper in a careless kind of a way, as if it was a form of ritual, without discerning what is there.
C.Bl. Would the uplifting of the brazen serpent serve to adjust the people in relation to the outward position in pointing them to the gold?
S.McC. Yes, that is an interesting link, it shows how the moral question was solved in that relation with regard to the people and their murmurings, and then the Spirit comes into view in the singing following that.
L.A.C. I was just noticing that it would appear in the chapter that what is connected with the foundation is of stone, and then the interior work is of cedar wood, covered with gold, but everything outside, outside of the house, that which we have to do with first before we go into the house is all brass, the pillars and the capitals, the sea, the bases, and
{193}
the laver, are all of brass, which is all outward but so to speak, that which we have to do with prior to our entering into the house.
S.McC. That is very interesting because it is a question of God's abode, God's dwelling, "Holiness becometh thy house, O Lord, for ever," the Psalmist says, "Thy testimonies are sure, holiness becometh thy house for ever," and all this stress in this portion has that in mind. In fact, the law of the house in Ezekiel is just that -- holiness.
H.E.B. Do you think that @Psalm 48 comes in here, where we have the suggestion of the towers, which might represent the elevated platform from which things are viewed; and then the bulwarks might be the suggestion of the brass before we come to the palaces?
S.McC. Yes, no doubt there is a link in that, because the *system* is protected from encroaching defilement and evil. But here, as the time is going, we should see the stress on the sea and the laver. The fact that so much is stressed as to the *basis* of the matter, the base of the sea and the base of the laver is important. The right basis for the maintenance of the thing is stressed, and we need to see that, especially as we come to the bases of *brass*, ten bases of brass for the laver. The sea was a great general position in the court, a fixed general position, but the lavers were a portable matter, a movable, portable matter, they represent the idea of flexibility more, over against what is fixed. And they represent how this service may be carried on in helping and assisting in the matter of keeping whatever impressions we have of Christ free from encroaching defilement.
P.E.T. What would you say about the twelve oxen, three looking toward the north, and three looking toward the west, and three looking toward the south, and three looking toward the east?
S.McC. Well, I think it shows that in this wonderful
{194}
system that typifies the heavenly system seen in the assembly, you get a united outlook in regard to the support of the great system of cleansing. So if the brethren in this city have a certain moral question that is faced and seen through, the brethren in other cities would not be at variance with it, they are supporting it on the lines of the unity of the Spirit, the unity of faith. That is, there is a unity entering into this matter of the support of the sea, the twelve oxen, faith is entering into it.
H.E.B. And the great thing in any moral matter taken up in this city is that the brethren should be concerned about unity in the judgment arrived at.
S.McC. We are not all diverging in regard to the question. Take the matter of associations that has been so much before us of late, what has marked the brethren generally in a remarkable way is the unity universally in regard to the matter, so that we stand together in relation to the support of the great idea of cleansing, as the sea suggests.
C.Bl. And we are assured of divine strength in that way?
S.McC. Yes.
H.O.E. The burden of the testimony is being borne universally.
S.McC. That is right.
A.Y. Is the unity and how things are borne out seen here in this clause in verse 26, "Its thickness was a hand-breadth "?
S.McC. Yes, it shows how human measurement enters into the matter, a hand-breadth represents that it is governed by certain measurements that speak of man, not of angels. It is not a matter of things being left to angels, the angels look, the heavenly intelligence look upon the assembly, you know, and see the all-various wisdom of God working out in these moral matters. Then another point to be noticed is, that all their hinder parts were inward.
{195}
That is, the place of strength is not on the outward position but on the inward, that is, the world does not know where our strength, in that sense, lies -- it is inward.
R.S. Would the hand-breadth suggest that things are left to us? Sometimes we say the Lord will work it out, but I was wondering if it is suggesting that the Lord would say. No, I have left it in *your* hands to work the matter out.
S.McC. Yes, that is what I had in mind in saying that it is not left to angels it is for *us* to work out. And the principalities and powers in the heavenlies are learning in the assembly, in the solving of these moral questions, the all-various wisdom of God.
M.S.S. Would the laver in the tabernacle where Aaron and his sons *had* to wash before they went in, be more individual?
S.McC. I think the sea generally was for the priests to wash in, and the lavers were for the rinsing of the offerings. That is, the offerings speak of impressions of Christ, we would serve one another in love, so that not just any natural feature might be promoted, but that what *that* brother and what *that* sister has of Christ should be preserved, the sea was for the priests to wash in and the lavers were for the offerings to be rinsed in. It is love working out in these different ways. And what is to be noticed too is that both of these vessels of cleansing could hold far more than is indicated, that is, there was always room for more in regard to the water, which is an important thing.
L.Br. It says the sea held 2,000 baths.
S.McC. Yes, but according to 2 Chronicles its capacity 3,000, the full capacity was not there in 1 Kings. We are always reminded in Christianity that there is something more.
R.A.E. Was that seen in Corinth where their first thoughts as to the man there had to be revised, the
{196}
cleansing took place more quickly than was thought at first, and he was restored.
S.McC. Very good. I believe there is something in that. *They* had a kind of fixed idea as to the matter, but the apostle had to help them with regard to that. There is a certain flexibility, in the capacity, it held 2,000, but as we are told in another passage, it could hold more.
L.A.C. Does the idea that it is *molten* all come into line with that? It says in verse 23, "And he made the sea, molten."
S.McC. Yes, it is very interesting this matter of what is molten in regard to the sea, and then in verse 33 it says, "The work of the wheels was like the work of a chariot wheel: their supports, and their rims, and their spokes and their naves were all molten." There is a certain kind of rigidity about the whole matter, in the taking up of the thing. We are to be impressed with that in love's service, that things are not held loosely, you know, but there is a certain firmness. Remember the Lord Jesus when He came to Peter on the line of the laver in @John 13, Peter says, Thou shalt never wash *my* feet. Well, the Lord is very firm about the matter, He says, "Unless I wash thee thou hast not part with me." Although it was love's service there is a firmness there, that there was to be no allowance for anything that would interfere with love's service. And I think that the molten idea suggests, not legal rigidity, but the rigidity that belongs to this system where things are held on the lines of firmness and faithfulness.
R.S. So at Corinth again the apostle says that the less he was loved by them the more he loved. Their not loving him would not hinder him going through them with in his love.
S.McC. That is right. And now we should refer briefly to all the ornamentation in relation to what
{197}
you say. *Why* should we get such richness of ornamentation on the *base* of the laver rather than on the laver itself? It is to show us what lies at the basis of what we are doing. If we are serving one another in love, what is at the base of it? What marks it basically, and foundationally? Is it that I might promote a little place for myself, make myself a little bit more conspicuous? Or what lies at the basis of it? Notice what it says here in verse 28, "And the work of the bases was this: they had panels, and the panels were between the fillets." Now those who know engineering will know that the fillets are for strengthening in corners. Fillets are put there to strengthen any weakened part. It is a matter of strengthening certain parts that may be weak. And then it says, "And on the panels that were between the fillets were lions, oxen and cherubim." Think of the dignity of the lion, the patience of the oxen and the discernment of the cherubim! All this is entering into the way in which by love we serve one another on the principle of the laver. And then it says, "Over the fillets there was a base above; and beneath the lions and oxen were garlands of festoon-work." The word 'festoon-work' is translated in other passages of Scripture "descent, or going down." That is, underneath the feature of dignity and patience, are garlands of descent-work, or going downward. The right way to serve one another in love, is not to get a brother or sister and show them how big we are, but how low we can go down in serving them.
E.Me. Is that What Paul admired in Timothy, his care with genuine interest for the saints?
S.McC. He did, and in @Acts 20 you feel that there are *garlands* of festoon-work! Not just a little bit, but garlands of it. That is, the whole thing is *richly* ornamented, the thing is profuse, the way he holds up his address, to go down, descend, and embraces
{198}
Eutychus; it is the principle of garlands of festoon-work, descent-work in profusion.
L.A.C. I have been looking at verse 30 and the verse following that: "And every base had four wheels of brass, and axles of brass," would that suggest that in the moral support which underlies everything, this matter of brass and what it morally refers to, must always be kept there even in detail?
S.McC. Exactly, that is important. You do not go along the lines of human niceness and kindness and excuse evil, or excuse wrong influences of sin, all your movements are marked by the brass, that is the moral side, self-judgment, the element of judgment of evil and of sin as the brass stresses, the wheels suggesting the movements, and the whole thing being molten together, suggesting that there is no looseness in the matter.
H.L.H. There were molten shoulder-pieces behind these garlands. Does it not suggest that things are taken up in the strength that is derived from maintaining the judgment of evil?
S.McC. Well, I think that is right, so that if you go to a brother you are not overcome by his personality and what he is naturally, or a sister, you are not overcome by what she is naturally, there is this strengthening part behind all your movements so that you carry the thing through according to love's way, as suggested in the laver.
L.A.C. The idea suggested in connection with the word 'molten' is that it is all of a piece, is that not so?
S.McC. That is it, that is what I am referring to, it is the solidity of the matter. Paul, as has often been alluded to, draws attention in @1 Corinthians 13, to the great subject of love -- it is the cement that holds the brethren together, the great principle of love in that chapter. Well, if we speak with tongues of angels and the like that does not mean much if
{199}
we have not got love. Love is the bond of perfectness in the sense in which we are referring to it.
M.S.S. Is that suggested in verse 37, where it refers to ten bases, not twelve, it says, "All of them had one casting, one measure, one form"?
S.McC. Exactly, showing that *I* do not go to a brother one way, and *you* go to him in another way. We are all to be marked by unity in these matters, "*one* casting, *one* measure, *one* form," we think the same thing and speak the same thing.
C.Bl. Where there is lowliness we will be able to serve one another in love without lacking in moral dignity?
S.McC. That is it, that is the garland of festoon-work -- it is in blessed profusion, garlands of it, going downward. It is very difficult for us to go down.
S.C. "The four shoulder-pieces to the four corners of one base" (verse 34), would that have any bearing on the truth of the testimony universally?
S.McC. I think so, the shoulder-pieces would be strengthening parts too.
L.A.C. I just wanted to ask about the expression "clay-ground" in verse 46; it says, "the king cast them in the clay-ground." Is it not marvellous that God is carrying out now, in connection with weak, mortal man, all these blessed thoughts of His, and working out matters of such great moral consequence now in persons like ourselves?
S.McC. Well, I am sure it is, because it is fitting us for the day of glory, we will be part of what is coming out. Think of what God can do in the clay-ground, what the Lord Jesus Christ as king here in the type can do in the clay-ground. Zaretan is a testing place, and then as we are held in proximity to the Jordan (we know what the teaching of the Jordan is), we shall not come under the power of what would mar us in relation to God's house.
M.S.S. Is underlying all this the thought that it
{200}
is God's house, and His service is connected with it, what is for His pleasure?
S.McC. That is it, and we must be governed by His standards, not ours, I think that is the point.
A.T. I was thinking of verse 29, where the formation of features are mentioned -- the lions, the oxen and the cherubim.
S.McC. Well, I think it is the ornamentation, it is stressing what enters into the *way* we do things. We have had Luke's gospel before us, it says of the women in chapter 23 that they saw *how* the body of Jesus was placed. Luke stresses the "how," "*how* God anointed Jesus of Nazareth who went about doing good." You may say, It does not matter what kind of way I do anything, but it does, the more light we have as to the assembly the more we should be marked by the grace of the system and comeliness in what we do. And the rich ornamentation shows that there is dignity, spiritual dignity about the way we carry on love's service through these purifying and cleansing channels. The ungodly king Ahaz said he did not want to tempt Jehovah. He sounded as if he was a pious man, but when you look into the man's history, you find that he took the lavers off their bases, stripped them, and took the sea off the oxen. That is, he, is the type of man that has got no use for the principles of cleansing, and there are many like that.
P.E.T. So when the blessed Lord washed the disciples feet He also wiped them with a towel.
S.McC. Very good, that is, He completed the service.
Chapman Street, Bridgetown, Barbados.
{201}
SPIRITUAL QUALITY (11)
@1 Kings 1: 38 -- 40; @1 Chronicles 29: 20 -- 22; @Ezekiel 48: 5 -- 12
S.McC. The thought came into some of our minds this morning as we were together in this place that there is a suggestion of a stream or a current in relation to Zadok, moving in relation to the great thoughts of God as to Christ typified in Solomon, God's anointed. One has been impressed this morning and in continuing to think about it, that there is a definite suggestion in the type, in this stream and current of movement that God seems to make so much of, of that which is linked with the Holy Spirit. Not that we are saying that Zadok is a type of the Holy Spirit, I would like that to be clear, but there is that with Zadok, and what he does and the way he moves, that particularly draws our attention to a stream and current of movement that is marked by the Spirit's presence in type, both in the horn of oil in 1 Kings, and in the matter of the anointing in @1 Chronicles 29, I think it is important to see how the Spirit of God seems to have a right-of-way in a vessel like Zadok as counteracting the anti-Christian and apostate influences suggested in Adonijah. We are faced with that all the time. It is not our intention to dwell upon that side so much, being the first day of the week we want to keep the positive side as presented in Zadok more before us, but it is essential to a clear apprehension of the truth, that we see how he entered upon things in the opening of Kings; that it is a matter of what is according to the mind and purpose of God going through, and the flesh, of course, in these others (particularly Adonijah who sought to exalt himself) is operating to thwart, we might say, the divine end in regard to, in type,
{202}
Christ, God's Anointed One. There are various elements that act and react in the chapter in regard to the matter of Solomon. Solomon would represent what is peculiarly choice and fittingly linked with our day and time in relation to what is before us in the assembly. We should, because of the time and the need for keeping to our scriptures that we have read, abide by what has been suggested. It says in verse 39, "And Zadok the priest took the horn of oil out of the tabernacle, and anointed Solomon." I do not think we will have much difficulty in seeing how the Spirit of God enters into this movement, especially a movement that is linked with the universal position, suggested in the tabernacle. It is not like David's own anointing so much, where the word to Samuel was, "Fill thy horn with oil" -- a matter of the personality of the great prophet Samuel, and the spirituality marking him, in "fill thy horn with oil," because the allusion would be to Samuel himself, and the power of his prophetic personality and ministry, and service: it is somewhat different when we come to Solomon, it is more a matter of what is linked with the whole position of the assembly, as it says, "The horn of oil *out of the tabernacle*" -- the tabernacle or tent of meeting being a suggestion of the assembly, I thought we might be helped in seeing for a moment how Zadok comes into view in relation to the horn of oil in this setting of the tabernacle and making way for what Solomon suggests. We might think of the beginning of the work of recovery of 130 years ago as fitting in with the Davidic side, the powerful personality of God's servants suggested in Samuel, their horn filled with oil; how matters were met on that principle, powerful personality in prophetic ministry. Of course, it descends to our own time too, and in Solomon's time things that were passed over in David's time are not passed over in Solomon's time, they have become
{203}
adjusted. A lot of things have come up that perhaps the brethren at the beginning of the revival did not take up in the same way as they are now, under the hand of Him who is Son over God's house.
H.L.H. What would correspond in our day to making Solomon king?
S.McC. I think it would correspond with what is transpiring in the assembly, the wonderful way that Christ has been signally distinguished beyond doubt in the ministry, especially as to the truth of the Lord's supper in the last fifty years. Time after time, year after year, the truth as to the Supper has been enlarged upon, and the service of God, and the unique place of Christ particularly standing out all the time, especially in regard to what followed the readings at Barnet as to the Lord's sonship.
E.L.E. Would that answer to "anointing Solomon the second time"?
S.McC. There seems to be something like that in it. It seems to me what you might call an added touch in the way of what love would do, as in a realm where the truth is so wonderfully full and so wonderfully free, as in @1 Chronicles 29.
L.A.C. Would you explain for us, so as to make the matter quite clear, why Zadok cannot be regarded as a type of the Holy Spirit?
S.McC. Well, I am just seeking to guard going too far with the types. It says, "Zadok the priest," and we would hardly refer to the Spirit as a priest. While we may refer to the Spirit as augmenting the priesthood of Christ, it would not be quite in keeping with the truth, nor would it be comely to refer to the Spirit as a priest.
L.A.C. Is it also because in certain connections here in Kings he, Zadok, is found along with others, apparently on their same level?
S.McC. Exactly, such as our section opens with Nathan, Benaiah, and the others, all these representing
{204}
elements, I think, that the Spirit of God would use to furnish a kind of a background for the horn of oil to come forward, that is, the liberty and freedom of the Spirit's movement in the distinguishing of Christ. I think Zadok is more a type of the stream and current in which the Spirit is moving in view of the distinguishing of Christ. He represents one in whom the Spirit has a right-of-way, he is the priest, "Zadok *the* priest," representing one who has the Spirit and who is marked by the Spirit in what he does. As the priest he typifies what, in Christianity, is marked by the presence of the Spirit, because the priests in Christianity represent those that have the Spirit, those who are capacitated to think and to act for God by the Spirit.
C.B. Are you stressing a priestly state amongst the saints by which the Spirit can be free to carry through God's thoughts?
S.McC. That is helpful, that Zadok represents a state among the saints in which the Spirit of God has particular right-of-way and liberty in bringing forth the distinctions and uniqueness of Christ, as in the type before us.
W.H. It says, "the people rejoiced with great joy." Zadok moves intelligently?
S.McC. He did. I think we can see at the present time in what Zadok represents, a remarkable stream in the assembly in which the Spirit is moving, and we may reverently say, flowing! Because the types of the Spirit are very fluid and liquid in the Scriptures. So that in the language of the type we can refer to the Spirit as moving or flowing in this stream and current, that is, making way for Christ: because it is evident that the Spirit of God will not support anything that makes room for any of us -- I mean, as over against Christ.
R.A.E. Is it your thought that we are to be brought into this current? It says in verse 40,
{205}
"All the people came up *after* him," he gives a lead but the people come up *after* him.
S.McC. That is the point, that you have a rallying thought in this *great* movement where the Spirit of God is operating, typified in the oil, in the setting of the tabernacle as before us. It is not the oil outside the tabernacle, but it is the horn of oil out of the tabernacle, meaning that it is the Spirit in relation to the assembly, because the Spirit is not in the world. He is in the assembly.
S.G.H. What is the thought of their causing Solomon to ride upon king David's mule?
S.McC. I think it is just to show that Solomon is a counterpart of David, that in the way of looking at the truth we must take David and Solomon as one, the one is a counterpart of the other in that way, do you not think?
M.S.S. Is what is moral suggested in Zadok's history? I was thinking of the way Abiathar was displaced because of unfaithfulness.
S.McC. That is one of the things that has been in mind in the line of enquiry suggested, that the moral side runs through in Zadok. In Ezekiel we will find in looking into the last chapter in the presence of the holy heavings, the holy movements of devoted strength and love amongst the people of God, in the appreciation of the purposes of divine love, that a place is found for Zadok. You see how the moral line, as we might speak of it, merges into the line of purpose, and counsel, in Zadok's position in the different phases in which he is viewed.
H.L.H. So there should be a gathering-up of power as things go on, accessions of light rather than a diminution of it?
S.McC. That is the point, and so the passage that we have read is very important, verses 38, 39 and 40, "all the people came up after *him*, and the people piped with pipes, and rejoiced with great joy,
{206}
so that the earth rent with the sound of them." We can see how the power extends. The matter of Adonijah and those that were linked with him, Abiathar and Joab, is weakened and the whole position got the foundation taken from under it -- not that there was any foundation perhaps to it -- but there anyway *their* movement was gathering strength, but *this* movement is gathering strength, and the Spirit of God particularly before us, in vessels, as in Zadok the priest with the horn of oil, linked with the assembly, in type, in the tabernacle.
C.Bl. So you would say that Zadok represents a person who gives place to the Spirit in order that room may be given to Christ in that way?
S.McC. That is it. That is the *great* end of the service of the Spirit -- to make room for Christ in our souls.
P.E.T. Is strength and power seen in *the* horn?
S.McC. I think that is good. I think that is just what is suggested in it. It is a question of *power*, power as linked with the Spirit. You will remember we have allusions to horns particularly in relation to the Davidic line. You do not find it in the same way in other parts of scripture. For instance, Hannah's horn, she says, "My horn is lifted up in Jehovah," she is making way for God's anointed as she refers to this in the end of her song there. Then we get, in @Psalm 132, God taking account of *David's* horn. He is going to cause the horn of *David* to bud, and then we get in @1 Samuel 16, Samuel's horn, the prophetic horn; we get the priestly horn of Hannah -- of prayer; the prophetic horn of Samuel, and the kingly horn of David -- God's king, in @Psalm 132, causing his horn to "bud forth," his enemies are clothed with shame. And the horn here now is standing linked, not with any particular person as belonging to a person -- it is not a question of powerful personality here in relation to the horn as in Hannah,
{207}
David and Samuel, but it is a question of *the assembly*. What the Lord is stressing at the present time more and more is the assembly. The tabernacle is a type of the assembly, and the power that is linked with that realm to set off and to carry through, as the Spirit has right-of-way in such persons as these, the divine thought as to Christ.
V.B. Would you say that in verse 40 we have the power seen in the universal position?
S.McC. I thought so. So that what we had this morning in this room was a little touch of the buoyancy as linked with this position, as the liberty of the brethren was marked in the service of God. The idea of what was sustained. It is a little forerunner, of what is coming in in the world to come.
<blockquote>"Thou dost make us taste the blessing <br>Soon to fill a world of bliss." (`394:5)</blockquote>
We touch it now in the assembly.
H.A.L. As far as Zadok is concerned, would you link the two sons of oil in the reference in Zechariah?
S.McC. I suppose by long extension to Zechariah there would be a link there, because they represent what is in the current of the Spirit's power.
A.T. In verse 38 there is no instruction given them as to what to do, yet there is movement.
S.McC. That is good. Of course what precedes this and what we have not gone into, but we should keep in mind is Bathsheba and how Nathan comes into the matter. Thank God for Nathan, the prophet, he comes into the matter too, and Zadok the priest, and what seems to mark the position here now to which you are referring is the intelligence in these men. Zadok apparently has no instruction as to the horn of oil, specifically, I mean, he seems to understand and to know what is required. As it says, "And Zadok the priest took the horn of oil out of the tabernacle and anointed Solomon." It is specifically
{208}
linked with Zadok. And as we are stressing, he represents a channel in whom the Spirit is moving, in this wonderful stream and current, where Christ as typified in Solomon is to be made way for. And I think it is important in our gatherings, in the light of the assembly, that the Spirit should have right-of-way in this particular matter, because the great point is Solomon and what he is to God -- Christ and what He is to God -- what is in the divine mind in relation to the matter of government, and as to the strengthening of his hands.
R.A.E. So that while it applies to the whole general position, would you not say that we can make a special application of it as being linked peculiarly with the Supper and what follows, as to the distinguishing of Christ amongst us, that we need to carry in our minds that it is the Spirit operating in the saints that does that?
S.McC. That is what I was thinking about, I was particularly linking our subject with this morning, the Lord's supper and what flowed out of it. We do not want to be in the current of Adonijah or Joab or Abiathar, they are all centring around the man of sin and shame: how much part they can take, and the kind of part they can take, and how well worded it may be, all that is really in the spirit of Adonijah in which Joab and Abiathar are moving, whereas Zadok the priest, and Nathan and the others are moving in the current of the Spirit who is distinguishing Christ.
M.S.S. Would this show that there is what is public connected with the service of God? It is a question of a public matter, is it not, the assertion of Solomon's position, faced with the apostasy?
S.McC. As the word says in @1 Corinthians 11, "For as often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink the cup, ye announce the death of the Lord, until he come," verse 26. That is, it is Solomon in mind.
{209}
That is, the appearing, not the rapture, the appearing of the Lord to take up His rights in administration and government in the world.
A.K.H. Do the Pelethites and the Cherethites bear out that thought? In Samuel there is reference to them as being the executioners or bodyguards, is there not that feature about the Supper?
S.McC. Well, there is. A very important feature this, of bodyguards, those that surround the king, those that are concerned about the king's honour and the king's glory, and who he is. So the Cherethites and the Pelethites represent certain features of the work of God in the saints that stand in this way around Christ.
S.W. Would Abiathar represent the official side?
S.McC. In a wrong way, yes. There is the official side in a right way but Abiathar represents the official side in a wrong way. He is in a distinguished office but he is carried by a wrong current, wrong movements that really link on with the man of sin and shame that the Lord has set us free from.
S.W. So you would then say that where the official side has broken down and failed, the moral side goes through?
S.McC. That is it, that is how we should look at it, and it fits in with our time -- that the official side has broken down, but the moral side is maintained and goes through in Zadok, right through to Ezekiel.
S.P. So in our day we need the Spirit to be preserved out of the anti-Christian and apostate element that exists around us.
S.McC. Well, we do. It is the only way that we will be preserved and kept from going out of fellowship -- getting into the anti-Christian stream. Now that is what going out of fellowship means. Do not let us think anything less of it. To go out of fellowship means we are in danger of getting into the
{210}
anti-Christian stream, and the danger of being carried completely off with it. The young brethren need to bear that in mind -- salvation is in the assembly, in keeping among the saints. To get out of the stream where the Spirit of God is. He is in the assembly, to get out of it means virtually that you may go into the anti-Christian stream, and we want to keep out of that.
C.B. The blowing of the trumpet here was to bring about a decision in the minds of the people as to who they were going to follow?
S.McC. Very good. It seems to be a suggestion of the wonderful way in which the ministry has called attention to the honour and glory of Christ in the revival of the truth. I think we want to keep to the thought of the assembly, the greatness of the realm, what we are as together in assembly, the power that there is in the realm rather than the individuality that belongs to us. There is power in the realm and there is great comfort in that, because a young brother may not think he has got much, but if he has a desire to take part and he takes part he will be *carried* in that power, maybe carried beyond his measure. The power is not in the individual but in the realm -- in the assembly realm; "all the people" stresses that thought.
R.S. I was going to ask if "Behold, his couch, Solomon's throne; threescore men are about it," if the mighty of Israel does not bear on it? Not only Solomon's throne but Solomon's couch.
S.McC. Very good, I am sure it does. I was thinking of that a little bit earlier when reference was made to the Cherethites and the Pelethites. We have had the feeling and sense, in the way that the ministry has been moving, how there has been that thought of *guarding* the Person of Christ, care and concern as to the honour and glory that belongs to Him, His peculiar distinctiveness.
{211}
E.L.E. If anyone doubts that let them read our hymnbook.
S.McC. Exactly.
H.E.B. Would what you are saying link with @Genesis 24, where the servant says, "My master has one son [there were other sons we know] and to him he hath given all that he hath"?
S.McC. Yes, you are referring to Abraham and Isaac. It is wonderful how attention is focussed on Isaac, and also on Joseph, the generations of Jacob -- we get Joseph, and that is all. We have to wait till all the moral exercises are followed through before we get the rest of the genealogies.
S.K. If there is anything to be ministered to the pleasure of divine Persons it must be in the power of the Holy Spirit?
S.McC. I think that must be understood. Any activity outside the Spirit in the assembly would not have any power, "We are the circumcision who worship by the Spirit of God." What we had last night was stressing the Spirit's power in the matter of the application of the truth.
A.Y. Would you say that this power in the truth was even recognised by the opposing element?
S.McC. Well, it is, and it will always be so, that where you get a current and stream where the Spirit has right-of-way in priestly elements, in prophetic elements, you will find that the opposition will *have* to recognise where the power is.
A.Y. So in verse 43, "And Jonathan answered and said to Adonijah, Indeed, our lord king David has made Solomon king. And the king has sent with him Zadok," and so on. They recognised the power that was there in Solomon.
S.McC. Exactly. Now in @1 Chronicles 29, we have a remarkable setting where things are sustained. I think if there is one thing that tests us more than anything else in the assembly it is the matter of the
{212}
sustaining of things, and this is a wonderful realm and environment we are in in @1 Chronicles 29, it is filled with glory. It is the fortieth year of David's reign. Great things are in it -- the greatness of God, the greatness of Christ, the greatness of the Spirit too is in mind in the anointing -- all giving character to this environment, and we may say, the greatness of the saints. There is a remarkable allusion to this matter of the saints in this section. We might have thought that all the splendour and glory of the fortieth year (there was so much wealth entering into it, so much power and glory entering into it), that out of the way elements might be forgotten about, but there is an interesting allusion in chapter 26: 31, "Of the Hebronites was Jerijah the head" (notice this bracketed remark because the Spirit of God has something in it), "(as to the Hebronites, according to their families according to the fathers in the *fortieth* year of the reign of David they were *sought* for, and there were found among them mighty men of valour at Jaazer in Gilead;)" Now there is something choice about that, because if there is one thing I think the Lord is drawing our attention to it is the essential need of *everybody* in the service of God. And while the fortieth year of David marks great profusion in wealth and richness in regard to the service of God, great glory before our souls, yet there was the seeking of these elements, the Hebronites, and the bringing of them into the current that flowed, in which these things are moving. I think it is a most delightful to see that and I think the Lord is drawing our attention to it in the assembly at the present time.
E.L.E. Perhaps we do not seek for them enough.
S.McC. Maybe.
H.L.H. Who would you say the Hebronites represent?
S.McC. Well, I would say they are a people
{213}
according to their name, who have some kind of link with another world -- with *that* world in the resurrection from among the dead.
C.B. The present activities and service of the Spirit are furnishing the assembly for that world at this time?
S.McC. Exactly.
R.S. As this stream goes on and there is more power there is more to be recovered into the position from the captivity?
S.McC. That is what I am thinking of. And material that may have been dormant is more and more coming into the stream, and actively moving in it, flowing in it, because things are very fluid in this section as to David and all through this section as to Solomon. Things are not according to a creed, according to pure ritual, because Solomon is anointed a second time. And then it says, as we were noticing this morning, in verse 21, "They sacrificed sacrifices to Jehovah, and offered up burnt-offerings to Jehovah, on the morrow *after* that day." That is, things are multiplying as they go on, not according to a specific ordinance, but according to the elasticity that belongs to the realm where the Spirit is particularly free.
H.L.H. I was noticing that the first thing in connection with the anointing in Kings, is that joy and gladness flow from the anointing, whereas in Chronicles the anointing seems to issue out of the joy, as if conditions there were such that they anointed Solomon a second time.
S.McC. A remarkable thing that. We anoint him once but then we anoint him again, as it were, as we move on. That is, the greatness of Christ affects our souls, so that in the presence of this kind of glory there is this un-prescribed movement.
E.L.E. You get in this section the suggestion of God as Head, is not that remarkable?
S.McC. It is indeed. The chapter is a very choice
{214}
one. It is remarkable that the only two persons mentioned outside of David and Solomon are Jehiel the Gershonite, a man you know who followed principles through, and then this man Zadok the priest, but as the chapter ends of course it gives us a backward reference to all the wealth of the ministry that had preceded the matter, that is, Samuel the seer, the book of Nathan the prophet, and the book of Gad the seer -- all the wealth of prophetic ministry that had preceded and enters into what is present here, and we have to think of that in our time.
M.S.S. Are we to understand from verse 22 that Zadok himself was anointed?
S.McC. That is how I understand it, it says, "Anointed him to Jehovah to be prince, and Zadok to be priest." And so we have the supremacy of God alluded to in the chapter, no doubt the Father would be typified in Jehovah, and we have got the distinction of Christ, but then what is linked with the Spirit stands out in the anointing. The Spirit is before our souls in this great matter of the anointing, both as to the governing side, the side of dignity in the prince, in type; or as to the side of the service of God and holiness among the saints. Although, I suppose, there may be a certain way of referring to Christ, too, in relation to Zadok the priest.
L.A.C. It is the Spirit who stresses, "All the congregation" so much. I was wondering whether it was not the Spirit's mind distinctly to draw brothers and sisters alike into this marvellous stream. There are two women who are associated with the activities in 1 Kings, which we are reading, and the scripture referred to in the Song of Songs, as a counterpart to the warriors there are the daughters of Jerusalem who paved the palanquin of Solomon with love. Is that not all, so to speak, seen here in the expression "the congregation"?
S.McC. Very good, I think it is. As we were
{215}
referring to it this morning, it is to be noticed, the 'alls' in this chapter. It is remarkable from the beginning right through. First in relation to God's position as exalted as Head above *all*, and then as we come down we get this matter of, "and David said" (verse 20) "to *all* the congregation" -- that is, brothers and sisters. It is a matter of the complete idea of the assembly.
H.E.B. Do you think it would be on the level of Ephesians, where the apostle, after unfolding all the wealth in the first chapter, prayed that we might apprehend with *all* saints what is the length and breadth and depth and height. *All* saints are included there again as representing the universal position?
S.McC. I think so, I think there is something in that. It says "the drink offerings and sacrifices in abundance for *all* Israel." Well, think of these refined, rich thoughts, standing related to the whole position. Not just one or two but the *whole* position is in mind. The Lord has that in mind at the present time, the idea of the *whole* assembly.
L.A.C. In verse 14, we have the expression "for *all* is of thee, and of that which is from *thy* hand have we given thee."
S.McC. Very good, showing how things are flowing from God and going back to God. Then the chapter finishes with, *all* the reign of David, as it says in verse 30, "with *all* his reign and his might." There is no idea of @2 Samuel 12 exactly, here, although it is in the background, but it is not referred to here. "With all his reign and his might" alludes to the completeness of the idea, the power that was there in David abstractly all the way through in relation to the anointing.
M.S.S. In connection with the anointing of Zadok, would there be the suggestion of the resources and ability in the Spirit, as being in and with the saints in this great matter of the service of God?
{216}
S.McC. Well, that is what I am thinking. It is a question of the freedom that the Spirit has amongst us, in relation to these *great* thoughts, because we *need* the Spirit, it is a question of His *power* pervading -- "*By* the Spirit all pervading" -- that is what the anointing of the prince and the priest suggests.
M.S.S. We might think we are not equal to the great matter of the service of God, but the thing is, it is the *Spirit's* power.
S.McC. Well, exactly, *the Spirit's power*. The power is *here* in the way in which we are now looking at it, not at the right hand of God. There *is* power at the right hand of God, but there is power *here*, the Spirit is here, and we touch every phase of the service of God: both in relation to the dominical side, in relation to the side of union, in relation to the side of the family, the Father, or in relation to the fullness of God -- we touch it all in the Spirit *here*, not in heaven, but here.
A.T. Would you say verse 20 is what is final?
S.McC. That would be a kind of a leading note, of course, in the chapter. It is the Lord helping the saints, in type in David. "David said to all the congregation, Bless now Jehovah your God. And all the congregation blessed Jehovah the God of their fathers, and did homage to Jehovah and the king." Notice it is not just the God of David, the God of David is alluded to elsewhere, but it is the God of their fathers: it is all the accumulated light entering into the environment, giving added touch and tone to the service.
H.O.E. Has not the presence of the assembly here an effect on the earth generally?
S.McC. Well, it certainly has. We want to see that more and more, what the assembly means at the present time, the power and influence that is linked with it in the light of the Spirit's presence.
H.O.E. At the end of our first scripture it says,
{217}
"The earth rent" (@1 Kings 1: 40), and at the end of the second, "Over Israel, and over all the kingdoms of the countries," @1 Chronicles 29: 30.
S.McC. Very good, showing us the extensive range that this kind of influence affects.
E.Me. Does that link with the queen of Sheba and how she was affected and came in? She was affected as seeing this wonderful realm.
S.McC. No doubt, there is something in that. She was particularly affected by the altar, the manner of the ascent and the like.
R.S. Would this expression "God of their fathers" save us from living merely on the past? All that the Father has given is to be brought forward on the principle of accumulation?
S.McC. That is the whole point. It is a great thing to see that. Mr. Darby's ministry does not conflict with the present day. Mr. Stoney's ministry does not conflict with the present day, *all* the ministry is carried forward, and the light and power of it is *all* in the assembly at the present time, giving added touch and tone to the service of God.
R.S. In saying that there may be time to add this. Mr. Raven says that if the Spirit could be looked at objectively we could worship Him. And then he goes farther and says later on that the Spirit is *with* us as well as being *in* us.
S.McC. Very good. We should see all that in regard to the past ministry of these beloved men of God. We have been careless in not taking account of certain details which they refer to. As for instance, the opposers of the truth as to our Lord's sonship. As the truth of our Lord's sonship came forward the opposers readily took hold of Mr. Darby's expression, but never one of them quoted the expression in the Notes and Comments on John, chapter 1, they knew better.
{218}
E.L.E. So with F.E.R., he did not bring it forward at the time when he got it.
S.McC. No, he did not. Now we must finish with a word as to Ezekiel. I think it is important to see that this stream, and the flowing of things in which the Spirit of God may be viewed in the type in relation to Zadok is honoured of God. We have a wonderful realm of love and glory in @Ezekiel 48. From chapter 40 onwards spirituality is tested. As to the ministry of this book, we follow devious routes and devious ways; one way they go in and they go out, and they turn backward and they go forward; they take all kinds of turns and we are tested as to all that in the understanding and apprehension of the truth, as it is viewed in Ezekiel's system. But now the chapter ends with this remarkable touch as to the heave offering, showing that after *all* the exercises in the book, strength and power is contemplated in the saints, as moving in the appreciation of God's choice thoughts -- the inheritance, and Zadok is particularly considered for. You will notice that it says just before, "And the sanctuary of Jehovah shall be in the midst of it. It shall be for the midst of it. It shall be for the priests that are hallowed of the sons of Zadok" (verse 11) as if God must dwell by Himself with this line.
L.A.C. What way exactly is this stream flowing? You referred earlier to the fact that it is a matter of our enjoying these things on earth in the Spirit's power. Is it that the stream, so to speak, is the Spirit, bringing things that properly belong to heaven to us, or are we carried to heaven in Spirit to enjoy them there?
S.McC. No, it is what you said first. We do not go to heaven, the Lord will take us to heaven at the rapture. The Spirit brings heavenly things to us, so that we enjoy in the power of the Spirit *all* that is linked with heaven, all that is linked with the eternal
{219}
side, we enjoy it anticipatively in the Spirit's power. It is all here in the Spirit.
L.A.C. I believe that is a very helpful thing to lay hold of. In our minds, I believe we have been more or less in the habit of believing ourselves carried away by some remarkable power into realms beyond, whereas the truth is, is it not, that in the power of the Spirit, who is here in us and with us, all things that properly belong to heaven can be enjoyed *now*.
S.McC. The Spirit is here and we touch in the Spirit all that is linked with what is outside of this world, as *here* in the assembly. The Spirit is not in the world, He is in the assembly.
C.Bl. So it would be right to say that we are in an out-of-the-world condition of things and yet not actually in heaven?
S.McC. Exactly, what we touch in the Spirit is not linked with the world, it is an out-of-the-world condition of things, it is none the less heavenly because we ourselves are heavenly, the assembly is heavenly, the assembly is out of heaven. What is heavenly is touched in the power of the Spirit *here* in virtue of His presence in the assembly, and I think the apprehension of that would give us to see how much we owe to the Spirit. *Everything* in regard to the truth can only be touched rightly in His power and by virtue of His presence.
Chapman Street, Bridgetown, Barbados.
{220}
UNDIVIDED AFFECTION FOR CHRIST
@Genesis 24: 15 -- 18, 57 -- 61; @2 Corinthians 11: 1 -- 3; @Ephesians 6: 23, 24
I have before me tonight, beloved brethren, the thought of undivided affection for Christ, having particularly in mind Christ and the assembly, what the assembly is to Him, and you will notice that in all these passages there is the thought of an uncorrupted state in mind, and I want to stress that side of the truth, because the enemy of Christ and the assembly, for he is that, is seeking by every means possible to corrupt the affections of the saints, and to divide the affections of the saints, whereas the Holy Spirit who has come from heaven -- "sent from heaven" as it is said in @1 Peter 1: 12, here in the assembly in such lowly obscuring grace, is constantly working and operating to keep the affections of the assembly undividedly for Christ.
The chapter we have read from (although we did not read the section that alludes to it) stresses the thought of conflict, of warfare particularly linked with the heavenly position. We have a wily foe to deal with and to contend with. J.N.D. says in his Synopsis in regard to him that the enemy is very subtle and we need to withstand his stratagems more than his power -- a very interesting remark. He is a wily foe and we need the whole armour of God to withstand the devil and the votaries and agencies of his power, and all their darkening and corrupting influences. Reference is made in this chapter to the whole armour of God, the whole panoply of God, and we want to see to it that there is no weak spot, that there is no avenue afforded to the enemy to
{221}
move through to corrupt and divert affection for Christ. It is a real matter, it is a solemn matter, and the Spirit of God is alluded to in this chapter in a way that He is not alluded to in any other part of the Scriptures. We are to take note of it, because the great thesis of this epistle is Christ and the assembly, and the Spirit is brought before us in this chapter in a militant way. Notice the allusion in verse 17 to the "sword of the Spirit" -- a remarkable allusion referring to what relates to militant action. Perhaps we are not inclined to think of the blessed Spirit in this light enough. Surely He has come in in lowly grace into a subordinate position in the economy, serving in such a hidden obscure way. He is called the Spirit of grace in Hebrews, and He *is* the Spirit of grace, but yet we have the allusion made to the militancy of the Spirit in this chapter. The sword of the Spirit. What a weapon that is! God's word, there is nothing like it. David said of the sword that overthrew Goliath, with which he took off his head, you will remember, "There is none like that; give it me," @1 Samuel 21: 9. There is nothing like God's word. The sword was hidden when David asked for it, it was not being used. How many places there are like that -- the word of God is not being used and used effectively, but David knew there was none like it. The sword of the Spirit which is God's word, and it is a wonderful thing to see the sword of the Spirit in the hands of a godly man or a godly woman.
Isaiah refers to the drunkards of Ephraim in chapter 28, "Woe to the crown of pride of the drunkards of Ephraim," verse 1. A drunkard or intoxicated person does not really know what he is doing. J.N.D. once said in referring to divine principles that divine principles in the hands of an unspiritual man is like a sword in the hands of a drunkard. It is a great thing for us to make use of
{222}
the Spirit in the way here indicated, the sword of the Spirit, which is God's word, and for that we need to be in communion with God, and be near to God. There is nothing that weakens the position more than a bad conscience or being out of communion with God, and if we have a bad conscience we will have little power to face the ever wily, unrelenting foe who is bent on hindering us from going all the way into the blessing, and into the choice realm of blessing that God in Christ has marked out for us.
This letter is a wonderful letter opening up the wealth and glory of the heavenly domain, and presents to us Christ the exalted Man as the very centre of that domain, and also we, the saints of the assembly are with Him in the very centre of the heavenly domain, for we are not united to Him here, but united to Christ *there*, the heavenly Man in the heavenly realm. What that introduces, dear brethren, should have a saving and delivering effect on us. Are there any of us who take the place of belonging to the assembly who may be espousing secretly some feature of the world? Do you know that it will lead to divided affection as to Christ? The enemy knows what he is doing. We may trifle with the truth of separation, and keep as near to the world as we can, but the damage will be shown, the results will come out in our conversation, in our activities; it will manifest itself, and we want to see that the light, which is *our* light, in this letter is laid hold upon and cherished and held in the power of separation from the world, and *all* that constitutes that system of things that has been built up and would interfere with pure uncorrupted love for Christ on the part of His own.
I want you to notice this closing verse -- Paul says, "Peace to the brethren." We were referring to how like his Master he was. I suppose in suffering, outside of Christ, there was no one like Paul, and you
{223}
remember the Lord Jesus, when He came amongst His own, said "Peace." Paul has that in his soul, he has got the drift of the Lord's intentions and thoughts for His own, and it is a wonderful thing that he closes this letter, with a word like this "peace to the brethren." You may say, "surely that may be better for the believers in the epistle to the Romans or to the Corinthians," but dear brethren, it is not a question of peace of conscience, but of peace of mind and of heart, and in Philippians, which is the counterpart of Ephesians. Philippians dealing with the experiences of the heavenly man here below. Paul says, "the peace of God which surpasses every understanding, shall guard your hearts and your thoughts by Christ Jesus," @Philippians 4: 7. It is a wonderful thing this matter of peace in relation to the heavenly side of the truth because it is very essential for the enjoyment of the heavenly side of the truth, and then he says, "love *with* faith." A remarkable expression, you do not find it in any other epistle in the same way, "love *with* faith." "Peace to the brethren, and love with faith." As if Paul is saying to the Ephesian brethren that in relation to this matter of peace and love in the heavenly environment of things, and our entrance upon it, and holding the ground in relation to it in our souls, we will need faith. You know what caused the perishing in the wilderness of old of many, was that when the gospel of the glory, in figure, was brought to them by Caleb and Joshua, and the spies, they did not accept it as it says in @Hebrews 4: 2, "the word of the report did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in those who heard." We need faith, dear brethren, for the heavenly position. We often think of needing faith to keep our jobs and keep our families going, but we need faith for the heavenly position, faith to lay hold of the heavenly truth, and to hold it against the wily artifices of the
{224}
devil. Love *with* faith. Faith is an accessory matter to love here. Galatians speaks of "faith working through love," (@Galatians 5: 6), showing how closely they are linked together, but in Ephesians in these closing verses faith is an accessory feature to love -- "love with faith."
People speak of having a lot of love, and the great thing in Christianity is love; it has a great place in Christianity, but Paul reminds us that we need faith with it in this verse. What is the use of speaking about love in relation to the heavenly position if we are settling down in our businesses, in our work, or in our families, and going on with earthly things? No, dear brethren, we need faith to go forward. Barzillai, when David asked him to cross over the Jordan with him, thought it was too much for him because he had got so old, but none of us are too old. We need faith with love to hold the heavenly position. And then he says "from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. Grace *with* all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in incorruption." Grace *with*, not grace to, but grace *with* all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in incorruption. Now, that is a word for all of us, as to whether we love the Lord Jesus Christ in incorruption as we might refer to it. Whether our affections are undivided, because that is what incorruption means, that there is nothing to corrupt, nothing to impair the pure unsullied flow of undivided affection and love for Christ that is produced by the Spirit. That is assembly love as we might refer to it, which is a great matter.
This letter unfolds to us what the assembly is to Christ as we were alluding to it in prayer, "No one has ever hated his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it, even as also the Christ the assembly"; we want to get the assembly into our minds, and into our hearts. It is one thing to have our sins forgiven, and to have the knowledge of deliverance from the
{225}
thraldom of sin and Satan, emancipation from all his power, but to enter in and to be in the current and flow of assembly love and affection for Christ involves separation from the world, and all that constitutes it, and goes to make it up. Let us consider the word. We cannot carry out in obedience the heavenly calling without leaving the world -- not physically, for we are still here. We shall leave it physically, glorious hope, when "the Lord himself, with an assembling shout, with archangel's voice and with trump of God, shall descend from heaven; and the dead in Christ shall rise first; then we, the living who remain, shall be caught up together with them in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air; and thus we shall be always with the Lord," @1 Thessalonians 4: 16, 17. What a moment, dear brethren, when a wave of divine power will bring us with those who have fallen asleep through Jesus into the air to meet the blessed and glorious and incomparable Object of our love and affection! Another has said just another wave of power and up we will go, dear brethren, to be with Him forever. We know what these waves of power mean as in the power of the Spirit we go from glory to glory, and just another application of that power as the Lord Jesus comes in and will take us out of this scene altogether.
May I, in passing, ask, Is there a person in this room who does not know the One we are referring to who is coming for His own? Is there one in this room who has no vital link with Christ even in the enjoyment of the matters we are referring to? We who believe, as belonging to the assembly, our hearts yearn over you tonight that you may "come with us and we will do you good," as Moses said of old; @Numbers 10: 29. Not that there is any good in us, far be the thought, there is only one good and that is God, but we are journeying on to the heavenly land with all its promised inexhaustible store of unbounded
{226}
wealth. Will *you* come with us? We have something you have not got, something that is real, intangible as it may be, but *so* real. As the moment of the rapture draws near, young men, young women, brothers and sisters, look into your lives, look into your history, what is there that is hindering the full unreserved flow of undivided affection for Christ in your soul? What means the loss of spiritual power and joy? Where is the joy you once knew so well and which sent a thrill through your whole being spiritually? Where is it tonight? You have allowed, may be espoused secretly some feature of the world with all its corrupting influences. Oh, let us see to it tonight that the Spirit has His way, that the sword of the Spirit is brought to bear on every hindering influence that would stand athwart the free and unreserved flow of pure incorrupt love for Christ. Let us come into the stream and current of assembly flow in love for Christ. Let us get the assembly into our minds. That is what this letter would do. We should think of it *all the time*, Christ and the assembly; think of it in the morning, think of it during the day, thing of it at night, think of it during the night. Let it permeate our beings.
Heaven is full of interest, care, and concern in regard of this great vessel, and *our minds should be filled with it*. The assembly is God's chief interest on earth, and if I am in the enjoyment of union with Christ in the heavenly domain as this epistle sets out, then His interest must be paramountly my interest; not my business, not my work; we have to carry on with business and work and do it righteously and diligently, for a person who is slovenly in business or work is not much of a testimony to Christianity and to God's saving grace and power, and you will always find that a true assembly man or woman is diligent in business, but they do not allow their business to dwarf them, or overshadow everything else. A great
{227}
servant has said, "I find that in looking after God's interests He looks after mine, and I feel it is much better to leave mine in His hands." Oh, dear brethren, the wasted time that flits away, that slips through our hands, as it were. What have we been spending our time on, and expending our energy upon? Is it on what we shall have to leave? Giving too much time altogether to that it may be when we should give more time to Christ and the assembly. Young brothers, young sisters, you who are starting out in Christian life in the testimony, put Christ and the assembly first and foremost, If you are getting married, put Christ and the assembly first; if you are getting a house established, put Christ and the assembly first; let Christ and the assembly be supreme in our thoughts, so that our households are set for the interests of Christ and the assembly, and to care for His saints; it is a wonderful thing, and you will find that there is infinite blessing on that line.
Now a brief word on @2 Corinthians 11. Paul says there, and what feelings in the heart of this beloved, servant, "Would that ye would bear with me in a little folly; but indeed bear with me. For I am jealous as to you with a jealousy which is of God; for I have espoused you unto one man, to present you a chaste virgin to Christ." Now we are not in the epistle to the Ephesians here, we are in the epistle to the Corinthians where the enemy seems to have succeeded in corrupting the affections of some of the saints, but Paul never lost sight of what they were abstractly. The first letter is filled with thoughts as to what the brethren in Corinth were abstractly. He speaks of them as "the assembly of God which is in Corinth, to those sanctified in Christ Jesus, called saints," @1 Corinthians 1: 2. He keeps before him as he has to deal with matters among them the great truth of the anointed vessel, and in all his service and ministry
{228}
he has in mind that there should be amongst the saints in Corinth a vessel in sanctification answering to the light within. We must always keep in mind that we cannot go on with the things of God loosely, we cannot go on with the things of the assembly loosely, and there is nothing more damaging to spiritual joy and spiritual power than a loose way of living, and a careless way of moving. It may be getting as near to the world as we can, but yet not far enough that the brethren can take matters up and deal with us, but we will never know the joy of being in the full flow of assembly affections for Christ if we are on that line. It is a great thing to be in that stream and current. Paul is concerned about it in his letters to the Corinthians. He does not have liberty to unfold the truth of union in his letters to the Corinthians as he did to the Ephesians but he has called to their attention his commission and the authority of his commission that "I have espoused you unto one man to present you a chaste virgin to Christ." And while they scurrilously attacked him, and slandered him, and spoke evil of him, Christ and the assembly had such a place in that man's heart that he could say to them as he loved them in the light of the assembly and what they were to Christ, "Now I shall most gladly spend and be utterly spent for your souls, if even in abundantly loving you I should be less loved," @2 Corinthians 12: 15.
What a pattern Paul is to us in all our localities in serving the brethren; however little we may be thought of, however much we may be made little of, let us think of the brethren in the light of what they are to Christ, as belonging to the assembly, and serve them in the constancy and abiding character of the love that historically went all the way into death for them. Let us remember the constancy of that love, "This is my body which is for you," @1 Corinthians 11: 24. He said to Paul in relation
{229}
to the loaf at the Supper, and as we partake of the loaf, Lord's day after Lord's day, first day of the week after first day of the week, there is to be inculcated into our minds and thoughts all that is linked with that loaf and our affections are to be impregnated with the feelings of love that went so far for the assembly. We shall only serve the brethren rightly as in the devotedness of that love, and Paul is serving here in the light of it, as he says, "But I fear lest by any means, as the serpent deceived Eve by his craft, so your thoughts should be corrupted from simplicity as to the Christ," @2 Corinthians 11: 3. Oh, dear brethren, let us watch out for this enemy and all the varied means and sources of subtlety and craft he would employ to divert the free unreserved flow of virgin love for Christ. "But I fear lest by any means, as the serpent deceived Eve by his craft, so your thoughts should be corrupted from simplicity as to the Christ." Notice how he gives full force to the enemy's activities -- as the serpent *deceived* Eve by his *craft*. What love Paul had for them! Think of what lies behind these letters, the tears and the feelings, because he wrote his first letter with tears, as he says, "For out of much tribulation and distress of heart I wrote to you, with many tears," @2 Corinthians 2: 4. He had to deal with them in the power and authority of his apostolic commission, but bathed in the feelings of a man to whom Christ and the assembly were supreme, and foremost in his outlook.
Brethren, I ask you all, as my own heart would be challenged as to whether Christ and the assembly have the place in our hearts and affections they should have? *Is everything in our lives regulated by Christ and the assembly*? You know what a touch of glory the meetings take on as we sit down in the localities in which we are as Christ and the assembly inundates our thoughts, what a place the brethren acquire in our affections as we sit down in temple
{230}
character and light, and that is the way that the enemy's force will be stalled and thwarted, and *it is a great matter that the brethren should be united*, that there should be no breach for the enemy to break through and attack the position, because what he has in mind is to overthrow Christ and the assembly. Let there be no breach in the wall as it were, let the wall be intact, and let the brethren stand together, so that there may be this free unhindered, unimpaired flow of virgin love for Christ. Oh, for pure unsullied affection for Christ in a world where many are going on with corruption, even believers, and there may be some here tonight going on with the world, and with wrong defiling associations, with their affections corrupted. Well, the whole bearing of the Lord Jesus Christ's service, and the Spirit's service is towards you tonight to help you in the chastity that is referred to here -- "a chaste virgin to Christ."
Now, a word as to Rebecca in @Genesis 24. @Genesis 24 is a wonderful chapter. It reminds you of the expression and language of @2 Corinthians 3, "from glory to glory." There seems to be no end to the wealth in this wonderful chapter in its typical suggestions and unfoldings. Its teaching seems to be inexhaustible, a veritable mine of spiritual wealth, and rightly so, because its theme typically is Christ and the assembly. You will always find, dear brethren, that where Christ and the assembly have their proper place in the minds of the brethren in any locality you will have spiritual wealth and substance there. "The gold of that land is good." This chapter has served us well, and it may just serve a little bit more tonight to bring before us all what is towards us, because if there is one thing that marks this chapter it is redundancy, yet not redundancy in the sense that it is not necessary or that there is too much, but it is to impress us with the wealth and the glory that enters into this path of
{231}
moving on to Isaac, to Christ, the heavenly Man, with the blessed Spirit companying with you, because the servant of Abraham is a type of the Spirit. I just want briefly to say that reference is made to Rebecca's virginity. What an apt type of the assembly she is, not as delivered from the world, and a history of sin and shame, there are other types that bear on the members of the assembly in that relation, but this type is a reference to the assembly as suitable to be united to Christ, as beloved Mr. Stoney said, "Only what is out of Christ can be united to Christ, and only what is out of heaven will go into heaven."
That is our position, dear brethren, we are out of Christ and we are out of heaven, because "such as the heavenly one, such also the heavenly ones," @1 Corinthians 15: 48. The origin of the assembly is heavenly, she is a celestial vessel, and why should we trifle with earthly things to the extent that we become engrossed with them and overcome by them when we belong to a vessel whose destiny not only is heaven, but whose origin is heaven? She is indigenous to heaven, she belongs to heaven. Such is Rebecca, a suitable type, she is moving in concert with the Spirit, and when the challenge comes as to whether she is prepared to go with the Spirit, "Wilt thou go with this man"? verse 48, 'man' alluding to the Spirit, and they enquire at her *mouth*, she says, "I will go." The mouth of the sisterhood in Genesis is interesting, Sarah's mouth, Rebecca's mouth, and the mouth of Rachel and Leah. The challenge is put to her, "Wilt thou go with this man?" And in clear, simple, unbeclouded language she says, "I will go," and that is the word I finish with, dear brethren.
The blessed Spirit would raise the challenge with all of us tonight as to whether we are prepared to go all the way with Him to move in that path of communion with Him, where He would bring to us all that is heavenly, and bring into our souls the lustre
{232}
and glory of the heavenly Man, the true Isaac, our Lord Jesus Christ. Rebecca leaves all her relatives, family, kindred, and country to go with the servant to meet the heavenly Man, Isaac. Certainly it is a test, but it is a wonderful path to enter upon and to go forward in, for the ultimate goal is the supreme joy of Christ as man in having His saints with Him united to Him, the object of His constant, abiding, and active love. It says of Rebecca, "she became his wife and he loved her." May the Lord bless the word.
Address by S. McCallum, Kingston. Jamaica.
{233}
SPIRITUAL DESIRES
@Numbers 27: 1 -- 7; @Joshua 14: 6 -- 15; @Judges 1: 12 -- 15
It is laid upon my heart tonight, dear brethren, to say a word about spiritual desires, for I think that if there is one thing that these meetings that we have been together in relation to these three days should do, it is to awaken and revive spiritual desires. It may be that we have never had them before, or it may be that we have had them before but the desires have waned somewhat with us, but what I have to say tonight I have to say to all of us, that as we return to our gatherings we shall return with renewed spiritual desires, I have chosen these passages in the Old Testament, which is so rich and so full in figurative and typical language and always serves to amplify the truth; and in all the passages I have read, there is a peculiar expression of desire. In regard to Achsah, that delightful young sister, whose name is so honourably mentioned, she says, "Give me a blessing," and not just content with that she says "Give me also"; oh, that word 'also'; it is interesting to see the different ways it appears in Scripture. She says "give me also springs of water." That is, Achsah is in full accord with the mind and heart of God, *which is always more and more*. And then the daughters of Zelophehad whom we often refer to, they say "Give unto us a possession." What courage these beloved women had, without fear, in the holy boldness that faith imparts, and that belongs to those who have the Spirit, because @Numbers 21 has been passed, "they stood before Moses and before Eleazar the priest, and before the princes and the whole assembly, at the entrance of the tent of meeting." And they say, "Give us a possession among the brethren of our father," verse 4.
And then that delightful passage we have read in
{234}
@Joshua 14 -- just the very reading of it is spiritually exhilarating -- we see the delightful, wonderful brother Caleb. What a lesson, what a model he is to all of us, how he says, "And now give me this mountain." He is very clear, although he is an old brother as we would speak, but his mind is very clear as he covers the ground, and remembers things and calls attention to certain promises. We might refer to them as the promises of God, because that is how they would apply in our case. His mind is very clear. He is not just reminisencing, as some of us may do, 'there *was* a day when we were so bright, so keen.' *He* was not living in the days when he *was* once bright and *was* once keen in spiritual desires. He was the same then as he was before, he gives us a wonderful illustration of a consistent *person* in divine things right up to the end, and I am sure that the older brethren will bear the exhortation tonight as we would speak respectfully in regard of their years in the testimony, that heaven is very pleased to see sustained desire right up to the end as we shall see in Caleb.
Now, I go back to Achsah in this setting in Judges. The fact that we get two references to this incident is not without note, the repetition would show how pleased heaven is about the matter, so that it is put on record twice. I would like to say in opening out now what is in mind in the Scriptures I have read, that in regard to every one of us, and especially would I encourage the younger brethren, that in relation to spiritual progress in divine things, *divine Persons will take us as far as we are prepared to go*. Now let that sink into your mind and heart. Divine Persons are not arbitrarily forcing us into the realm of what is so choice, so holy, and so glorious, so abiding and so eternal, but they are ready, and by wondrous grace indeed would serve us in every possible way, to take us as far and as high as we want
{235}
to go, and I would say, as we return to our gatherings, that the Lord has been suggesting to us that we should lay ourselves out more to be taken on by divine Persons, and that we should allow divine Persons to take us as far as *they* want to, because they will take us to wonderful heights of glory, they will take us to wonderful realms of spiritual wealth and fulness, so that we shall never need to have a regret as to the journey, and as to the point to which, in their taking of us, we may have reached.
Now this matter of Achsah appearing in the book of Judges; she appears in the book of Joshua, and as those who are intelligent in regards of the Scriptures know, Joshua is the book of victory, victory on the side of the people of God, it is victory all the way generally speaking -- There may be defeat as at Ai necessary to prove something to the people, but generally over the book of Joshua can be written "Thanks to God, who gives us the victory." Under the spiritual leadership of Joshua, with Gilgal as the base of operations, the people go forward in relation to victory after victory in entering on the inheritance that God has marked out for them. But the book of Judges presents a different viewpoint. The book of Judges contemplates what we have to view in our time, a broken state of things. The book of Joshua contemplates the days of the Acts, speaking after a certain manner, when the people under the spiritual leadership of Christ, typified in Joshua, and also the leadership of the Spirit typified in the man with the drawn sword, went forward in relation to the great thoughts of God, and nothing could stand before the power of Christianity; in the days of the Acts everything had to give way.
So the book of the Acts corresponds with Joshua in that way, especially reaching in Paul's ministry the heavenly side of the truth which the book of Joshua has particularly in mind. But then we are
{236}
not in the days of the Acts, *we* are in the days of 2 Timothy when everything is so difficult, and when there is such public confusion abroad in Christendom which renders things difficult, so that it is a great matter that we should see the setting of Achsah in the book of Judges -- I have deliberately chosen Judges because Judges contemplates what is analogous to our own time, so that none of us might say it was alright in the days of the Acts when the Spirit was operating in the church in the conditions of pristine power and glory that belonged to the church in those days. None of us can say that from the standpoint of the book of Judges, because Judges presents Achsah over against the dark background presented in that book where things were so difficult, I think it is important that this book opens with a young sister manifesting and expressing a desire for the truth. What about the young women here in this gathering now, and in these gatherings for the three days we have been together? Have *they* got spiritual desires like Achsah? Have *they* got the desire to go in for divine things, to go in for the blessing, and to get the Spirit, and all the gain of what lies in the Spirit? "Give me also springs of water," verse 15. Let us face the matter tonight, because this book is specially helpful in showing us how *the enemy is out to get the young sisters*. If he can ensnare them in the world system, all the better from his standpoint, because the young sisters are needed for the carrying on of the testimony as well as the brothers. Deborah, that delightful woman of worth knew that, and she discerned it, and she brought it up in her song; she refers to what the mother of Sisera was saying, and to the strategy in the enemy's camp, and to the counsel of the enemy, and you remember in chapter 5 we get the language that is going on in the enemy's camp. "Have they not found, divided the booty, a *damsel*, two *damsels*,
{237}
to each?" @Judges 5: 30. The *enemy knows what he is after*, he is not just after anything, he has specific designs, and especially on the damsels. I would appeal to the young sisters tonight to *steel your heart against the artifices of the devil*, If he can get you into the world, and to be engrossed with its fashions, so that the most of your time is spent on how you fare publicly in the world and on how you dress, then he has gained a victory over your soul. The divine design is that all your outlook, your exercises, and your concern should centre around the blessing connected with the realm of God's selective choice, and your thoughts should centre round the gift of God, the outstanding gift of the dispensation, the springs of water, which speak of the Holy Spirit. Reference is made in @Numbers 21 to the well which princes digged, which the nobles of the people hollowed out at the word of the lawgiver, with their staves. The gain of the Spirit comes to us as in the type, through the word of the lawgiver. Moses is the great lawgiver. He is a type of our Lord Jesus Christ who has led in the matter of our complete emancipation from the world, typified in Egypt with all its thrall and spell which the enemy would cast over our minds and hearts in relation to it. He has led us forth morally by the Red Sea and broken the power of Satan in our souls, but that is not all. The word of the lawgiver, the digging of the well in @Numbers 21 suggests how concerned our blessed Saviour and Deliverer is that we should get the gain of heaven's best, the gift of the Spirit to carry us onwards in the path of the sun-rising, in the path of life in which there is no death, right on and over the Jordan into the realm of God's inheritance, and we may say, our inheritance too.
Beloved young sisters, may there be awakened in your hearts tonight desires in relation to what we have had together, "Give me a blessing," very
{238}
specific, "Give me a blessing." "What wouldest thou? and she said to him, Give me a blessing; for thou hast given me a southern land, give me also springs of water. And Caleb gave her the upper springs and the lower springs." We have been in the southern land these days, we have had that given to us, the rain of heaven has been falling upon us, the favour of God has been shining upon us. God has given us the southern land these days, blessed be His name. And now she says, "Give me springs of water," as if to say that as we return to our localities we cannot go on in the truth without the power of the Spirit to carry us through, and I commend the word to the young sisters.
What about the young brothers? Of course, they are not out of this, I am referring to them too. They come into this matter and are essential for the continuance of the testimony, and so we have Othniel here. What a wonderful man Othniel was, and what a link he had with Achsah! It is a great thing, dear young people, when we form right links. There is nothing like bad links to hinder us spiritually. Othniel was the kind of young brother that heaven took account of, and saw that he got a right link in the marital relation. And I would say to you young men, because the marital relation is a normal relation, and a very blessed relation, some of us can speak of it experimentally, and we can thank God for the wives who have been given to us, and who have been a great help and balance to us in the truth -- it is a wonderful thing to get a wife like Achsah, a wife *who will help you in the truth*. And, young sisters, what a wonderful thing to get a husband like Othniel! A brother who will help you in the truth, too.
I am being very simple about this matter because the matter of marriage has just come into one's mind in proceeding, and it is a very real affair. Some young sisters get so disappointed over this matter that they
{239}
are prepared to go out of fellowship to get a husband, I would counsel any who might by any chance be thinking along that line. *It is disastrous*, If your heart is right and if your desires are right, *God* will provide for you, and you may rest assured of that.
And Othniel, what does it say about Othniel? Well, a suggestion was made in regard of the truth and Othniel took it up. I wonder if the young men here, the young brothers are taking up suggestions in the field of the truth? Othniel might have said, "I will not bother my head about it, let someone else take it up," but the point is that Othniel was thinking about what was set out by Caleb, "He that smites Kirjath-sepher and takes it, to him will I give Achsah my daughter as wife," verse 12. Notice, not only smites it, but *takes* it. Now, I commend that to the younger brothers; Kirjath-sepher, what does it mean? We have often referred to it -- the city of the book. Now that is a great test to overcome the city of the book, the city of education, the city of literature. It is a real test in these days. Libraries are so prolific and so much is available. Do you not notice how easy it is to make room for natural desires, and to read a lot of literature that really does not help you? It does not help us in the truth; it may be legitimate. It may be you say to your father or mother, "I have to do it to help me in my school studies"; the enemy sometimes helps us to say things like that, but sometimes it is not to help us in school studies at all. Sometimes it is just to satisfy mere desire naturally, whereas it may damage us spiritually, I want to encourage you all to overcome the city of the book; it is a great matter not to let learning and education overcome any of us, a certain education may be needed to obtain employment, and God will help you so far as it is necessary to carry on, but do not get immersed in the thing to the extent that your soul is damaged, your spiritual
{240}
desires are damaged, your interest in the truth is taken away, your interest in Christ and the assembly is lost. A great thing is to face it like Othniel on the line of overcoming having in mind the idea of the assembly as in Achsah, and that is our salvation. The idea is that Othniel had Achsah before him, therefore he *overcame* the city of the book, and it says "And Othniel the son of Kenaz, Caleb's younger brother, took it; and he gave him Achsah his daughter as wife."
As to the sisters, do you urge your husbands on in regard of divine things? Or do you say "do not be too extreme, do not go too far, take things easy"? Achsah was not that kind of a sister, she stood behind her husband, she knew what was best and *urged* him to ask of her father a field. She could have asked herself, but she wanted Othniel to come into the matter, so she urges *him* to ask. You see the recognition of headship, comeliness in the matter. She urges *him* to ask of her father, and then it says, "Caleb said to *her*." How delightful, dear brethren, that is in the application of the truth. "Caleb said to her, what wouldest thou? And she said to him, Give me a blessing; for thou hast given me a southern land; give me also springs of water. And Caleb gave her the upper springs and the lower springs." Think of the Lord saying to you tonight, "What wouldest thou?" What do *you* want tonight? What are *you* looking for tonight? Achsah got not only what was necessary for continuance here below, in the wilderness and all that constitutes it, but she represents one who got what was necessary for maintaining her in the heavenly position in the light of the assembly, and the assembly's links with Christ as united to Him. And we need the Spirit for that, and we will get the Spirit, the upper springs, to help us into the upper levels of the truth.
{241}
Now a word as to the passage in Numbers, and the daughters of Zelophehad. In chapter 27 it says, "Then drew near the daughters of Zelophehad." Notice the adverb 'then.' It is very important because in the previous chapter God had been giving instructions in regard to the numbering in view of the land. It is an important thing to be amongst those who are numbered in relation to the inheritance, those who are going forward in relation to the choice things of God. @Numbers 26, while it is a glorious chapter in one way, is a most solemn one in another way. There are three deaths mentioned in @Numbers 26 where the numbering is in view of the inheritance, and none of them are natural deaths, they all took place in the government of God, as if to remind us all that in this matter of the truth and the light of the heavenly position *it does not do to trifle with it*, it does not do to play fast and loose with the truth and with the Lord's rights. You who read the Scriptures carefully will find as you look into @Numbers 26 that the death of Korah, Dathan and Abiram is alluded to. "This is the Dathan and Abiram summoned of the assembly, who contended against Moses and against Aaron in the band of Korah, when they contended against Jehovah. And the earth opened its mouth, and swallowed them up together with Korah when that band died, when the fire devoured the two hundred and fifty men," @Numbers 26: 9, 10. They withstood the sovereign rights of God in Moses. It is a very important thing to notice the rebellion in Christendom in relation to the rights of God in their sovereignty, and none of us wants to be found allied with that kind of thing. Then in verse 19 of that chapter "Er and Onan died in the land of Canaan." If you read Genesis you will find that Jehovah slew them; on what account? Because they were not prepared to give their support to the continuance of the testimony. If you look into it
{242}
you will find that it is true. When it comes to the continuance of the line of the testimony, one was wicked, and the other was not prepared to support it, and God was so displeased with the matter that He slew them, showing how serious it is not to be prepared to support the line of the testimony in its continuance. Then we get in the closing part of the chapter, verse 61, "Nadab and Abihu died, when they presented strange fire before Jehovah." They did not die a natural death, but the judgment of God came in upon them because of their offering of strange fire, and these things appearing in @Numbers 26 are to remind us that profanity, lightness, carelessness in the realm in which we have to do with God will not do. If we are on that line we will be only courting divine displeasure, whereas over against that we have the numbering in view of the inheritance as if God is showing that despite these humbling disastrous things, the overcomers are going forward right into the realm of what is choice, what is marked out in Christ before the world began, and now on the basis of redemption and the incoming of the Spirit. God is seeking to lead us forward in relation to that.
So it says, "*Then* drew near the daughters of Zelophehad"; that is in the light of all that has taken place, and notice it says in verse 2, "And they stood before Moses, and before Eleazar the priest, and before the princes and the whole assembly, at the entrance of the tent of meeting." They did not take Moses aside, or send a note to say they would like a private interview. No, they came right up in front of Moses and the princes of Israel, and the whole assembly at the entrance of the tent of meeting; and they have a sober judgment of the whole moral question; and it is a great thing that we should have a sober judgment of the moral question. They are very decided and discerning as to it all. They say "Our father died in the wilderness, and he was not
{243}
in the band of them that banded themselves together against Jehovah in the band of Korah; but he died in his own sin, and he had no sons. Why should the name of our father be taken away from his family because he has no son? Give unto us a possession among the brethren of our father." That is the fourth death, and these things are very humbling, but we have to face them on the moral line in relation to the history of sin and shame, but we can do it in the light of the clearance wrought for us through the death of Christ. As we sometimes sing,
<blockquote>"How by dying Thou hast freed us <br>From the man of sin and shame." (`161:4)</blockquote>
That is a point that every one of us must face, the history of sin and shame, but face it in the light of the wonderful deliverance that has been wrought for us. All question of moral stain has been resolved, and we can go forward. "Why should the name of our father be taken away from his family because he has no son? Give unto *us* a possession among the brethren of our father." These women were not married apparently, at this point, for the word in the last chapter is, Let them marry whom they please but in their own tribe. They were not thinking of husbands here, they were thinking of the inheritance, "Give us a possession." The inheritance territorially is in their minds, for us in the type, divine territory marked out before time for us in Christ that we should be holy and blameless before God in love, and accepted in the Beloved. These choice thoughts were in their minds. Think of the ministry of the past years in this time of revival; thoughts that have been in the mind of God before time was. Think of the progress in the service of God as ray after ray of spiritual heavenly light has come to us enriching the service, enhancing the service. Is it our desire to be like the daughters of Zelophehad and get a
{244}
possession of that kind, and in that realm? "Give unto us a possession among the brethren." What a wonderful company the brethren are! How can we do without them? How *could* we go out of fellowship? We need to have our souls rooted and grounded in love. Leaving the brethren really means leaving the Lord. Some people try to tell us that you can still go on with the Lord and leave the brethren, but you cannot go on with the Lord and leave the brethren, because the Lord is amongst His people, and if it comes to a question of leaving the fellowship, it comes to a question of leaving the Lord. He would say to us here tonight, "Will ye also go away?" Plenty are departing from the truth in Christendom, but the Lord would say to *us* tonight, "Will ye also go away?" "Simon Peter answered him, Lord, to whom shall we go? Thou hast words of life eternal," @John 6: 68. That is what is going to help us.
Now, I would refer to this, "Moses brought their cause before Jehovah." "And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying, the daughters of Zelophehad speak right; thou shalt surely give them a possession of an inheritance among their father's brethren; and thou shalt cause the inheritance of their father to pass to them. Their *cause*, a delightful word. What they *speak* is right, not only what they think, so dear sisters, it is a time for speaking in regard of these matters, and for expressing yourselves in your desires to go on. If you are not fully committed to things, express yourself and you will get help. God is listening, and God has interest. God loves to hear the language of the sisters on this line of desire, and He will honour the sisters on this line.
Now, I would close with an allusion to that delightful man, Caleb. Would to God we were all like him. Just a literal reading of the passage is spiritually exhilarating. He would put many of us to shame, and he lived in a dispensation when they did not have
{245}
the Spirit as we have Him. Notice how the children of Judah came near, "Then the children of Judah came near to Joshua in Gilgal." They did not stand afar off while others were going on in the truth, and we want to *all* come into it, and go back to our localities with awakened desire to draw near and ask and go in for the truth. The children of Judah came near to Joshua in Gilgal. That is a very testing place for it means the complete cutting off of the flesh and that is why a lot of people do not get on with the brethren, but we have to face the question of Gilgal where the sharp knives of circumcision come into view and the reproach of Egypt is rolled away. There are two things that go together, the reproach of Christ and the power of the Spirit as F.E.R. pointed out in that address of his at Quemerford. Why so many saints in the systems around do not know the power of the Spirit is because they have not accepted the reproach of Christ, they are powerless to deal with evil. So they drew near to Gilgal, and Caleb gives a lead, and it is always good to have someone who can give a lead, "Thou knowest the word that Jehovah spoke to Moses the man of God, concerning me and thee in Kadesh-barnea. Forty years old was I when Moses the servant of Jehovah sent me from Kadesh-barnea to search out the land; and I brought him word again as it was in my heart ... . But I wholly followed Jehovah my God." What an *unjealous* man Caleb was! What a judgment he had of Moses the man of God. How he had loved Moses and appreciated him for what he was in his moral power and authority; then he says, "concerning me and thee" -- that is delightful "me and thee." Sometimes we like to centre things on ourselves alone. We like to narrate things which make much of the wrong man, but Caleb in the true spirit of fellowship takes Joshua into full account. Joshua and Caleb were wonderful brethren
{246}
who went on together in an unjealous way in the truth. "Forty years old was I" -- he is marking out the divisions of time, he was a comparatively young man, forty years old. Now the time has gone, but I finish with a word about verse 11, "I am this day eighty-five years old, I am still this day strong as in the day that Moses sent me; as my strength was then, even so is my strength now, for war." For *war*, there is no retiring in this conflict, it is a question of going on right till the glory is reached. And here Caleb, old man as he was, says "give me this mountain." Dear brethren, what a desire! He is assured that God will be with him, and may God help us to make room for spiritual reviving and awakening of desires. Paul said to Timothy, "Rekindle the gift of God which is in thee," @2 Timothy 1: 6. Let there be a reviving in spiritual energy and power in the midst of the darkening state of things abroad. May God help us all for His name's sake.
Kingston, Jamaica.
{247}
CHRIST AND THE ASSEMBLY
@Ephesians 1: 19 -- 23; @Ephesians 4: 10 -- 16; @Ephesians 5: 25 -- 32
I have in mind to speak a word on Christ and the assembly. It is a very exalted subject, and in approaching it we are made to feel how much there is to be learned in regard of it. I believe the Lord is helping us to see more and more something of the greatness that is linked with Christ and the assembly, and if tonight as under His hand some impression is left on some heart by the Spirit as to the greatness of it, the meeting will not have been to no avail. It is a subject that is especially full, and I particularly want to refer to certain features in the passages that we have read together, in which there is a constant reference to the assembly as the body -- the body of Christ.
This epistle is remarkable for the light that it brings to us in relation to Christ and the assembly. And the great aim of all the ministry is that we should reach the divine end in mind. The apostle seems to have had a very peculiar right-of-way amongst the Ephesians saints to open up in the way he does, in his ministry in relation to the great counsels of God, a liberty that he did not seem to have with the saints at Corinth, although he did indicate, on the basis of his commission in the second letter to the Corinthians, the great place that Christ and the assembly had in all his service, for he had espoused them as a chaste virgin to one Man -- Christ, in the carrying on of his service.
Now I have in mind to speak first of all of the assembly as sharing with Christ in administration. Then I want to refer to the assembly as the direct object of the activity of Christ through the gifts. And then I want to refer to the assembly as particularly
{248}
the subject of the present activity of the love of Christ. It is a wonderful thing to take account of the verses that we have read in @Ephesians 1, and to think that we are part of that wonderful vessel that is referred to as the assembly, His body, the fulness of Him that fills all in all.
I would especially enlist the interest of the younger brethren in regard to the immensity and greatness of this subject, because the greater the thoughts that occupy our minds in the dispensation, the greater will be our progress, the more manifest will be our progress, because generally we are formed by what we think about, by what is in our minds, and I would especially desire to impress every one of us, young and old alike, with the greatness of Christ and the assembly being in our minds *all the time*. It is in the mind of heaven. It is the great theme of heaven at the present moment. Every other feature in God's ways is held up at the present time in order that all might be concentrated on this wondrous family of which we form part, as having the Spirit, this glorious vessel, that we are part of through divine grace; everything is concentrated on this unique vessel, the assembly, because of the greatness of her part and place in the purposes and counsels of God.
It is especially important that we should realise that if divine Persons are so concentrated in their interest and activity on this wondrous family and vessel, that *we* should be concentrated too in *our* interests, in *our* outlook and thoughts in relation to this great vessel. It is essential that Christ and the assembly should be first and foremost in all our thoughts. The prosperity of the work of God on this island largely lies in the fact that there have been men and women whom God has honoured, who have put Christ and the assembly first; and dear younger brethren, it is important that Christ and the
{249}
assembly should have a paramount place in our outlook in relation to the ways of God at the present time. It is God's chief interest on earth, the Father's chief interest at the present time. It is the chief interest of Christ. It is the chief interest of the blessed Spirit. All three Persons of the deity engaged with this wonderful vessel and family of which, through grace, we form part, beloved brethren. It is not an ordinary matter. It is not a matter that we can idly think of. It is not a question of light that we can be indifferent to, but it is a question, dear brethren, of seeing that the prime interest in heaven's view, and which is to be in *our* view, is Christ and the assembly. There are illustrations of course in the scripture of men of God who had Jerusalem as their centre of old. But however great Jerusalem, the earthly centre of God's ways was, it will never have the greatness that the assembly has -- although the greatness of Jerusalem is wonderful! Indeed, it seemed to occupy such a place in the minds of godly men and godly women of old, that the very mention of the name Jerusalem sent a spiritual thrill through their beings, as witnessed in the marks of exclamation in the Psalms when Jerusalem is referred to.
And thus it is, dear brethren, as we think of Jerusalem as a type and transpose the figure to the assembly, the very mention of the assembly should touch a note in every one of our hearts that nothing else would in the same way. And as I have said, all the Persons of the deity are engaged with this wondrous vessel. The Spirit, unfailing, untiring, in faithful, active and devoted love, to bring us, in the light of the assembly to the ultimate goal, of union with the heavenly Man -- the true Isaac, our Lord Jesus Christ. And that chapter of typical glory, @Genesis 24, abounds with references to the faithfulness of the servant who would *not* give up his mission until he had found the woman that was suited to
{250}
Isaac. You will remember that when Rebecca went in and told her mother's house of the contact with the servant, that Laban came out, and what did he see? He saw the man *standing by the camels*, *by the well*. Wonderful note in the chapter that, dear brethren, showing how the love of the Spirit held Him to His wondrous mission, and nothing would deviate Him from the path of search for the woman that was suitable to be united to His Master, to the heavenly Man. We are to be impressed with that, dear brethren, with the unselfish and faithful service of divine Persons, and to see that it is something that we are to hold to tenaciously -- the light of Christ and the assembly.
Now in this chapter the assembly is referred to as Christ's body, "the fulness of him that fills all in all." It says of God that He gave Him, that is Christ, to be Head over all things to the assembly, which is His body, the fulness of Him who fills all in all. Words fail to convey the greatness of what is in mind in this wondrous passage, but may the Spirit leave an impression with us of the greatness of what we belong to, as belonging to the assembly. It is the body of Christ, "the fulness of him that fills all in all." The allusion, of course, *must* be to the Deity of Christ, when it says, "who fills all in all," for who but a divine Person could fill "all in all"? No ordinary man could. But the assembly is not the fulness of Deity, the reference is to the exalted Man. The expression "who fills all in all" is said of the exalted Man, our Lord Jesus Christ, while referring us back to the greatness of the Person that it is said of, as One who fills all in all. The assembly is said to be the fulness of the exalted Man -- a wonderful reference, dear brethren, as we take account of what the *fulness* means! The completeness! It is important to take account of the fact that there is a Man in glory tonight. That Man in Christ has
{251}
entered heaven, and is in heaven. It is wonderful! It is immense! He has been exalted there. He is the exalted Man. He is the heavenly Man, for He is the second Man *out* of heaven, and as in that position the assembly is said to be the fulness of Him, "the fulness of Him that fills all in all." What a touch that is, dear brethren, that *we* should be part of such a Wonderful vessel, in such intimacy with Christ, the exalted Man, that the assembly is said to be His body. Think of the affinities between the assembly and Christ in this matter! And it is all in the setting of His headship, the administration of all things, and she shares with Him in that blest administration. A wonderful thing to think of it, dear brethren. In @Genesis 1 we have an intimation of this in God making man, male and female. The Woman is to have part in the administration, in the government of all things. But it is just referred to. We get the principle suggested. But when we come to the second chapter, what fulness enters into the second of Genesis! As we take account of all that comes out in wondrous detail there! It is a principle with God to give us a suggestion as to something, as He does in @Genesis 1, and then to open it out in wondrous detail in all that may follow, and @Genesis 2 in relation to the man and the woman is a wondrous opening out in fulness of the suggestion of the assembly's part with Christ in administration and government. And as we go through the Scriptures, in all the typical teachings we can see typical suggestions of the part the assembly is to have with Christ in sharing with Him in the blest administration that will be under His hand. Joseph's wife, Solomon's wife, they all remind us in type of the wondrous part that the assembly has with Christ in administration and government. The very suggestion of it, dear brethren, should elevate our thoughts, that we are to have part as of the assembly. We are to share, as
{252}
of the assembly, with the exalted Man, in the administration of that wonderful scene, where every issue as to good and evil is solved. And so the assembly is viewed in the Revelation, chapter 21, as the Lamb's wife, as coming out of heaven, descending out of heaven from God to share with the Lamb, to share with the great and unique One who suffered. She herself is qualified to share in the administration by the part she has had in sufferings here now in the ways of God.
May the thought of this, dear brethren, touch our hearts more and more. We may have heard it before, we may have thought of it before, but let the thoughts tonight infiltrate our minds and our hearts in the power of the Spirit with fresh and renewed power, and help us to see the immensity of the thought, that we are to share with Christ in the exalted administration of all things that are put under Him. It would help us to see that everything now in the ways of God is not haphazard; everything in our lives is not a matter of what occurs by accident, without design, but every feature in our education has in view our refinement as belonging to this wondrous vessel that is so blessedly fitted to have part with Christ in administration. The third chapter of this epistle shows us the great interest of the principalities and authorities in the heavenlies in this vessel where they are now observing the all-various wisdom of God. Think of the matchless grace that has given us, such as we are as called out of this world, to have part in this wondrous vessel. Can the world cast any spell over the mind and heart that apprehends and appreciates by the Spirit these glorious thoughts? I am sure, dear brethren, that the fuller our apprehension of the light of this is, the lighter we will move through the world, the less hold it will have on our minds and affections.
Now I want to speak for a moment of this wondrous
{253}
vessel as the direct object of the activity of Christ through the gifts. Surely, dear brethren, it must impart some sense of the greatness of this family and this vessel, when we think that, having ascended up on high as Man, Christ has given such gifts as are named in @Ephesians 4, with a view to the building up of this wondrous organism, the body of Christ, having in mind the perfecting of this wondrous family: for we are going to enter heaven, not in any way as an unfinished article, or unfinished in our education, but we are going to enter on the final state of things as perfected through divine workmanship. There may be much to be done. Undoubtedly there is a tremendous lot to be done, as you think of all the souls ensnared in the systems of men around us, the imperfectness of the knowledge. Think of what will have to be done! But with God, dear brethren, *all* things are possible, and in that moment, in the twinkling of an eye, what things will be done! How great is our God, as we think of the perfecting of the work in regard of every one who belongs to the assembly.
Think of what enters now into the ministry. That the Lord Jesus, in the greatness of His love for the assembly, has furnished in these persons that have been named, channels through which He can enrich the assembly, enrich our hearts and build us up in view of the arrival at the final and perfect thought in His mind. As it says, "For the edifying of the *body* of Christ, with a view to the *work* of the ministry" -- dear brethren, think of the work of the ministry! It is the *work* of the ministry. It entails work! Think of all that lies behind the ministry. Think of what Paul delineates in 2 Corinthians, what lies behind all that comes to us in the ministry. It is not a matter of merely filling certain offices, or persons who stand on the platform and say certain things: but as we think, in this time of revival, of
{254}
all the wealth that has come to us through the service of Christ in the ministry, mediately -- think of the work, the labour that enters into it! Paul says to the Corinthian saints, they were reigning as kings, adorning themselves with their gifts, forgetting the idea of the *work* of the ministry. Paul says, "Death works in us but life in you," and it is well, dear brethren, that we should all be reminded that behind the ministry lies this great thought of concentrated activity on the part of Christ, with a view to our arriving, not at unfinished thoughts, an uncompleted end, but to arrive at fullness and perfection, and this is in mind, in the work of the ministry; "with a view to the edifying of the body of Christ, until we all arrive at the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God." Notice these words, "until *we all*"! Oh, these delightful references, dear brethren, in this wonderful letter and in Corinthians too, where Paul refers to, "we all" -- "we have all been given to drink of one Spirit," he says, and "we all partake of that one loaf," and "we all beholding the glory of the Lord." A wonderful thing to take account of, the "we all," it is love's language. Love delights to speak thus. And it is a great thing, dear brethren, that we should see what is in mind -- *all* the saints. There is nothing narrow, nothing bigoted about this great outlook, it is with a view to elevated things, until we all arrive at the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, at the full grown man. Are we content with the forgiveness of sins? Are we content with being justified from guilt? We are justified in that Man that we have been referring to, that is in glory, in heaven. We are not justified in Adam, we are justified in a Man in the glory. So that we have no right or title to live in this world morally, because we have been justified from our guilt in the blessed Man that is out of death and in the glory.
{255}
Well, are we just content to have justification? Are we content with salvation from the world, and from the law and from the flesh? This letter has in mind, dear brethren, all that and more, that we should be saved from the earth, from the place, and won over to Christ as the Centre of the heavenly realm, everything as it were having lost its hold upon us here. Our hearts and our eyes are together on the great divine objective -- the assembly for Christ, for that is the bearing of the light of this wonderful epistle. Nothing less than that to be reached in our souls. The assembly's position is before us in this epistle, as united to Christ the heavenly Man. I say, dear brethren, there is nothing alters and changes our viewpoint in life like the arrival at the apprehension and enjoyment in our souls of union with Christ the heavenly Man. As beloved Mr. Stoney said, it changes all our interests. You see persons who make their business their interest, they make their families their interest, but once we reach, as the light of this epistle has in mind we should reach, the great thought of being united to the Man who is the Centre of the whole heavenly domain, it changes every outlook in life we have. We see that the supreme interest of heaven is Christ and the assembly. The supreme joy of Christ as Man stands related to the assembly as united to Him in the heavenly realm. And the supreme joy of the assembly femininely is in her link of union with the heavenly Man, and the ministry has all this in mind. It speaks of the body and wonderful organism that the body is, how love pervades it, and that is what it should be, dear brethren. If the truth is to prosper, if divine aims are to prosper, love should pervade the gatherings.
The great thought in verses 15 and 16 of this chapter is that we have a wonderful organism that is working automatically, as we might refer to it, as it says of it, "works for itself." Think of the greatness
{256}
of this organism that we are part of, working for itself, its self building up in love. It seems as if the saints in the light of the body, as I may speak of it reverently, are contemplated as intelligently arriving in the apprehension and appreciation in their souls of what the ministry has in mind. The ministry has in mind our being built up to Christ, and the assembly works and operates with the same thing in mind. So it is a wonderful suggestion, dear brethren, of the correspondence between Christ and the assembly. In the mediatorial position of service think of love as it is seen in Jesus, and let us take account of love in relation to this wonderful organism, the body, as it says, "to its self building up in love." As it says, "Holding the truth in love." Not in an arbitrary fashion, but holding the truth in love, as if love is the fructifying, fertile soil in which the truth as it were expands and increases with the saints.
And then, in the reference made to the body, dear brethren, allusion is made to every joint of supply. Oh, if there is a brother or sister that does not think they are of much account, let us think of the part that we have, however obscure, however hidden, in this wonderful organism that is the *direct* object of heaven's interest and heaven's supplies as viewed in this chapter, coming from the ascended Man through the ministry. Indeed the body is so wonderful that in the opening of this chapter the first thing that is mentioned in the great moral, fixed system is, "there is one body and one Spirit." You know the body is a wonderful thing to the Spirit. The Spirit has not become incarnate as Christ has, but the Spirit is here, not in the world but in the assembly, and He has found in the body, a vehicle, a vessel, for unhindered, uninterrupted right-of-way of operation with a view to the accomplishment of the counsels and purposes of divine love. Is it not wonderful, dear brethren, that we are part of this organism?
{257}
I want now to refer briefly to this wonderful reference to the body as the direct object of Christ's present love in chapter 5. We have the most exalted references to the assembly in her link with Christ as wife, but it says in verse 28, "So ought men also to love their own wives as their own bodies." "He that loves his own wife loves himself," think of that! Think of Christ looking on the saints, looking on the assembly, loving Himself as it were, a reference to His wonderful Manhood, and what the assembly is to Him as linked with Him in manhood. "For no one has ever hated his own flesh, but nourishes it and cherishes it, even as also the Christ the assembly, for we are members of his body," verse 29.
In a gathering like this, and in all the gatherings throughout the world, at this time, think of the active service of Christ in such holy activity, having Himself before Him as in the intimate link of the assembly with Him as His body, "nourishing it and cherishing it." Think of the value of the assembly to Him! The greatness of what we are in His eyes! There is no one like the assembly in His eyes! There is no family, no vessel so wondrous in His eyes at the present time, and yea, we may say, in all eternity, that is quite like this wonderful vessel and family that we form part of, that is said to be His body, for we are members of His body. Think of how we enjoy with such warmth and in such a full way the ministrations of His love! Whatever has come into the dispensation publicly, whatever failure and breakdown may have obtained, in all the unwearied, unselfishness of His devoted love He carries on with unabated energy this wonderful service, nourishing and cherishing the assembly. It is delightful to think of it! Such grace that has given us to have part in such a wonderful vessel, such a wonderful object of Christ's affections, that even now we are conscious that there is no one like us in His eyes,
{258}
and all His energies, we might say, at the present time, are directed and expended in the constancy of that love that historically led Him to give Himself in death in order that we might be His forever. All the wealth of that love is directed in constant, abiding, unhindered activity in view of our being fully secured in the apprehension and appreciation of the assembly's part in union with Him.
May God help us to see these wonderful thoughts, the greatest thoughts in the universe that we have been called to have part in.
Chapman Street, Bridgetown, Barbados.
{259}
PRIESTLY GREATNESS
@Deuteronomy 9: 18 -- 27; @Deuteronomy 32: 1 -- 4; @Deuteronomy 33: 1 -- 7
What is upon one's heart, dear brethren, in view of this hour is the thought of priestly greatness, I would like to draw attention to priestly greatness in Moses. There are other men in Scripture in whom the thought of priestly greatness is set out, but with special design I have selected Moses and the book of Deuteronomy, because the book of Deuteronomy fits in with the present moment, as we are about to go over, dear brethren, into the realm of God's choice for us. There is every right and title to refer to Moses as priest although officially he was not a priest. But yet in @Psalm 99, it refers to him as a priest, it says, "Moses and Aaron among his priests," that is God's priests, "and Samuel among them that call upon his name," verse 6. It is a wonderful thing to be priestly, dear brethren, and I am sure that the Lord would help every one of us, young and old alike, to desire to be more priestly. And what is priestly suggests nearness to God. It is a great thing to come into contact with persons, brothers and sisters, who have to do with God, who live in nearness to God: you cannot help feeling something about them that is different. We may have all the knowledge of the truth that it is possible to get, but if it is held apart from priestly conditions and nearness to God there will be little power with it. And if the word tonight should create in all our hearts, oneself included, a greater desire to be more priestly, it will have served to a good end indeed, because every one of us has the capacity for being priestly as having the Spirit.
In the Old Testament, of course, the priesthood was vested in a specific family, Aaron and his sons;
{260}
in Christianity priesthood belongs to *all* the saints as having the Spirit. As receiving the Spirit we are divinely constituted and capacitated to think and to act for God, and that is a great matter in these days, dear brethren, in a world where everybody is thinking for themselves and thinking about themselves, it is important to be among those who are thinking for God and acting for God. And I would say in passing, you will find God acting for such persons, as Isaiah tells us.
In the book of Deuteronomy we get a life-sized portrayal of Moses in a unique way. Deuteronomy gives us in a very special way, the *man* Moses. It gives us the *spirit* of the man. It underlies priestly conditions -- our spirits. It is one thing to be marked by certain external actions which may correspond with the truth, but we may be all wrong in our spirits. Moses was a remarkable man, and this book specially draws attention to the *spirit* of the man, the unselfish spirit of the man and his thoughts of God. His priestliness lies in the way he thinks of God and speaks of God, and in the way he thinks of the saints and speaks of the saints.
Now in the first passage that I have read I want to refer to him in that crisis, a unique crisis, at the very mountain of God, and the remarkable way that Aaron is before him, a prince in Israel, and the priestly feature that marked Moses in that critical hour when the enemy seemed to have gained the day, but where the intercessory service of Moses, wonderful type of Christ, intervenes for the salvation of Aaron and of the people. It was a difficult moment: Deuteronomy helps us to go over the ground and see all the way that God has led us. It has not been an easy matter for God, speaking reverently, dear brethren; if it had been a question of ourselves with one another we long ago would have had done with one another, but this book unfolds to us how God
{261}
bore with them. As Paul says, "he nursed them in the desert," @Acts 13: 18. The unbelief, the murmurings and the rebellion. What Deuteronomy would help us to see in enlarging on the journeyings is the greatness of the mountain of God, that lying behind all these journeyings and all God's operations in relation to them, in view of bringing them into the inheritance, is this great stable position, the elevated position that the mountain of God suggests. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of God, Hebrews tells us. God is God and this book reminds us of His government, and how serious it is for any one of us to resist any light that God may give to us as to His mind and to His thoughts and as to the disposition of His heart. This book is to sober us in view of going over, in view of finishing with the wilderness side altogether, and therefore we get touches in this book that we do not get anywhere else. And I think we can say that at the present time, dear brethren, in some little way we are getting touches that we have never had before, and especially is our attention being drawn to what the saints are substantially, what the ministers are substantially. And a great feature of a man of God is not his ability to draw you into reminiscences of his own spectacular exploits, but to draw you over to God's side and to impress you with the greatness of God, and the greatness of His mountain. His purpose which stands fast, in order that you might see what lies behind *all* the humbling circumstances of our desert path.
Moses was a great minister, a wonderful minister! He could fill a place in ministry that nobody else could in his day, and yet the remarkable thing at the close of his life is that he is not dwelling on what he once was. He is not dwelling on the mighty deliverances that God had wrought through him and by him instrumentally. The Psalms give us an insight to Moses. What is he speaking about in his closing
{262}
days? Is he just dwelling in reminiscences? No. He had pitched the tabernacle according to divine direction, and all the details connected with its structure he had to do with, but he is not living in that, he is not living in the greatness of his ministry, as it says in @Psalm 90: the prayer of Moses, the man of God: "Lord *thou* hast been our dwelling-place in all generations," think of that! How many there are that would dwell on their own exploits, would dwell on the help they have got in divine things, it may be. But what a poor thing it is after all! If God is pleased to use any of us, brothers or sisters alike, we can thank Him for it, but it is a poor thing to live in it and to dwell in it. Moses, one of the greatest ministers of all time, outside of Christ, lived in God, he dwelt in God. As John writes in his epistle, "He that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God." Who loved the saints like Moses? Wonderful type of Him he foreshadowed, our Lord Jesus Christ. He was prepared to die for the brethren in order that they might be carried through. Does that spirit mark us, dear brethren? Is that the outlook of our minds and our hearts? Prepared to go out? Prepared to lose our lives in view of the brethren? What a wonderful man is Moses, he says, "Lord, *thou*!" -- the emphatic 'thou' -- "*Thou* hast been our dwelling-place in *all* generations," not one or two or three but in *all* generations.
I have no doubt that Moses would think of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob as well as the children of Israel in referring to the generations, for he alludes to them here, he says in the portion that we have read, "Remember thy servants, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; look not at the stubbornness of this people ... ", he refers to God on the high level of His promises, he would remind God of His promises, which is another priestly feature of the man, as Isaiah says, "Ye that put Jehovah in remembrance."
{263}
What a wonderful thing! How God delights, dear brethren, to have us put Him in remembrance of His promises, the high level of His thoughts, the heavenly line of His thoughts, suggested in the reference to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. Think of the variety of experience that entered into the lives of those three patriarchal men! Think of what God was to them! And Moses reminds God of these men over against the stubbornness of the people. I believe God was very pleased with Moses at this time in that relation. Another thing about Moses emphasising his greatness is the way that he can accept the discipline and government of God in regard to himself. Three times in the beginning of the book, once in the end of the book, does he refer (for the book is his) to the government of God because of the way he spoke in a certain circumstance. He is not covering up anything in regard to himself. He is clear and transparent as to all that he was in his ministry and in his movements with the people of God. He has got nothing to hide, there is no opaqueness with Moses. He relates to us in detail the displeasure of God with regard to the matter in which he broke down. And, dear brethren, who of us here would dare to say we have never broken down! But it is a wonderful thing to see how this book rises above *all* the breakdowns. God is above the breakdowns. Moses is above the breakdowns, and he carries on, holding God, as I might say, in priestly power to the light and the blessedness of His promises.
It was a critical time. Moses was up on the mountain and God had been giving ray after ray of light in regard to His pleasure, with regard to the world of which the tabernacle was a figure, because the first sanctuary is a picture and a type of the vast universal system in which God's glory is displayed in Christ. And ray after ray of light as to that wonderful world was being unfolded on the mountain, and yet we are
{264}
reminded in Deuteronomy of what was taking place below. What a humbling lesson, dear brethren, what a humbling experience! God by His power had brought the people to Himself, prepared to do the best for them, to bring them to the best and choicest thoughts that love had for them; but the working of unbelief in the scene here below -- think of what it was to God! We all have to learn the lesson that *that man* will *never* do for God. There is only one thing that God could do with that man, the man of sin and shame, the man of unbelief, the man of murmuring and rebellion, there was only one thing that God could do with him, and that was to remove him judicially for ever in the cross of Christ. And He has done it, blessed be His name, and the gospel is to help us to come to the change of man, that we are no longer going on in ourselves with the man that has been linked with the history of sin and shame, but we are going on with a Man that is the Centre of God's world, the blessed Man that the ark, the beginning of the tabernacle system, speaks of, the Centre and Head of God's world.
Well, Moses had to come down -- we have to face these conditions here below, we cannot go on, on the mountain without the people, Moses would say. That would be the language of the heart of this great man of God in his priestliness. We *cannot* go on without the brethren! Are any of us trying to go on without the brethren? Are any of us thinking that we are above the brethren and that we can go on without them? Moses would help us as to this. He comes down, he sees what had happened, he could not do what the Lord Jesus Christ did, he had to break the tables of stone, he could not bring in redemption for the people, wonderful man as he was, that prerogative belonged to Christ and how wonderfully *He* carried it through. But it says of Moses as the *full* bearing of the crisis bears in upon him, "I
{265}
fell down before Jehovah *as at the first*," notice that! It was not the first time, dear brethren, that this man of God had been with God about matters, he says, "I fell down before Jehovah as at the first, forty days and forty nights -- I ate no bread and drank no water." Oh, how like Jesus he was! How like the One he typified he was! Think of *His* forty days in the wilderness without bread and water. He who could have commanded that the stones should be made bread, but in the perfection of His holy humanity, having come into the place of obedience to God, and dependence on God, He would not take Himself out of it, and He answered the tempter, "Man shall not live by bread alone but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God." What a situation that was. But think of Moses, a man of like passions as we, corresponding with Christ in this great relation! Dear brethren, we shall be like Jesus in glory, as one has said:
<blockquote>"Like Jesus in that place, <br>Of love and light supreme," (`64:5)</blockquote>
but what about being like Jesus now in all the difficulties and crises of the hour in the testimony, for it is one crisis after the other. The whole matter of the testimony at the present time is full of crises, and we want to consider, dear brethren, the attitude and the spirit that marks us in these circumstances, as to whether we are like Christ. We want to be like Him now, in spirit and in our ways, drinking into *His* spirit and grace as Man, so that we are like Him in crises like these. He says, "I ate no bread and drank no water, because of all your sin." Think of this man's love for the people! Think of his love for God! In this section there is the mountain of God; chapter after chapter refers to it, the mountain, it is casting its shadow over the whole position -- the rights of God in holy love to a people He has redeemed by grace and
{266}
by power from Egypt and from the enemy's thrall -- He has a right to the people. He has got a right over us now. The mountain is casting its shadow over us now, dear brethren, at this time as we are together. God, in other words, is *asserting* His rights to us. He will not let any of us go. He will not leave us to go on without being reminded of His holy rights -- the rights of His love to have us, to have us for Himself, for His pleasure *now* and forever. And if we dare to do despite to these rights, we are only but courting the government of God, a serious and solemn thing. This book tells us about it in no uncertain terms.
And this matter of fasting, what do we know about fasting, dear brethren, in crises? What can we say about it? What can we say about denying ourselves? You know there are people abroad that profess links with God and they carry on fasting but they have really got nothing vital in their souls; but here we are with all the light and wealth of the purposes and counsels of God, and what do *we* know about fasting? How much there is that we could deny ourselves! That was Moses, and a mark of his priestliness, it enters into his priestly constitution, his ability to deny himself in view of the people and their condition. How God must have been pleased with Moses, as He always is pleased with the attitude of mind and heart in any brother or sister that is prepared to fast, to deny themselves, in view of God's rights, the rights of His holy love being secured. Think of David, think of Daniel, think of Nehemiah -- all these men of God -- think of what they knew about fasting! That is what enters into this matter. He says, "I ate no bread and drank no water -- because of all your sin which ye had sinned, in doing what is evil in the eyes of Jehovah." God loves persons who are prepared to hold themselves to this principle of self-sacrifice and self-denial that the rights of His love might be maintained.
{267}
And it says in verse 19, "For I was afraid of the anger and fury wherewith Jehovah was wroth against you to destroy you." I would say in passing, dear brethren, that while we are in Christianity, in the dispensation of grace, we must not forget the fear of God. The fear of God is a wholesome thing. It is a great matter to see men and women who are marked by the fear of God. How many there have been before us, we who are younger, in the line of the testimony, who have feared God. And the testimony has prospered on account of their fear of God -- Moses, great man as he was, living in nearness to God, had the fear of God before his eyes, as he says, "I was afraid of the anger and fury wherewith Jehovah was wroth against you to destroy you." We shall not, any one of us, turn lightly to sin or to the world, or to anything connected with man's doings if the fear of God is before our eyes. The man we were reading about last night had got a touch as to the saving grace of Jesus, he says to the other man, "Dost thou not fear God?" What a word for every one of us -- do we not fear God? Young people, I say to you tonight in soberness, it is a great thing in early years to cultivate the fear of God, it will be a preservative all your life as you develop and grow in it. And he says, "And Jehovah listened to me." I think that is beautiful, dear brethren. Think of a brother or sister in priestly power going through like this in a crisis in Barbados, and God would listen to them. He says, "Jehovah listened unto me" -- Moses knows it, you see. He is not haphazard about it, he does not say, "I think" -- he knows. Any man or woman that goes through things with God, they know if they have got the ear of God, and *Moses* knew it, he says, "Jehovah listened unto me also at *that* time." What time? All this time of crisis when Moses was marked by the spirit of Jesus in relation to the people. And
{268}
notice what it says, "And with Aaron Jehovah was very angry to destroy him." Oh, what a word this is! Aaron was a prince in Israel, he was a man with a remarkable place and position, but we must remember that God in the jealousy of the rights of His love is not going on with anything in any of us, however great we might think we are, whatever position we may fill. After all, dear brethren, we always have to bear in mind what J.N.D. said in regard to Barnabas, that all the weight of a man's godliness adds to his sin when he falls. Sometimes people, you know, excuse sin by saying, he was such a godly man or such a godly woman, but *all* the weight of that godliness adds to his sin when he breaks down, as it says here, "With Aaron Jehovah was very angry to destroy him." Think of what a crisis it was! The whole priesthood was threatened and it says, "And I prayed for Aaron also at the same time." He is not only praying for the people generally but he is praying for Aaron specifically, and that is a great thing, dear brethren, to pray for one another specifically, especially if any of us breaks down, to mention one another, each by name, in any given crisis.
And he says, "I prayed for Aaron also at the same time." It is one thing when a brother or sister is not going on right to give them a word. We are very good at giving them words, but I wonder if we are as good at praying for them? It is a good thing to back up a word publicly to them with prayer in private for them. So Moses is praying, he is interceding. He might have thought, as some men might think, Aaron might get ahead of me, God might put him in my place, but not Moses. Moses was the kind of man that says, "Would God that *all* the Lord's people were prophets," and that is the spirit of true greatness. You will find that distinctively in the ministry at the present time, that true greatness
{269}
lies in the lowliness of the vessel, and the desire to make room for all that is in the assembly. It is a great matter, dear brethren, notice what it says, "And I took your sin, the calf which ye had made, and burned it with fire, and crushed it, and ground it very small, until it became fine dust; and I cast the dust thereof into the brook that flowed down from the mountain," verse 21. Now this is one of the added touches in Deuteronomy. There are a number of them. You young brothers and sisters, as you have time, look into the book, read it carefully. Read it once, twice, three, as many times as you can, you will find great help for your souls in the book. You do not get this in Exodus, you get it in Deuteronomy. After *all* the wilderness journey is over we get this added touch as to the brook that flowed down from the mountain. As if in the very place of the breakdown of the first man, of the people in relation to their great sin, in the very presence of the mountain -- typical of the holy rights of God in His love -- there is this suggestion of grace flowing to carry away the fruits of unbelief and independence of God. What a touch, dear brethren! It is a Deuteronomic touch, reminding us that in the very presence of the severity of the government of God, in the very presence of His anger, the touches of His grace appear. The brook that flows down from the mountain reminds us of what is available to carry off in its stream the fruits of the workings of infidelity among the people.
Now I would pass on to speak of the second portion that we read. It is not a crisis now. Moses is a great minister. His priestly greatness underlies his ministry. He is not only marked by priestly greatness in a crisis, but he is marked by priestly greatness when it comes to ministry, because the test of all ministry is as to whether it leaves an impression of the greatness of God. You will find if you study a man of God, a man marked by priestly greatness,
{270}
that there are two impressions that he will leave on your spirit -- he will leave an impression as to the greatness of God and an impression as to the greatness of the saints. I would counsel each one of us as to that. It is a great matter to speak well of the brethren. It is easy, you know, to speak wrongfully of the brethren, to find all the fault we can with them, but it is a great matter to be with God in priestly greatness and to speak well of the brethren, and that is Moses in Deuteronomy. And in this passage he leaves an impression on our souls as to the greatness of God. And what I would point out in regard of this passage is the fluidity that marks the man. You know, when we get older it is a great thing to be fluid right to the end. The danger is always in crystallisation, but the more we are with God, the more we are marked by priestly greatness, the more fluid we will be. You know it is a wonderful thing to see persons who are well on in years and to see how they are in the main stream. Some of us were visiting a beloved brother known to you all on this island this morning, and what spiritual fluidity marks the man, the freshness and fluidity that marks the man! Instead of crystallisation, instead of saying, Oh, well! Twenty or thirty years ago we had such wonderful times and wonderful ministry, but things are different now. It is a great thing to move all the way with the stream in which divine Persons are moving. Not to say 'the former days were better than these,' but to be in spiritual fluidity, flowing in affections and in thought in these wondrous streams that make glad the city of God, "God's exhaustless tides," as J.N.D. refers to them.
Now in this portion Moses says, "My doctrine shall drop as rain, my speech flow down as dew. This is the lawgiver that is speaking. This is the man that with such authority and power led the people out of Egypt, through the Red Sea,
{271}
into the wilderness, and brought them to the mountain of God. You might think Moses was a hard man, he was an arbitrary man, but Deuteronomy would give us a view of the spirit of the man, he says, "My doctrine shall drop as rain." Think of the gentle influence of the rain and what it means to this earth. What it means to the saints, the people of God in this relation! "My speech flow down" this is the man that God had to speak to and discipline because he spoke so hard to the people, because of the hardness of his speech. Notice how he has faced the whole matter, and he has got the gain of it, as it were he is with God in the matter, he has got the whole gain of it, and his speech now is flowing down as the dew. He is in accord with the mediatorial system, what is coming down from God to men, the heavenly influence of the dew. You know this was the man who said he was not eloquent and could not speak. He did not want to do what the Lord wanted him to do. Many of us have been like that. We have hindered God perhaps taking us on, but God went forward with Moses and Moses got the gain of it, and here he is saying now, "Give ear, ye heavens, and I will speak; and hear, O earth, the words of my mouth!" (verse 1). It is not a question of Pharaoh now, the sphere is far extended -- the heavens and the earth. This is the man that could not speak, who said he was not eloquent! Spiritual mellowness is a great thing. In the Song of Songs it speaks of the fig tree mellowing her winter figs. A wonderful thing to see the mellowness that belongs to old age, the ripened fruits of old age. How we thank God for experience amongst us. We younger brethren always want to remember that we could never buy what the older brethren have. They have got experience and we have not got that, and it is a great thing in the things of God, mellowed and ripened experience. Think of what Paul says being such an one as Paul
{272}
the aged. He says that in the epistle to Philemon, and if you read that epistle you cannot help but see that Paul's doctrine is dropping as the rain, his speech is flowing down as the dew, and as small rain upon the tender herb. Onesimus was a tender herb, one who had newly come into the truth. His master had difficulty about him, but Paul solved the whole matter as he distilled the influence of heaven. It is a great thing to find a brother or sister coming into the room and distilling the influence of heaven, especially when things are not going too well, and it is all a part of priestly greatness.
I finish now with a word as to chapter 33. I might say in passing from chapter 32, that he says, "For the name of Jehovah will I proclaim," not the name of Moses, "Ascribe greatness unto *our* God! He is the Rock, His work is perfect, for all his ways are righteousness: A God of faithfulness without deceit; Just and right is He." What a word after all the Deuteronomic coverage of the failure and breakdown along the way. But the mountain is looming above it all, the rights of God in holy love for a people He had redeemed by His power. And now a finishing word as to priestly greatness in Moses. What is he doing in chapter 33? He is blessing the people. Blessing the children of God, the children of Israel, before his death. Think of his priestly greatness, he not only can leave an impression as to God and His greatness upon our spirits, but he will leave an impression as to the greatness of the saints. And he says, "Jehovah came from Sinai, and rose up from Seir unto them." Now I want you to notice, dear brethren, that he is not referring to the matter of what took place in Egypt or the Red Sea, the prophets tell us that God brought them out under the leadership of Moses from Egypt, and through the Red Sea and into the wilderness, but Moses leaves that side. "Jehovah came from Sinai," that is, the
{273}
mountain is in his mind -- *God's* rights in holy love in relation to the people, those rights of God of which He is so jealous. It says, "He rose up from Seir unto them; he shone forth from mount Paran. And he came from the myriads of the sanctuary"; Moses saw not the unbelief of the people, but God shining forth on the people like the blessing of the Nazarite, in @Numbers 6. And it says, "From his right hand went forth a law of fire for them." Oh, that law of fire! God round about His people protecting them. Why should we fear, dear brethren? Our God is round about us, the law of fire is for us, to protect us. We do not need to be afraid of the law of fire. It may involve discipline and suffering, but the rights of God in His holy love are behind it. You remember hour in @Genesis 22 where God is testing Abraham, that it says, Abraham took the knife and the fire and both of them went on together. It is not an easy matter to face the knife. The knife is the dissecting side, the fire is the consuming side. We do not like the dissecting side, when things are laid open, and motives exposed in the discipline of God, but Abraham took the knife. He was prepared for every dissecting movement on the part of God, he took the knife and the fire. And Isaac, type of you young people, *he* is in the matter -- they went both of them together. Think of Isaac alongside of Abraham, and the fire, and the knife. Let us not be afraid of the sufferings, the testings of the present time, because God is in them, it is His law of fire.
I desire that we might all emulate Moses, the man of God, in his priestly greatness!
Chapman Street, Bridgetown, Barbados.
{274}
CIRCUMCISION
@Genesis 17: 23 -- 27; @Genesis 18: 1, 2; @Exodus 4: 24 -- 31; @Joshua 5: 2, 3, 8 -- 11
It will be apparent to most of the brethren, if not to all, that I have the subject of circumcision in mind in view of this hour. It is a very important feature of the truth, and if it is not recognised and accepted we shall be hindered from entering into the greatness of the thoughts of God for us. I have particularly in mind to refer to circumcision as the basis of certain matters, for all the passages that we have read link certain results with circumcision. Paul says in Philippians, "We *are* the circumcision, who worship by the Spirit of God, and boast in Christ Jesus, and do not trust in flesh." It is a very easy matter to accept, in certain ways, the truth of God's judgment as to the flesh, and the bearing of the death of Christ upon it, but when it comes to circumcision it is a very testing matter, and without circumcision and the recognition and acceptance of it, I do not think we shall experience the full weight of divine power that is operating on our behalf.
Now circumcision refers to the application in the power of the Spirit, of the death of Christ to the flesh. In @Romans 6, we are taught as to reckoning ourselves dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God in Christ Jesus our Lord: now that is not circumcision. @Romans 6 has in mind our arrival *by faith* at what has taken place in relation to the death of Christ, but circumcision involves more than what we arrive at by faith, circumcision involves the practical application *in the power of the Spirit* of the truth of the death of Christ to all that we are and have. Especially do I wish to stress *the inwardness* of it, as Paul alludes to it in Romans, that circumcision is not in letter, it is in heart and in spirit; chapter 2: 29. He says there, "He is not a Jew who is one outwardly,"
{275}
and so on. And what one feels, dear brethren, is needed so much is the inward bearing of circumcision, so that we should see, and we should learn to accept; the absolute judgment of God upon the flesh. I know we accept it as a doctrine, I know we talk about it; but I am concerned, as most of us would be, as to the wonderful way in which we have seen the Spirit is available to help us in regard to the various features of the truth, and that we should learn how to use the Spirit, and to make room for Him in regard to the truth of circumcision.
Gilgal, at which circumcision takes place in the chapter that we have read, is a wonderful place in the book of Joshua, it becomes as we have often referred to it, a base for the military movements that are so wondrously outlined in this book, where the inheritance is entered upon. At the very outset of this chapter, at the border of the inheritance, we might say in the Colossian position, as we have it in the New Testament, the teaching of Colossians bearing upon it, the people are confronted with this sober and serious matter of circumcision. We need to take on the things of God more seriously and soberly, and circumcision has in mind the terms on which we have to do with God and can enjoy His richest thoughts. It says in the first verse that we read that "at *that* time Jehovah said to Joshua." Now the time is to be noticed, that enters into this book. Wonderful things had been done, a wonderful victory had already been wrought for the people, for through divine love the way had been opened up through the Jordan into this wonderful realm that we are on the border of. Where love's choicest thoughts are to be known and enjoyed, where the inheritance is beginning to expand itself before them, and where the spiritual leadership of Joshua (a wonderful type of Christ in relation to the inheritance) is asserting itself more and more. And it is at *this* time that Jehovah says to
{276}
Joshua, "Make thee stone-knives, and circumcise again the children of Israel the second time. And Joshua made him stone-knives, and circumcised the children of Israel at the hill of Araloth."
It is a very painful matter, circumcision, to the flesh, but God shows us in this particular section, that if we are going to enter into the inheritance and go forward in it, we *must* face in our souls what the teaching of circumcision means. In the verse that we read, in verse 9, it says, "And Jehovah said to Joshua, This day have I rolled away the reproach of Egypt from off you. And the name of the place was called Gilgal to this day." God comes into this position in a remarkable way. He personally takes a hand in the matter, as if He loves us so much, dear brethren, that He cannot bear the thought of our being in this environment that is now before us with any feature of Egypt's reproach upon us. It is important, dear brethren, that we should get this firmly in our minds, because it is the basis of the service of God, it is the basis of the worship of God, that all that is linked with the flesh *must* go, not just arriving at it as a matter of faith, reckoning ourselves dead indeed unto sin, but in the power of the Spirit, in practical application, the truth being brought to bear upon our souls. So in @Romans 8, as some of us were seeing the other night, there is the thought of the deeds of the body and what is referred to in Colossians too, as to the putting to death, the mortification of our members, which are upon the earth. It involves the power of the Spirit coming into the practical application of the truth, it is not just reckoning ourselves dead, but the living, active feature in the power of the Spirit of applying the truth so that no quarter, no room is made for the flesh at all, I think God would help us, dear brethren, as to it more and more, because it does not matter what kind of flesh it may be, worldly flesh or religious
{277}
flesh, none of it in any shape or form will do for God. The great matter that God would impress upon our minds is that as having part in the assembly and what is linked with it at this time and in this section, there is to be no feature of Egypt's reproach upon us. Egypt represents the realm where man has full scope, where the energy of the flesh has full scope, but God is reminding us at the very immediate entrance to the land of His choice, which speaks to us of what is secured in Christ, in heaven, according to His purpose and counsel; God reminds us of the necessity of the refusal, in *heart* and in *spirit* (I am not referring just merely to ways, and to actions, and to behaviour, but to heart and spirit) the constant need for the application in the power of the Spirit of the death of Christ inwardly, so that the flesh has no ground to stand on in any department of the service of God. God is reminding us of that. In the last fifty years we have had remarkable light recovered to us in regard to the service of God, in regard to the greatness of His thoughts, but we *cannot* go on without the inward acceptance of the truth of circumcision. So that *no* flesh is to glory in God's presence. If God gives us light, dear brethren, we have no ground whatever to glory, we cannot rest on our oars. We cannot, as it were, adopt a complacent attitude, that things are all right just because we enjoy so much, and have liberty to enter upon so much: we must make *no* room for the flesh, in any shape or form, whether actively or passively, because we may deny it and cut it off actively, but the point is to see to its cutting-off passively, so that there is no room for it at all.
It is remarkable, dear brethren, how much we may, while accepting the truth generally, allow the flesh in some ways. God is reminding us in this matter of circumcision at the very doorway of the inheritance that if we are going to be with Him we are going to
{278}
be with Him on *His* terms, not our terms, that is what God is saying to us here, and circumcision is one of the basic terms on which we have to do with God. So that, dear brethren, it cuts athwart *all* that is around us. People do not like to accept the true position of Christianity, *in the assembly*, because of the reproach it involves, the complete cutting off of the flesh, that *no* flesh should glory in the presence of God. People come in touch with the truth, they get a ray of light in their souls, they know that the truth is in the assembly, is among the brethren, but if *only* they could add a little, they think, if only they could *do* a little, if only they could carry on in some way something that would give the flesh some little room to glory, it would be all right. But what God would remind us of at the very beginning of the book of Joshua is that if we are going to enter into the great range and scope and realm of His thoughts, conceived before time, before the worlds were formed, it *must* be on the basis of the acceptance of circumcision, the application in the Spirit's power of the death of Christ in relation to the flesh, and the reproach of Egypt. Think of what God thinks about it that He should bring it up in this way! They had come through the Jordan, the stones had been placed in the bed of Jordan and the stones had been brought up out of the bed of Jordan. We are in the presence, as it were, and testimony, of a people that have been made to live in the life of Christ as risen from the dead, and in the power of that life, with the help of the Spirit, the *truth* of circumcision is to be brought to bear upon us. Not in the wilderness light, but in the light that belongs to the other side of death -- the other side of the Jordan. It is the heavenly man that can rightly apply circumcision. It is in the heavenly letter, that speaks of heavenly men and women here on earth, the epistle to the Philippians, that it says,
{279}
"*We* are the circumcision, "And I am sure if there are any here who are having difficulty as to the truth, difficulty as to going all the way, that if only they can see that it is a question of getting into the blessedness of the heavenly position, and enjoying what it is to be made to live in the life of Christ, the risen and the heavenly Man, that *then* they can look back, or *then* they can take up and deal with in power, by the help of the Spirit, the question of Egypt's reproach, and all that is linked with the flesh. Sometimes we turn it around and try to do it the opposite way, but if God gives us light as to the heavenly position, if He gives us light as to Christ and the life that is linked with Him as out of death, let us move forward in it, and we shall get help by the Spirit to apply in power the truth as to circumcision, because you know as well as I know, that the *great* thing that tests everyone of us is circumcision.
In every department of service in regard to the service of God, we are tested as to the complete acceptance of circumcision. It is a searching matter but it is the only basis on which *all* the triumphant movements in this book can go forward. Wonderful persons come before us in this book, but the whole truth of the book of Joshua is based on what we have in Gilgal: they go forward from that base, they return to that base, and go forward again from that base. And if we are going to know what power is in our souls, it *must* be on the basis of the acceptance of circumcision, the complete rolling away of every reproach of the system that God has had to say to in judgment -- Egypt. Now it is for every one of us to see if there is *any* feature of Egypt's reproach that is holding us up. Egypt is a place where people do things according to their own resources, their own means, their own wisdom, their own ideas, their own thinking and planning: but God has brought us into touch with a realm where everything is done according
{280}
to heaven's direction, and according to strength which *God* supplies, and the blessedness of the enjoyment of it lies in the acceptance of what we are referring to -- the truth of circumcision. It says, "The name of the place was called Gilgal to this day." You take a person like Rahab that soon comes before us, she is a wonderful woman, you know! She represents what God can do. We do not know what God has done in persons here tonight. I do not know the persons that are here, but Rahab represents a person that God has wrought in sovereignly, apart from Israel. Wonderful thing that to take account of! From another viewpoint she represents the work of God as coming to light from the other side of the Jordan in the saints. She is a wonderful person, but she is one who accepts, in principle, what is involved in the truth of circumcision. Because for her, life in Jericho was over and finished. We get persons like Caleb who go forward in the inheritance in the full acceptance of what the death of Christ means, as we are referring to it now in relation to circumcision. We get Achsah and Othniel, a young brother and a young sister, in chapter 15 of this book, they are going forward in the light of all the victories, but it is based on this, no quarter for Egypt's reproach, or the flesh, which Egypt embodies and sets out. It sets out the independency of the flesh, the strength of the arm of the flesh, it is developed there in Egypt: and God says to His people as they are going forward into the assembly and into the light of *all* that is established in Christ, I want *every* feature of that rolled away, *rolled* away! And God says, "This day have *I* rolled away," as if as circumcision comes about God comes in to help us in regard to the matter, because it says in verse 8, "And it came to pass when the whole nation had finished being circumcised, that they abode in their place in the camp till they were whole. *And Jehovah said to Joshua*" -- notice
{281}
God immediately comes in with a word. Who knows but what there is someone here tonight who may be saying, Well, it means that I will just have to go out, I will lose my life if I take up things in the assembly! Well, that is just what it means, that we have got to lose our lives as far as this world is concerned. There is no hope for any of us, if we want to shine in the assembly according to the principle of Egypt or the principle of the flesh. We *must* be prepared to go in for a life that is completely hidden, in which the power of God is to be seen rather than the strength of the arm of the flesh.
Now let every one of us face the matter as to what is hindering us going *all* the way. You young brothers and sisters here who have not committed yourselves to the *full* position, the full light of the assembly, which the book of Joshua has in mind, and the inheritance as opened up in relation to it, what is *your* hindrance? Perhaps it is this matter. The Spirit is available to help us to *apply* the truth, the Lord Jesus says in @John 17, He Himself having taken a position with this in mind, "I sanctify myself for them, that they also may be sanctified by truth," or as it may read, "in the power of the truth." He has taken a place in heaven that by the truth and light of that place, we might be entirely secured and held apart from all that is linked with this world; whether in Egypt or whether in the wilderness, because the wilderness represents what the world becomes to us as redeemed by power, as by faith, coming into the light of God and His saving grace. And the Lord Jesus has taken a place in order that we might be apart from it all, sanctified by the light of His place in heaven, and circumcision would help us in relation to heavenly-mindedness. The more heavenly-minded we are the less desire we have to be marked by Egypt's reproach, whether it be in a good mind, or an amiable disposition, or
{282}
whether it be in the ability to serve well; it may take many forms, but circumcision brings this home to us, that the body of the flesh in its entirety is completely dealt with in the death of Christ, according to @Colossians 2, and circumcision for us means the application of the *truth* of that in the power of the Spirit in our souls. So that there is no ground whatever for any flesh to glory. And now it says, "The children of Israel encamped in Gilgal" -- notice that! It says, the name of the place was *called* Gilgal to this day, and then it says, the children of Israel *encamped* in it. It does not say they encamped in it before, but they reached this point, as it says in verse 10, "The children of Israel *encamped* in Gilgal," as if now a definite position is taken up in the acceptance of the light that *governs* the position, and there is the complete removal of the offensiveness of the flesh before God in the matter of circumcision, and it says, "And held the passover on the fourteenth day of the month, at even, in the plains of Jericho. And they ate of the old corn of the land on the morrow after the passover, unleavened loaves, and roasted corn on that same day." Now notice that there is no instruction as to this. It seems as if, as moving on the line of circumcision, for us the acceptance in the power of the Spirit of the death of Christ as applied to the flesh, the doorway is opened into this wonderful side of the truth where food that would build us up in relation to a heavenly constitution is there available to us. For the old corn of the land alludes to the Lord Jesus Christ as the heavenly Man, as indigenous to heaven. If in circumcision everything that is connected with the reproach of Egypt, the principle of Egypt's world has been rolled away, there must be something constitutionally to take its place, and that is what comes out in the verses that follow: that as we accept the basis suggested in verse 2 to the end of verse 9, we find
{283}
an opening into this wonderful suggestion of the truth -- the food of the heavenly land, the old corn, feeding upon Christ, as belonging to the heavenly realm. We feed upon Him, of course, as manna in the wilderness, to sustain us in our everyday life here, but it is an important thing to feed upon Him as the heavenly One and the One who is in heaven, the One who *belongs* to heaven, so that we might become like Him constitutionally, "As is the heavenly One such also the heavenly ones." Now I pass over to Genesis. Circumcision in Joshua is the basis of the inheritance, and of all the victories that are connected with the people of God in their appreciation and apprehension of God's thoughts and His love for them.
Now in Genesis I want to speak of circumcision in relation to a man and his house, and also in Exodus. I think @Genesis 17 gives us a wonderful view of Abraham! It gives us a view of the moral power of this man who walked before God. It is a great thing to walk before God. We often walk before men. We are often concerned about what the brethren think of what we are ministering, what we are preaching -- how well we did in it, and all the good works that we may carry on and do. We often think a lot about men, you know, we are more affected by men than we are inclined to give credit to, but it is very subtle. But Abraham walked before *God*, God indeed gave him a word as to walking before Him, and you will notice that in the verse previous to the portion read, it says, "And he left off talking with him" -- I like that word, dear brethren! He *left off* talking with him! Not talking *to* him, but talking *with* him, "And *God went up from Abraham*"! Notice that, dear brethren. Think of this man that had responded to the light of the heavenly call! We are dealing now with the heavenly man properly in Genesis, the heavenly man morally -- Abraham.
{284}
Isaac, of course, is the heavenly man officially but Abraham is the heavenly man morally, and I want to ask every one of us about the matter of heavenly-mindedness. Is there anyone here who has not responded to the heavenly call? It is a great matter to respond to the *heavenly* call, that God is calling us out of the world and all that constitutes it, circumcision is really referring to that, that God is not going on with anything *in* the world but cuts at the very root of what the world's system is built up upon, the flesh in all its energy and strength. It says, "He left off talking with him and God went up from Abraham," The chapter is a wonderful chapter, it opens with God saying to Abraham, "Walk before my face, and be perfect. And I will set my covenant between me and thee": I think God would give us all a sense in our souls of settled and fixed matters on this line as walking before Him. Very often with many of us we have difficulty in arriving at just where we are, and how we stand. The covenant implies a definite fixed basis on which we know where *God* is and we know where *we* are, and that is a very important matter in regard to heavenly-mindedness, because circumcision lies at the basis of our progress in regard to heavenly things. And this chapter has in mind that Abraham should know where God was, and that he should know where he, Abraham, was, and I think we need to find our bearings, dear brethren, in this light. John's ministry has that in mind, his epistle especially, that we should find our bearings in the truth: that it is not just always sitting in the meetings and under the influence of the ministry, and the power of the truth, while that in itself is wonderful and we thank God for it but John would help each of us to find our *bearings* in the truth, so that we *know* where we are inwardly, because circumcision, our subject, is bearing upon inwardness, as @Romans 2, opens up. So while many
{285}
of us may know where we are outwardly and externally, as in the assembly, we want to know where we are *inwardly*, and John's ministry is especially calculated to help us as to where we are inwardly, so that things become fixed and permanent with us, as it says, "He that is begotten of God keeps himself." It is interesting how John speaks of the work of God in the believer, and as we get our bearings in relation to the truth that John has in mind in his ministry, we shall find abstractly a certain invulnerability in the believer as to all that we have to do with in passing through this scene. We shall find that as we rely and make room for the inward and abstract side of the truth which John is enforcing and inculcating into our minds through the principle of teaching, we shall get a fixed bearing. So that our joy is not up one day and down another. We are not all buoyant one week and all down another week, John's ministry is to help us to find our bearings. And the way that we are applying this thought of the covenant has in mind a certain fixed relationship between the believer and God, because Abraham is the father of us all, and is a pattern.
God is pleased with the position in this chapter -- pleased with Abraham, despite the fact that Abraham said, Oh, that Ishmael might live before thee. A great man like this, yet we are reminded of his desires in regard to Ishmael, but nevertheless contextually God is pleased with Abraham, as He is with *all* heavenly-minded persons. And it says, "He left off talking with him," as if the conversation would have gone on, and on, and on. A wonderful thing to walk with God and to converse with Him! It says, God *left off* talking with him. There will be no leaving off in eternity, but in the time scene things have to be broken in upon, so it says, He left off talking with him and God went up from Abraham, showing that the base of God's operation in this
{286}
great matter was Abraham, just as the base of His operations now is in the saints. And then it says, "Abraham took Ishmael." Now I want to refer briefly to the moral power of this man; that he can not only bring the truth to bear upon himself, upon his own soul, but his *whole* household, the whole institution that is linked with him, as it says, "And Abraham took Ishmael his son, and all who were born in his house, and all who were bought with his money -- every male among the people of Abraham's house -- and circumcised the flesh of their foreskin on that *same* day" -- not a week after, not two months after, but the *same* day. Now what is God saying to us tonight? Why is the word coming thus? Is there any one here that the truth is having to say to tonight? What about our movements in relation to it? It says of Abraham, "in the *selfsame day*."
Now the secret of all spiritual prosperity and progress is *immediate* reaction to heavenly light, If God gives us light on the road it is important that we should immediately react to it and we shall get more light from God, because that is what this section unfolds. Abraham takes one step (you remember how Romans speaks of the "steps" of the faith of our father Abraham), a step at a time. And you will find that if you take one step God will give you light as to another step. Often persons that are exercised about clearing themselves from wrong associations think that God will give them complete light in the association in which they are -- He will not. When you clear yourself of wrong associations, God will give you more and more light as to the whole position. And you will find, if you work it out, that that is how God operates. And it says, "Abraham -- on the selfsame day," notice how it is twice said! It says in verse 23, "On that *same* day, as *God* had said to him" -- you see it was not a question of what *anyone* had said but as *God* had
{287}
said to him. And then in verse 26, "In the *selfsame* day was Abraham circumcised." Notice how it goes over it twice, to stress the moral power in a man that is able to hold himself and *all* that he has, in relation to this *great* thought, on the basis of which God was walking with him, in fixed relationship -- circumcision. I know it is a testing matter. Some of us are more ambitious than others, more ardent in our desires than others, some of us like to do things religiously more than others, but in coming in for life in the assembly, dear brethren, we have to accept the principle of going out completely as far as the flesh is concerned, that no flesh should glory in God's presence.
And it says (notice in the next chapter) "And Jehovah appeared to him by the oaks of Mamre." Now I want to show, dear brethren, that circumcision in @Genesis 17 is the basis for the wonderful, intimate relationships in such blessed communion with divine Persons, as is set out in chapter 18. I am sure, dear brethren, that the more, in the power of the Spirit, the death of Christ and the truth of it is brought to bear on our souls and all that we are, the more we shall enjoy the blessedness of the company of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. What wonderful grace, dear brethren, that God, who is so infinite in His greatness, yet in revelation has come so near in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit -- come so near as to take up their abode with us, because @John 14 points out to us the possibility of *every* divine Person, the Father, the Son and the Spirit, being with an individual believer. What immensity in the suggestion! But there it is! The Spirit is viewed as being with us and in us, and the Lord Jesus speaks about those that love Him and keep His word, the Father and Himself coming to them and making Their abode with him -- think of it! And that is what we have in @Genesis 18, it becomes the basis of known, happy
{288}
relationships with divine Persons. We may wonder *why* we do not have it. Some of us might *wish* to have it, and why do we *not* have it? Well, perhaps we need to look into the matter of circumcision. Perhaps we need to look into the matter of the covenant, the idea of a fixed and known understanding with God as to where we are in the truth. I am sure as to the younger brethren, that the more we face this matter of a fixed and an abiding understanding as to where we are with God, the more we shall be helped in moving on with divine Persons, because They are on a journey, wonderful things are to be done, the world is to be overthrown (typified in Sodom and Gomorrah), the great supreme suggestion of love is to come in as in @Genesis 22, the wonderful light as to Christ and the assembly shining in @Genesis 24: it is *all* coming into the way, all on the horizon as it were, here, but the basis of it is circumcision.
Now I want just to finish with a word on circumcision in Exodus. I feel, dear brethren, that this is a sober matter with all of us, because we have the minister Moses here. Wonderful minister he was! But it shows, dear brethren, that God is not going on with any of us in carelessness as to the matter of the flesh. It is a serious thing to serve God and to have part in His service, I think we should all face that, brothers and sisters alike. It says in verse 24 of chapter 4 of Exodus, "And it came to pass *on the way*, in the inn, that Jehovah came upon him, and sought to slay him." This is a serious matter, dear brethren. Men think that they can do what they like in the service of God, they can carry on in any way they think fit, or see fit, but dear brethren, the nearer we are to God the more we shall see that it is a sober and grave matter to have to do with God, and we cannot go on with the flesh unattended to, with this matter of the reproach of Egypt not rolled away. Moses started out first to do things in his
{289}
own strength (we all have to learn the end of that kind of thing) but he sat by the well eventually, and I believe that was a turning point with him. We all have to learn what it is to sit in relation to the Spirit and His presence in the dispensation: and if things are to be done, in whatever way it may be, not only in preaching or in ministry but in service in any way, it must be done effectually on the basis of accepting circumcision. And the seriousness of it appears here that *God* came upon Moses, He did not send an angel, it says, "Jehovah came upon him and sought to slay him," showing the seriousness of going on with *any* feature of the flesh unjudged in our hearts. "Then Zipporah took a stone and cut off the foreskin of her son, and cast it at his feet, and said, A bloody husband indeed art thou to me! And he let him go. Then she said, A bloody husband -- because of the circumcision." This is not the most attractive side of the truth. If we are prepared to go in for the service of God and what it involves, we must be prepared for this side of the truth. Zipporah's language is not very refined, she has to learn, as *all* of us have to learn, in regard to divine matters, but what I would like to stress in finishing is, that while this is so sober and grave, and involves such serious issues, the acceptance of it involves God again coming *immediately* into the position, and it becomes the basis of the unjealous relations of love between one another. It says immediately, "Jehovah said to Aaron" (not now to Moses, He said to *Aaron*) "Go into the wilderness to meet Moses," Think of God taking such issue with Moses and yet immediately the matter is faced, although not faced in an orthodox kind of way, God is thinking about Moses and He is sending Aaron to meet him, and it says, "And he went, and met him on the mountain of God, and kissed him." Think of the grace of that! Think of the felicity of it -- these kind of surroundings and
{290}
circumstances, the mountain of God, the kiss of Aaron -- all coming in behind this matter of circumcision and the application of it. It may look fearful to us, it may seem as if it is terrible to us, as in verses 24, 25 and 26. People say to us, Why it is a *terrible* thing. I have heard of fathers and mothers who have said to their children, It means you will be virtually *buried* if you go among the brethren, take up life in the assembly -- well, it is really what it means. But then, behind the scene, the mountain of God behind the desert, is what they cannot see -- this wonderful state of happy, mutual conditions of love, the links between the brethren suggested in Moses and Aaron, especially persons that are *doing* things.
And I would leave that word with the brethren, at this moment, that the right way to get on with one another, to go on unjealously with one another, is in the acceptance of the truth of circumcision. To give no quarter to the flesh, or any principle or feature of Egypt's world. We shall thus know what it is to serve in relation to one another and in relation to the mountain of God where all the resources and power of God is known. We know how the enemy would work to cripple us, to render us ineffective in our service, but God would help us to see the effective way of service in the acceptance of circumcision. And as accepting it we will get the practical support of an Aaron, one who has the capacity to embrace us, and to kiss us. It may mean a journey. It may mean the taking account of the mountain of God, and what the mountain of God suggests -- the exercise of the rights of God in His holy love -- but it means the *kiss* of Aaron. And is it not worth while, dear brethren, in view of being effective in the service of God?
Well, may the Lord help us in this matter, for His name's sake.
Workman's Village, St. George, Barbados.
