{#Readings and Addresses in Australia}
{1}
THE GLORY AND PRINCIPLES OF DIVINE ADMINISTRATION IN THE ASSEMBLY
@Matthew 16: 24 -- 28; @Matthew 17: 1 -- 5; @Matthew 25: 31 -- 46
S.McC. The thought in mind in suggesting these passages as a basis for an inquiry in relation to the truth, is the thought of glory in relation to divine administration. We have, in the passages that we have read, remarkable allusions to glory, especially as entering into administrative functions and bearing on an administrative environment. In view of the apparent deterioration in administration on every hand and among the nations, it is important that we should understand the positive features linked with divine administration. Matthew is the great administrative gospel, and the assembly is presented in it in a very dignified and glorious way in relation to this subject of divine administration. Divine Persons delight, in the presence of the deterioration linked with man's administration, to draw our attention to, and link our thoughts with, the glory of divine administration, especially in regard to the positive features that are linked with it and what it brings in. Very often, perhaps, we have tended to allow the preponderance in our minds of administration as bearing on the repression of evil, without sufficiently seeing that divine administration, and the working out of it in its glory, involves the introduction of positive thoughts of blessing. There is a radiancy in divine administration, with which there is linked the representation of God; and every one of us, as having part in divine administration, should be marked by the right representation of Him who is the source of all administration. It is suggested that we look at this reference in chapter 16, where the Son of man is referred to, in verse 27, coming "in the glory of his Father," a remarkable allusion to
{2}
Christ; and then, in chapter 17, the overshadowing cloud, alluding to the excellent glory (as the marginal reference would suggest); and then the allusion in chapter 25, in the time of the sessional judgment, to the great thought of the Son of man coming in His glory; the reference to "his throne of glory," all bearing upon the administrative position. As the brethren will note, in chapter 25 it is a question of executive administration, especially working out in relation to the protection of the people of God. I thought we might get help in considering these features of glory, as set out in this gospel, which brings administration so much before us.
S.E.E. Would the glory of the administration of the assembly lie in the reflection of divine Persons in it?
S.McC. Yes, God would be rightly represented in all administration working out in the assembly. The Lord makes a remarkable allusion to the assembly in this chapter; "my assembly." How much the Lord makes of the assembly! The way He speaks of it as "my assembly," and "hades¬ gates shall not prevail against it," an allusion, I suppose, to the administrative side in connection with what is evil.
W.J.H. What you have said would be confirmed in the great issue in the book of the Revelation; when the cities of the nations fall. God's answer to it is to bring in His city in holiness and transparency and glory.
S.McC. So that it is said of the holy city that she has the glory of God. She is marked by that, a vessel that has been formed in relation to divine outshining, and, as having it, capacitated to have her part and place in sharing with Christ in the blest administration of that day.
P.B. Are you suggesting that this administrative vessel, the assembly, is composed of persons who have to be cared for?
S.McC. That is what Matthew would impress us with, that the saints are great in the eyes of divine
{3}
Persons. @Matthew 18 impresses us with that, in the working out of the principle of care, and @Matthew 25, while we know that prophetically it alludes to the sessional judgment of a future day, yet the principles that enter into the executive administration of that moment are to be understood by us, as rightly conveying what enters into divine administration.
R.C.R. So that administration is not limited to care meetings, but the care of the saints is basic in that chapter.
S.McC. I think we may have been too limited in our thoughts as to administration. Think of the glory of it in our dispensation; Christ in heaven and the great system of administration set up in relation to Him there. He functioning as Man in heaven, and the Spirit in the assembly down here commensurate with the position up there; the great working out of divine administration in the glad tidings in the way the knowledge of God is brought to men. We need to have our thoughts enlarged as to divine administration.
H.J.M. In chapter 16 He speaks of the Son of man coming "in the glory of his Father with his angels," and then in chapter 25, "But when the Son of man comes in *his* glory" -- are those two features that shine in the matter now?
S.McC. I think they do. "The glory of his Father" is a remarkable expression, and there is something for us to understand and learn as to this reference at this particular juncture; the Father being the great sovereign Ruler of the universe, and the One who is referred to by the Lord Jesus in that great turning point in @Matthew 11: 25, "I praise thee, Father, Lord of the heaven and of the earth, that thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them to babes." That is one of the features of the glory of the Father, that He is not operating in relation to the wise and prudent. He is operating in relation to the impressionable
{4}
state among the people of God. Unsophisticated as the babes are in the ways of human and worldly wisdom, the Father is operating in relation to them, with this great thought of administration in mind.
B.O.L. The glory of the Father was witnessed in the resurrection of Christ, was it not, according to @Romans 6: 4? He was "raised up from among the dead by the glory of the Father."
S.McC. Yes, showing how early the thought of glory enters into the position of the believer in the wilderness. It is the glory of *the* Father there, God known in that way.
N.B.S. In this reference in verse 27, "For the Son of man is about to come in the glory of his Father," intended to direct the eyes of our hearts to the contemplation of that glory, so that it affects us in our movements here, and enables us to be ready to lose things here, as indicated in the verses earlier?
S.McC. I think so. Peter had been the subject in relation to a divine movement in the body of the chapter. The Lord says to Peter, "flesh and blood has not revealed it to thee, but my Father who is in the heavens." That is another feature of the Father's glory, His operations in putting an impression upon such as Peter represents. The great thought of administration is brought into Peter's mind by what the Lord says in regard to the keys of the kingdom and what follows, "whatsoever thou mayest bind upon the earth shall be bound in the heavens; and whatsoever thou mayest loose on the earth shall be loosed in the heavens." The Lord is inculcating into Peter's mind administrative thoughts, yet Peter falls beneath the level of these great thoughts, and the Lord has to rebuke him in the succeeding verses, for Peter would turn the Lord away from the path in which the divine glory would shine, the path of suffering. Then the Lord introduces this matter of those who want to save their lives, and proceeds to speak of this matter of
{5}
the Son of man about to come in the glory of His Father. It seems to have a distinct bearing in relation to what has preceded.
A.C. Is that why He takes them up into a high mountain apart shortly afterwards, and is transfigured before them?
S.McC. Yes. It would show the elevated side of things that comes into view in this great administrative section; whereas, in man's world, there is the thought of degeneration in administrative functions, just as in Daniel's time there was the deterioration from the head of gold down to what we have in the feet. The Lord would elevate our thoughts in relation to the great realm and range of divine administration and glory.
H.J.M. Did Hannah have an instinctive sense of that glory of divine administration in her prayer, which was really a song, the reversal of men's thoughts? "He raiseth up the poor out of the dust; from the dung-hill he lifteth up the needy. To set him among nobles; and he maketh them inherit a throne of glory," @1 Samuel 2: 8.
S.McC. Very good. Hannah had a right conception as to divine administration, linked with God's anointed! She was a woman who was in power in her soul. Whilst the subject of persecution from her rival Peninnah, she finds herself liberated in her soul, giving expression to the exalted thoughts linked with the glory of divine administration.
J.H.H. Does it suggest to you that the Lord had confidence in Peter? I notice He calls him Simon Barjona first, but then He says, "thou *art* Peter." Does it suggest that the Lord had confidence that Peter was going to come into the gain of all that you are saying?
S.McC. Matthew would keep Peter before us: "first Peter". We are not to lose sight of the distinctive place that Peter has; but what comes out in the verses immediately preceding those we read, shows what is possible
{6}
with any one of us. If it was possible with Peter, it is possible with any one of us to fall beneath the level and dignity of divine thoughts in regard to what is going forward.
W.J.H. You refer, do you, to the Lord calling Peter "Satan" in that matter? An adversary!
S.McC. A remarkable expression! We might have said naturally, Well, was the Lord justified in using such a strong expression at this juncture? We might say, All that Peter said was, "God be favourable to thee, Lord; this shall in no wise be unto thee." But the Lord, turning round, "said to Peter, Get away behind me, Satan; thou art an offence to me, for thy mind is not on the things that are of God, but on the things that are of men." Peter was seeking to deflect the Lord in relation to the path in which the glory of divine administration would be established and shine out.
A.W.G. Would Peter's recovery be on the lines of following the Lord, as suggested in the following verses? "If any one desires to come after me, let him deny himself and take up his cross and follow me." Does the pathway of suffering precede this thought of glory?
S.McC. Well, it does; and I think it involves that we should be *unreserved* in our committal to things. Where there are reserves, you never get full enlightenment and full freedom in relation to the glory of divine administration. We try to save our lives, in whatever way it may be, in regard to things in the world around us -- our businesses, or in the way of religious reputation, or other things. If we try to save our lives, we shall never get the full gain of what is linked with our part in these great matters we are referring to.
J.D. Would verse 29 of chapter 11 have a moral bearing upon this? "Take my yoke upon you, and learn from me; for I am meek and lowly in heart."
S.McC. Just so. The Lord would help us as to our part in this great feature of administration, in which
{7}
divine glory is shining; because we are not to have anything less in our minds, in regard to the working out of administration, than that divine glory is to shine in it; not the glory of men, but *the glory of God*.
G.C.McK. That is emphasized in the heavenly city, that you drew attention to, having the glory of God, and her outshining corresponds with that?
S.McC. And therefore, as to the city having the glory of God, there is the great matter at the present time of the forming processes, through suffering and other means and ways of developing us substantially, in relation to that great thought.
G.J.G. Would you say a word in relation to the scripture in @Revelation 21: 23? "The glory of God has enlightened it" (that is, the city), "and the lamp thereof is the Lamb." Why are those two thoughts put together?
S.McC. I think it suggests that where divine administration is working out, you will find enlightenment among the brethren. Where divine administration is interfered with, you get darkening and bondage -- engendering elements, which do not set the saints free. "The glory of God has enlightened it." It is a remarkable sphere and environment, where the gates are open and not shut, and where there are the remarkable resources for meeting whatever need there might be.
W.J.H. Would the word in Galatians be in keeping with that? It says, "Jerusalem above is free, which is our mother," @Galatians 4: 26. Is that one feature of the glory shining out in the assembly?
S.McC. That is what I thought @Matthew 17 would teach us; the great matter of sonship. Preceding the functioning chapter (chapter 18), the liberty and dignity of sonship, in Christ and in the saints, is brought into chapter 17.
G.C.McK. It says in chapter 16: 27, "the glory of
{8}
his Father with his angels." I was thinking of the angels there. What bearing would they have on the matter?
S.McC. We know that the angels will attend these great matters. They attend in relation to the working out of administration in the assembly. They are greatly interested in the working out of divine administration wherever it may be seen, and it is interesting to see how they appear in these matters. In @Ephesians 3, the assembly is referred to, in relation to the working out of the all-various wisdom of God, and the angels taking account of it.
J.G.C. The first of the scriptures before us refers to individuals: "If any one desires to come after me." Does the concrete expression of administration in a local assembly depend upon the presence of individuals in it who are thus committed?
S.McC. I think that is important in a day of difficulty, such as we are in. It is important that there should be full and unreserved committal with us to the path of suffering and reproach; because, in that path, we see how divine glory shines out in Jesus; moral glory shining as the Lord drew near to the cross, and on the cross His relations with the thief, what glory shines; when He came and had to do with the Jews, in the light of John's ministry, how the Lord stressed the fact that they rejected the Father; how He came in the Father's Name; how He did the works which the Father did, and how He was rejected by the Jews.
A.W.G. On the mount of transfiguration, the Lord's face shone as the sun, and His garments became white as the light. Are they in keeping with what you have before you, as to the glory of administration?
S.McC. It suggests transparency. The figure of the sun implies indiscriminate influence, shining on the just and the unjust; the great heavenly influence linked with it, too. All that enters into the position of chapter 17. It is to help us in the administration of chapter 18,
{9}
for in chapter 17 we are in an administrative environment, and the teaching in it is to help us by first seeing the dignity of sonship in Christ.
H.J.M. That is really the shining that shone upon Saul of Tarsus on the way to Damascus, and he started early with the light of sonship and the glory of divine administration in Christ.
S.McC. Paul got an impression from that moment, and he is the minister that brings forward the assembly in her heavenly position. No doubt, all that entered into the moment gave him a permanent impression. I think we want to understand the heavenly side more, in relation to administrative matters; that we can only work out administration rightly and properly, as coming in from the heavenly side, with all the beneficent influence that the heavenly side, as enjoyed by us, would disseminate in the working out of the administration.
G.J.G. Would that bear upon the reference to "my Father who is in the heavens," and then further, "your Father who is in the heavens"?
S.McC. Matthew makes a good deal of that, what is in the heavens, and what is in heaven; as if, to understand administration rightly, we have to understand that side of things.
F.W. Is that why it is spoken of as the glory of the Father of the Son of man?
S.McC. That is a very interesting reference, "the Son of man" implying His link with humanity. What this administrative environment would stress, is the greatness of man, as the Lords sets out as to the Son of man and His activities. And then the matter of sheep; earlier in the gospel it is said, "How much better then is a man than a sheep!" That is, we are impressed, in the Son of man here, with humanity; because the Son of man is what He is on our side.
F.W. So that it is administration in a Man; but it is one particular Man; that is, the Son of man, is it?
{10}
And then the glory of the Father of the Son of man (at the end of chapter 16), and the glory cloud (at the beginning of chapter 17) with the word, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I have found my delight."
S.McC. So that you might say that the rights of humanity according to God are guaranteed in the closing verses of chapter 16, in the allusion to the Son of man. Evil will have to be dealt with, of course; but the very reference to the Son of man involves the protection of the rights of humanity, according to the divine viewpoint. It says, "For the Son of man is about to come in the glory of his Father with his angels, and then he will render to each according to his doings."
W.J.H. Is that why all judgment is given to Him, because He is the Son of man? He will deal feelingly even in judgment?
S.McC. Exactly; and the glory of the Father, linked with that, shows us (while the Father judges *no one*) the remarkable link of the Father with the matter of judgment in the hands of the Son of man; the grace side being intensified in the thought of the glory of His Father, because in the word to Laodicea, He is upon His Father's throne, having overcome, a delightful reference to the unique character of divine administration at the present time.
F.W. Is that why it was necessary for the bright cloud to overshadow them? There were those that were saying, "let us make here three tabernacles: for thee one, and for Moses one, and one for Elias"; but has that all to be set aside, and the special and dominant position of the glory of the Son of man to govern the situation?
S.McC. Well, that is it. So that, in this world of administrative glory in chapters 16 -- 18, every man must go out; no one can stand alongside of Christ. If administration makes much of man according to the
{11}
flesh, there is something wrong, because it is *Christ* and *God* that divine administration has in mind to set into relief in Their glory in its working out.
P.B. So we have this wondrous touch of the Lord's in verse 24 of chapter 16, as being the kernel of our arriving individually and in reality at this administrative thought, "If any one desires to come after me, let him deny himself and take up his cross and follow me."
S.McC. Linked with that, too, in the opening of chapter 18, 3 -- 5, "Verily I say to you, Unless ye are converted and become as little children, ye will not at all enter into the kingdom of the heavens. Whoever therefore shall humble himself as this little child, he is the greatest in the kingdom of the heavens; and whosoever shall receive one such little child in my name, receives me." The Lord is showing, in this realm of administrative glory, the exact reverse of what obtains amongst men, that it is not the 'survival of the fittest' in the divine realm. We are in a divine province, and room must be made for divine sovereignty in it; and especially that we should be in accord with the outshining of divine glory, which would distinguish Christ, and no man after the flesh.
J.D. Seeing Him, is referred to in chapter 16; verse 28, and then hearing Him; the Father's voice follows with "hear him," chapter 17, verse 5. Are both important in connection with this -- the seeing, and the hearing?
S.McC. It is a question of what our eyes are taking account of; seeing -- what do we see in the realm of administrative glory, as it is working out now? What can we see in the assembly? Are our eyes observing? Are they open to see what is being done, what is happening? And then the matter of hearing; are our ears open? Our faculties, in that way, must be sharp and keen.
W.H.F. We are ready, would you say, for the Lord's
{12}
word as to prayer and fasting? The impression of the divine glory would stimulate us to have power, as a result of the exclusion of the flesh, along that line?
S.McC. We are in an elevated realm here. We think of all that is around us in the public professing body; the sordid character of things, and how things are brought down into the dust. How we need to see the glory of the assembly in the divine mind, in this great realm of administrative glory, and the glory of the *personnel* of the assembly, which is in mind in this section. So, as Mr. Darby points out, the cloud covered, without darkening them. It was bright, the excellent glory. That is, the shining out of divine glory in a realm like this does not darken the saints, it illuminates them.
A.W.G. Does verse 1 suggest that it is a new day? After the six days, this is a new day, is it, in which we are found?
S.McC. Yes. And the Lord has selective rights; we must allow the Lord to do what He has in mind to do. He takes Peter, and James, and John, and brings *them* up. We might say, 'Well, why not someone else?' But we are in a divine realm here, and we have to have our thoughts adjusted in relation to divine ways of *doing* things. So we have to be converted, as chapter 18 indicates.
H.J.M. Why does it add the words in relation to John, "his brother"?
S.McC. Is not that a great feature in the environment of administrative glory, that we are to keep before us this dignified thought of the brother. "His brother"?
F.R.G. "*This* is my beloved Son." Is it a realm of love, as well as of glory?
S.McC. Well, that is it. That is the thought of the family side. The side of sonship, on the one hand, in relation to Christ, and its uniqueness in Him; the side of the brother working out, "John his brother," the feelings in those relations.
{13}
G.J.D. Had Peter learned this lesson in @Acts 3, when he could say, "Look on us," as administering something of this glory?
S.McC. That is it. There was something substantial there to be looked upon, and that is what the Lord is stressing at the present time. It is not the amount of light that we have (we can thank God for all the light that has come in through the great ministry of our day); but the Lord is testing us now, as to where we are *substantially* in relation to that ministry, in all its authoritative character.
P.B. So the voice is out of the cloud, is it not?
S.McC. Exactly; it is linked with the excellent glory. It is conveying this kind of thing.
J.G.H. I wondered if this glory is not also seen in Stephen?
S.McC. Yes. Stephen is a remarkable expression of a person who is substantially formed in the spirit and grace of the dispensation. He says, "Lord, lay not this sin to their charge." Stephen is a wonderful administrator. He is not letting his thoughts run all over the place, nor speaking about things in general; he says, "Lord, lay not this sin to their charge." He is very specific. He knows what he is referring to.
Now, when we come to chapter 25: 31, "But when the Son of man comes in his glory, and all the angels with him, then shall he sit down upon his throne of glory," we are to see how this throne of glory works out, in the remarkable way in which are people of God are protected, for it stands related to the protection of the saints. We were saying across the sea the other day, that if there is any sphere on earth where a believer should feel safe and protected, it is in the assembly, the great vessel of divine administration. We should never be afraid of losing our lives in the realm of administrative glory linked with the assembly. It is the sphere of salvation, the sphere of divine protection;
{14}
and the believer should feel that if there is any place he or she would be protected, it is in that realm, the assembly realm.
S.E.E. Even, too, as the Lord says, "to one of the least of these my brethren."
S.McC. "One of the least of these." The Lord is not writing anybody off here. He is taking full account of the smallest representation of Himself, as it may be; and the glory of divine administration involves that, that we make the most of every bit of the work of God connected with the vessel of divine administration, in our day, in the assembly.
A.W.G. "The weak brother, for whom Christ died"?
S.McC. That would enter into it.
E.S.W. "It is not the will of your Father who is in the heavens that one of these little ones should perish." Is not that the working out of it?
S.McC. That all enters into it. So that the young brothers and young sisters growing up amongst us should get an impression, in the working out of divine administration, that if there is any place where they will be protected on earth, it is in that realm, the great city of refuge.
J.W. Is that why the thought of the kingdom of the heavens is stressed by the Lord in the beginning of chapter 18?
S.McC. Well, it is; the rule of the heavens. This does not mean that evil is ignored, nor that evil is passed by; in all this realm of administrative glory, evil is repressed and fully taken account of; but that is not the great divine end only, it is that good might also be put in its place.
D.J.M. Is that why it says in verse 34, "Come, blessed of my Father"?
S.McC. It is a remarkable expression; and the same verse begins, "Then shall the King ... " The capitalized
{15}
word "King" there stresses the regal side of the administration. Even in the glad tidings, there are inculcated into our minds regal thoughts linked with divine administration. Grace reigns "through righteousness to eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord," @Romans 5: 21.
G.H.W. Is the reference to the shepherd intended to impress us as to care, and caring for one another, as entering into administration?
S.McC. The help of souls, caring for one another, as the Lord says, "for I hungered, and ye gave me to eat; I thirsted, and ye gave me to drink; I was a stranger, and ye took me in; naked, and ye clothed me; I was ill, and ye visited me; I was in prison, and ye came to me." What a range this working out of administration is taking into account here!
G.H.W-n. So have we the administration of Christ here, and the test as to answering to it?
S.McC. That is, we are tested by the way we regard those that represent Christ; that is the point in the passage. They say, "Lord, when saw we thee hungering, or thirsting, or a stranger, or naked, or ill, or in prison, and have not ministered to thee? Then shall he answer them saying, Verily I say to you, Inasmuch as ye have not done it to one of these least, neither have ye done it to me." We can see how the principles of divine administration, underlying this executive judgment here, involve the protection of the least that belongs to Christ.
L.F. In the actual carrying out of administration, the glory of divine administration is maintained, in so far as it is carried out in accord with God's own nature?
S.McC. That is it. So it is a great matter, in the working out of divine administration, that we should feel secure. We want to get into our souls that the working out of administration in the assembly involves the protection of all that we have, and all that we are,
{16}
in this wonderful realm that the assembly affords; because the assembly is the sphere, at the present time, in which divine administration is working out, and especially as marked by the dignity of sonship.
C.E.J. So it says in @Romans 8: 15, "For ye have not received a spirit of bondage again for fear, but ye have received a spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father."
S.McC. Why should persons be afraid of losing their lives if the glory of divine administration is working out in this elevated environment that we have in the assembly? For the assembly is a heavenly vessel here, representing God.
G.C.McK. Would the last word in chapter 25 have in view the saints being preserved in unity in view of the enjoyment of eternal life?
S.McC. Eternal life is the great end on the line of what is good. They go away into life eternal, strengthening in our minds the thought that eternal life involves a wonderful sphere, where the knowledge of divine Persons is enjoyed. So that, if any one of us does wrong; if a young brother or young sister gets involved in the world, in things that are wrong, they should not be afraid to open up in this realm of administrative glory in free confession of what they may have done, because they will be divinely protected and saved in the assembly.
S.E.E. One is impressed with the thought of the "babes" in chapter 11, and the "little ones" in chapter 18, and now, "one of the least of these" in chapter 25. It would all show the extent of divine consideration in this realm of administration.
S.McC. It is remarkable how the babes and the children come into this gospel. Matthew opens up with Rachel weeping for her children, because they are not; as if there is something in mind to begin with in regard
{17}
to the feelings that would enter into the working out of divine administration.
R.H.P. Would you link this with @Isaiah 11: 9, "They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain," and the administration of Christ there?
S.McC. That is how it would work out. As we were saying a little while ago, that does not mean that evil is passed by, nor that evil goes on unjudged. In the systems of men evil is allowed to go on unjudged, and the principles of the world espoused and no power to deal with them; but in the assembly, there is power to deal with evil, but also to bring in what is good. That is what we want to see.
P.B. So it says, "Then shall the righteous answer him saying."
S.McC. That is it.
J.C. Do we get a detailed outline of administration in @Proverbs 31 -- a full picture there of these activities?
S.McC. Yes; you might say the virtuous woman is there in her working clothes; a great thing to see the brethren in Sydney in their working clothes, to see what they are in a practical way, and how matters are working out, for that is what @Proverbs 31 typifies. It is not an out-of-the-world picture far removed from practical difficulties, but what the virtuous woman is in a scene *filled* with practical difficulties.
{18}
DAVID AND HIS KNOWLEDGE OF GOD
@Psalm 51: 1 -- 6; @Psalm 68: 7 -- 17; @Psalm 132: 1 -- 10
S.McC. In suggesting the Psalms, one has in mind the experimental side which the Psalms bring before us. Brethren will note that these are all Psalms of David. David is a great pattern in the Old Testament, of manhood. These Psalms are suggested that they may furnish help for us, looking at the impressions that David had, impressions as to himself and his links with God on the moral side in @Psalm 51. In @Psalm 68 it is his impressions as to God and the saints -- @Psalm 68 is a wonderful Psalm. Then in @Psalm 132 we have impressions as to God and Christ typified in the ark. It is thought that the experimental side is a side in relation to which the Lord would help us. We have been privileged to experience in the last decade the most wonderful ministry in the closing days of the dispensation. Wonderful light has come to us in regard to the truth, and the Lord is particularly seeking to help us at the present time in relation to the experimental side which the Psalms set out. Rightly speaking they are the basis of the service of God. The service of God in Israel's time is built up in relation to them. David is the sweet Psalmist of Israel. It is thought in suggesting these passages that they might furnish help in regard to our right links in relation to things.
E.A.K. I am sure that the scriptures before you give that. We feel the great importance of what is experimental, so that we should really have an acquaintance with divine Persons who have drawn near to us in grace and would have us near to Them. What you have brought before us surely is a three-fold cord the Spirit would develop in a mutual setting.
S.McC. Yes. @Psalm 51 is an important side of the
{19}
truth as to our clearance on the moral line. We get an insight into David's greatness spiritually from these Psalms, specially what he arrives at in this one, "Behold, thou wilt have truth in the inward parts; and in the hidden part thou wilt make me to know wisdom."
C.D. Would you say that these experiences make for depth in our souls?
S.McC. Yes. It is important that we should be helped on that side, as to thoroughness. Superficiality is a feature that is prone to mark us; every one of us knows that. It is a great thing to see in David, the man after God's heart, how, when he got into difficulties such as @Psalm 51 has to do with, he gets free, and how he is set up in relation to God as the Psalm sets out.
W.E. Some of us were noticing last night in @1 Corinthians 14: 26 that the apostle says, "whenever ye come together, each of you has a psalm." The experience that you speak of on the moral line would produce depth and knowledge of God, would it not, adding tone to each occasion?
S.McC. So that every circumstance, every experience, as we are helped by the Spirit, would become advantageous to us in our growth and increase in the knowledge of God, and would work out in the enrichment of the saints in the local gatherings where we are set.
G.J.G. You have brought before us that there is something special about David. Would you say a little about that in its bearing upon the present dispensation?
S.McC. He is unique in the Old Testament. You remember references made to him, at Auckland. We looked at the subject of grace in the history of David; he was unique in the way his sin was forgiven. Rightly speaking, it called for stoning, but he was forgiven. It would seem as if he is particularly chosen to set out the grace side. The Lord Jesus in Philadelphia presents Himself as "he that has the key of David," which I
{20}
take it would mean the administration of grace. This Psalm brings out what David went through in his own soul. There is nothing like moral exercises to give depth to our knowledge of God.
G.J.G. I was wondering if you had the reference in Romans in mind, David declaring the blessedness of the man to whom God would not at all reckon sin? That would be a part of his experience, would it not?
S.McC. Yes. Romans helps us as to the fundamentals of the glad tidings, especially in the way that God has set forth His righteousness in the matter of the clearance in regard to sin and sins. The truth of the glad tidings in Romans would help us so that we should be entirely free on the moral side.
G.H.W-n. Is that the significance of David's speaking at such a time of "thy loving kindness" and "the abundance of thy tender mercies," verse 1?
S.McC. It shows how the prophetic word had come on the historical side in @2 Samuel 12, and David was very indignant as the skill of the prophetic word was brought to bear upon the matter in hand. Then when Nathan points out that he was the man, he acknowledges his sin. This gives us the other side, what was going on in his own soul. As the fruit of all that, he comes into an enlarged knowledge of God, recognising that God's loving-kindness and the abundance of His tender mercies enter into this matter of clearance on the moral line.
C.P.P. Does the fact that this is well on in David's history remind us that this depth and fullness of judgment and having God alone before us, may be reached by us some time after we have begun in our soul history with God?
S.McC. Yes. David was caught unawares. In this section in 2 Samuel he was not maintained in his soul in the victory he had gained, so that he was caught unawares and falls under the power of sin, showing
{21}
what is possible with any one of us in these matters. There is the constant need of vigilance, our loins being girt about with truth.
C.D. What comes out here really is David's own heart knowledge of God, is it not? It stands him in good stead at this moment.
S.McC. Yes. And the whole Psalm shows what David was basically. It is a great thing that we should be on the solid ground and foundation of what we are basically in our links with God.
J.E. Does the verse in @1 John 1: 9 confirm it, "If we confess our sins, he is faithful and righteous to forgive us our sins, and cleanse us from all unrighteousness"? Is the "cleanse us from all unrighteousness" a link with the clearance of which you are speaking?
S.McC. Yes. It is an important matter that there should be a *full* clearance, not quarter, or half or three-quarters. @Psalm 51 would denote full clearance on the part of David and what he goes through in his links with God about these matters.
C.H.G. He traces his sin right back in relation to God in verse 4. Then he seems to clear the ground that God might speak. I wondered if something might be said as to what is in mind there and what he might judge.
S.McC. There is an important principle in that, and especially as we see how he seems to understand what is in keeping with the divine pleasure, because as you come to the end of the chapter he really represents God when he says, "The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit: a broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou wilt not despise." In verse 16 he says, "For thou desirest not sacrifice; else would I give it: thou hast no pleasure in burnt-offering." He seems to understand and set out what God himself would set out, in the way he speaks.
E.B.McC. "Behold, thou wilt have truth in the inward
{22}
parts; and in the hidden part thou wilt make me to know wisdom." It would be there, would it not, that we would as the apostle, bear about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life of Jesus might be manifest? The purging of course is always negative, is it not?
S.McC. Yes. It is an important thing, do you not think, that we should understand this matter of inwardness, of life. We often speak of inwardness in regard to the service of God, but perhaps we have been a little careless in regard to inwardness on the moral side, in regard to moral questions.
E.B.McC. I was thinking that; that we should have this so that we should not be overtaken. David, as you said just now, was overtaken in it. Had he had this before him he would not have been overtaken. That is, as we hold the truth in the inward parts we would not be overtaken.
S.McC. Exactly. The enemy got a right of way in David, through carelessness, and it is well we should all keep that in mind; well that the younger brothers and sisters should keep that in mind in regard to the inroads that the enemy may make; and well that we who are older, and those who are older still, should keep in mind this matter of truth in the inward parts, especially as viewed from the moral standpoint.
C.P.P. Does that link up also with verse 10 where a clean heart is spoken of and then a "steadfast spirit within me"? Are the heart and the spirit both connected with what is inward?
S.McC. Exactly. It is a remarkable touch in this Psalm -- "a clean heart." Some of the other Psalms speak about clean hands. It is important that our hearts should be clean; that we are not thinking wrong things about God and about one another; that we should have a clean heart. We may be concerned about clearing
{23}
ourselves publicly (it is important that we do) but it is a great matter that our hearts should be clean.
R.H.G. Is this inwardness gained as we cultivate the presence of God?
S.McC. I think so. I think what comes up in David's history is that he is a man who has to do with God. He is readily adjusted and always amenable to adjustment. It brings out the greatness of the man and his links with God. That is where most of us are weak, at least from what one observes in oneself. The great truth of the gospel which was referred to in Romans has in mind our being set up on solid ground in our links with God through the working out of the moral questions.
R.H.G. If there is breakdown, does the prophetic word come in to bring us back into the presence of God?
S.McC. That is the point in the prophetic service. When there is spiritual wane with us we get the prophets coming in with a powerful ministry on the line of revival.
Ques. "Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation," verse 12. Is the link with God in mind?
S.McC. Exactly, "and let a willing spirit sustain me." It is not that David will go on thinking about the darkness of this affair, humbled as he is about it. What David is concerned about is that as having the matter out with God he should be wholly free, clear inwardly, free inwardly in regard to the whole matter, so that the service of God can go forward. The service of God is not based on mere academic knowledge.
Ques. Would joying in the Holy Spirit help us in that way?
S.McC. Exactly.
C.H.G. In this Psalm is David a pattern for us? It seems to impart to us the great desirability of an
{24}
increased knowledge of God and a confidence in God in all the testing exercises that he passed through.
S.McC. It is a great matter that we should be entirely free on the moral line, as it says in verse 14, "Deliver me from blood-guiltiness." Think of that; what must be in his mind! Surely Uriah the Hittite must be in his mind. He was the cause of the slaying of an innocent man and he is concerned that he should be delivered from blood-guiltiness. "O God, thou God of my salvation" -- look how intense his feelings are about this matter -- "O God," as he thinks of Uriah the Hittite. "Deliver me from blood-guiltiness, O God, thou God of my salvation; my tongue shall sing aloud of thy righteousness" -- not his righteousness, but God's righteousness. That is the way the gospel would affect us.
C.P.P. Would you say a word as to how the Holy Spirit would help us? Does this self-judgment, which in itself is in the power of the Spirit, make way for the Spirit's positive help?
S.McC. Yes. It is important to see the relation of the Spirit to self-judgment. If self-judgment is maintained without the Spirit, we will get into an awful state of legality and darkness of soul. As a self-judged person, you *must* make room for the Spirit who would fill your soul with Christ. Self-judgment in itself does not get us very far. It is largely negative, but as we make way for the Spirit, through the truth, in delivering us from the man of sin and shame, our souls are filled with the Man of God's pleasure.
P.B. One is impressed that it is not only words that David uses here. As you read this Psalm you are impressed with the depth of feeling that David must have experienced with God in the whole matter of his sin.
S.McC. Very good. I am sure that is important. @Psalm 51 is no mere academic matter. That is, he is with God about the whole matter, judging it in all its
{25}
heinousness, representing God in the judgment He passed upon it.
C.D. When we come to the positive side in the last two verses, it is not an academic matter there, is it?
S.McC. No! The assembly is in his mind, the dignity of the assembly. "Do good in thy good pleasure unto Zion; build the walls of Jerusalem. Then shalt thou have sacrifices of righteousness, burnt-offering, and whole burnt-offering; then shall they offer up bullocks upon thine altar." That is, the matter is extending to a greater sphere of influence. That is how the matter works out. The saints come into it, "then shall *they* offer up bullocks upon thine altar."
C.B.S. In verse 5 David goes to the root of the matter in the secret recesses of his own heart. Would you say a word in regard to that?
S.McC. He is getting completely free in his soul from the man of sin and shame -- a great matter. The teaching of the gospel in Romans involves that we should have complete freedom from the man of sin and shame -- "a change of man," as Mr. Stoney referred to it. That is what we want to come to, not academically, but in the experimental way that is suggested in this Psalm and in the experimental section in @Romans 6 -- a change of man.
C.D. Is the doxology in Romans a matter of depth, "O depth of riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God!"
S.McC. Yes. The Lord is helping us as to this side of the truth -- the substantial side -- where we are substantially. We have all the ministry available in books and we have sat under the most wonderful ministry that it is possible to sit under in these closing days. What the Lord is bringing out now is just where we are substantially; not how much academic knowledge we have but where we are in our souls in regard to all that has come out in the way of light in the ministry.
{26}
C.D. It is a matter of reality.
S.McC. Yes.
G.J.G. It refers to the spirit and the heart in verse 17, "The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit: a broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou wilt not despise." That is the inward side, the substantial side, is it?
S.McC. Very interesting how the order is reversed in verse 17. In verse 10 the heart comes first, "Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a steadfast spirit within me." In verse 17 the spirit comes first because the service of God is in mind.
We might go over to @Psalm 68 which brings out another side of the truth. @Psalm 51 is one of the penitential Psalms, but @Psalm 68 is not a penitential Psalm. We do not live in the penitential Psalms. The great thing is to go through the penitential Psalms with God, but we do not live there. @Psalm 68 brings in a wonderful experience; David is set particularly free. There is no moral question in @Psalm 68 and David is greatly enlarged in his outlook in regard to God and the people of God. I think God would help us. Divine Persons all would help us in our outlook in regard to God and His people, the dignity of the saints in wilderness order on their way, with God at the head of them.
C.D. It was a triumphant march through the wilderness.
S.McC. Yes, but God was in it. Who can stand before the march when God is in it? If we are not in it we will be left behind. The testimony is going forward in this Psalm, going forward in power. The Psalm is replete with the suggestions of power.
C.P.P. Would you say it is not the side of the wanderings so much as a definite march in an orderly way towards a goal?
S.McC. It says, "O God, when thou wentest forth before thy people, when thou didst march through the
{27}
wilderness -- (Selah) -- The earth trembled, the heavens also dropped at the presence of God, yon Sinai, at the presence of God, the God of Israel." What a victorious march it was! If we were to look at Numbers we might think of all the difficulties, the murmurings, all that was linked with that side, but David is giving us a touch here as to God amongst His people in the march.
R.M.Y. What we are speaking of is Corinthian ground, is it not? Would you say that Paul had the light of this in his soul? Even when he was mourning over the Corinthians, he had a sense of triumph, did he not? He speaks of it in the second epistle.
S.McC. Very good. So that @Psalm 51 would be like the foundation in Romans in relation to the truth of the glad tidings working out experimentally in our souls and freeing us from sins and the man of sin and shame. @Psalm 68 would be the abstract side as Paul insists on it in Corinth.
E.B.McC. The Lord came in for His people, with J.N.D. and others at the commencement when things were very low. "Thou, O God, didst pour a plentiful rain upon thine inheritance, and when it was weary thou strengthenedst it." You spoke much about the ministry we have had, and it has continued, has it not? But at that time things were very weary.
S.McC. Yes. What has come in in that way in relation to the progress of the testimony; how God comes in in His own way! So that when we are in difficulty we do not give up meetings. Why should we give up meetings at the very time when meetings are needed? If there is any time that servants should be serving it is when there are difficulties. "Thou, O God, didst pour a plentiful rain upon thine inheritance, and when it was weary thou strengthenedst it." It is the time for ministry when there are difficult circumstances, when the march is on.
{28}
P.B. Would you say that when we go through with God on the moral side and complete it, what is abstract expands in our view and we take on fresh power in regard to the ways of God?
S.McC. And the saints become dignified in our minds. "Thy flock hath dwelt therein." Think of that! What the saints are as God's flock! How they are to be cared for! It brings out the dignity of the saints that has always to be maintained. However low things get and however great the difficulties, we *must* keep the dignity of the saints before us.
C.D. Is not the footnote to "the flock" significant: Or 'living assembly'?
S.McC. Or 'incorporated people.' It is the strengthening of the thought of the assembly in our minds. Of course we do not have the assembly in the Psalms in the sense of which we speak of it now, but we are going back into them with the light that we have. We can speak of it in this way. The Psalms rightly belong to a people under the law. We do not take up the Psalms as under the law, but as going back, with the help of the Spirit as under grace, they afford instruction for us in regard to the knowledge of God.
E.B.McC. It says in the verse that you have called our attention to, "thou hast prepared in thy goodness, for the afflicted, O God." It is a time, as you have said, when the meetings and the ministry are needed most.
S.McC. Exactly. God is thinking about them. "Thy flock hath dwelt therein: thou hast prepared in thy goodness, for the afflicted." We can thank God for that. If we have fallen down in our responsibilities, God has not fallen down in regard of the flock. We can see in matters of recent times that God has been near His people.
G.J.G. Is it not a great matter to arrive at God's thoughts of the saints in that way? Those who can
{29}
help us most would have such thoughts, would they not?
S.McC. Well exactly. No servant can serve the saints rightly unless he understands their dignity as the flock of God. No servant is above the saints. The servant's dignity is much greater as one of the saints than it is as a servant.
E.A.K. Is the supremacy of Christ as suggested in verse 18 in view of what you have been saying, so that no situation can ever get out of the Lord's hands, however difficult it is? Is it not important that we should keep our eye on the Lord?
S.McC. Exactly. That is the secret of being kept and preserved, that our eyes should be open to the glory of the unseen world. That is what comes in here -- Christ on high functioning in heaven as Man, in the type, and the great heavenly administration in which there is power proceeding from it. The ministry does not involve academic knowledge. There is *power* in the ministry, the power of the ascended Man flowing down through the gifts, for the gifts are subsidiary administrators, subsidiary to Christ on high and what He is carrying on in heaven.
E.B.McC. "Twenty thousand, thousands upon thousands; the Lord is among them: it is a Sinai in holiness." How beautiful that is! It brings out, does it not, the strength at all times? God has this before us at all times.
S.McC. Exactly. We want to see what the saints are as the hill of God from this viewpoint. Then we have, in verse 13, the power for recovery, the power for rising, revival, "Though ye have lain among the sheepfolds, ye shall be as wings of a dove covered with silver and her feathers with green gold." That is, there is power to rise in relation to spiritual dignity through the help of the Spirit in relation to divine thoughts.
{30}
I.E. Do you think the truth of this chapter bears in a particular way upon our mid-week readings, as we speak of them; the special power that God furnishes while we are on the march; the Lord on high giving the word, the idea of the mountain linking with the hill of God, so that we might as thus furnished go on triumphantly?
S.McC. Exactly, and the importance of *free* conditions among the saints -- liberty! It says in verse 25, "The singers went before, the players on stringed instruments after, in the midst of maidens playing on tabrets. In the congregations bless ye God, the Lord, ye from the fountain of Israel. There is little Benjamin, their ruler; the princes of Judah, their company; the princes of Zebulun, the princes of Naphtali." Think of the holy liberty in this great realm of divine glory where God is known amongst His people. There is nothing oppressive here; the liberty of the work of God in a realm like this! That is how it should be in our local gatherings.
P.B. You have mentioned much as to what may be academic. Why should we be academic when it is a question of dealing with the truth?
S.McC. Well we all know what we are naturally. The element of the Philistine is in every one of us. That is what makes us academic. 'If we do not judge it in secret it will come out in public,' someone else has said. We have to judge the element of the Philistine in our minds and in our hearts.
Now we should finish with a word as to @Psalm 132. Here we get another insight in regard to David's spiritual greatness. What a prince of God he was! Not now himself in introspection, not now God and the saints (although they come into the Psalm), in these clear perspectives as in @Psalm 68, but God and Christ. I think we are challenged as to what place Christ has in our service and ministry, and in every one of our
{31}
lives, whether the interests of God are first and foremost with us.
J.E. Is that the burden of Paul's prayer in @Ephesians 3, "that the Christ may dwell, through faith, in your hearts"?
S.McC. Yes. As Mr. Stoney taught us years ago, the great result of union reached in the power of the Spirit in the soul is that His interests become your interests, and that is what this Psalm involves, that divine interests are our interests.
C.P.P. Does it follow on in that way from @Psalm 68 where the side of what God is to His people seems to be pressed? Does that lead to an outlook as in this Psalm as to what is for God and of God and for His pleasure?
S.McC. Yes! How the thought of worship comes into this Psalm! Worshipping at His footstool! Particularly the thought of what is for God Himself. Then in verse 9, "Let thy priests be clothed with righteousness, and let thy saints shout for joy." You will notice how much joy is entering into these Psalms, the liberation of the saints in holy joy in these matters. It is a great thing that there should be this kind of liberty among the saints.
C.D. Would you say that in the first instance he is with God as to his sin, then he is with God as to the assembly, but here he is with God as to the place Christ should have.
S.McC. At the end of the Psalm God comes in. God has taken account of what David had been saying; God comes in to say the same thing, "And I will clothe her priests with salvation, and her saints shall shout aloud for joy." God thinks, as it were, so much of what David is saying that He comes in, according to the way the verses read at the end.
V.T.S. Does the Lord Jesus want us to be with God
{32}
in the way that He was? He desired that His joy might be in us. Is that His desire for us?
S.McC. Yes. So this verse, "There will I cause the horn of David to bud forth." We want to see the horn of David budding forth. I believe that is the point at the present time in the great administration of grace. God is making the horn of David to bud forth; and who can stand against it? "His enemies will I clothe with shame; but upon himself shall his crown flourish." We can see that all around us on the public side of things, the enemies of God's anointed, become to faith, clothed with shame.
G.H.W-n. Does this prepare us for the ascent by which Solomon went up to the house of the Lord?
S.McC. You might go further and say that for us it is preparing the way for the complete going up at the rapture. That is what should be in our minds constantly. We are just about to go up and we surely want to be in the gain of the horn of David budding forth; the blessed administration of grace enjoyed in a renewed way on the eve of the rapture.
{33}
THE KNOWLEDGE OF THE SON OF GOD (1)
@Romans 1: 1 -- 7; @Romans 5: 8 -- 10; @Romans 8: 1 -- 4, 14, 15
S.McC. I have been thinking of what Paul refers to in @Ephesians 4 in relation to the work of the ministry, and the knowledge of the Son of God. It will be apparent to the brethren that there is something choice and unique about the knowledge of the Son of God that it is referred to in the way in which it is in @Ephesians 4 as one of the great ends in the ministry, that we should all "arrive at the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, at the full-grown man." The expression itself, "the knowledge of the Son of God" is to be noted. It is said of the mystery in @Colossians 2, "in which are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge," and I suppose this would be one of the treasures of knowledge, a treasure among the many treasures that are bound up with Christ and the assembly. No other family in the universe of God will understand or have the knowledge of the Son of God in the same way as the assembly has. Along with Paul's definite commission as to the assembly, the making known of the mystery in relation to Christ and the assembly, there is also this definite commission that Paul has in relation to the Son of God. So that in understanding the Pauline ministry, there is need for seeing the place that the knowledge of the Son of God has in his ministry alongside the truth of the assembly. They run together in the outstanding service of this great minister. I suppose he is without parallel in relation to ministry and service as to Christ and the assembly. The knowledge of the Son of God enters into his glad tidings. Paul's glad tidings are characterized by this great feature of the truth of the Son of God.
It is, of course, an extensive subject, but we should
{34}
begin with it in Romans and see how it is threaded into Paul's glad tidings because it is part of the truth of the glad tidings. The truth of the glad tidings does not only involve the doctrine of the glad tidings. As Paul alludes to it in Galatians, it involves the knowledge of the Son of God, as we have been taught, in all its liberating power, and Paul stresses it in the ministry of the glad tidings. We should see in @Romans 1 how it is introduced as marking off God's glad tidings. It is concerning His Son. Then in @Romans 5, the chapter of administrative glory, the reference to the Son of God comes in in relation to the thought of reconciliation and the thought of our practical participation by the Spirit in the life of Him Who is risen from among the dead, the Son of God, the centre of another world. Then in @Romans 8 we should see how the thought of the Son of God is brought to our view in relation to the moral question in connection with sin in the flesh. In all these passages we are reminded that God has drawn near to men in relationships intelligible to men, relationships in which the nature and attributes, as has been said of the Godhead, are presented in a way that is intended to win the hearts of men.
A.H.S. Would you say love enters into the matter? I was thinking particularly of the setting in @Romans 5, reconciliation; God has reconciled us by the death of His Son, and then "his *own* Son," in @Romans 8. It was no mere academic thing with the apostle. His soul was bathed in the love of it.
S.McC. It is an important thing to see that love underlies all these movements on the part of divine Persons. "God is love" -- an absolute statement -- and in the divine arrangement into which divine Persons have come and in which they are viewed, it is all based on love because no One of the Persons, either the Lord Jesus or the Holy Spirit, has arbitrarily imposed upon Them the position of subordination into which They
{35}
have come. They have taken it of Their own voluntary movement in love. Love underlies it in the working out of the divine arrangement in the economy. That is, that the Lord Jesus was in the form of God, and He emptied Himself taking a bondman's form. It was His own act; it was not imposed on Him; love underlay it.
P.B. It says in the parenthesis, "concerning his Son come of David's seed according to flesh ... " I was thinking of what you referred to in @Ephesians 4, "until we all arrive at the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God." They are linked together there, are they not? The parenthesis would bring in the truth of the faith and the Son of God together.
S.McC. It is very interesting what we now refer to because David was a great uniting point, a great rallying point, in Israel. There is a link in the thought of the unity of the faith in @Ephesians 4 with what comes up in David's time and history.
E.B.McC. "God so loved." Would that come in? You say that it is a love matter and we have it at the commencement that God so loved.
S.McC. Exactly. "God so loved the world, that he gave his only-begotten Son." We are reminded thus that God has moved out and presented Himself to us in a relative way. It would impress us with the feature of love which underlies all divine movements, especially entering into this matter of the glad tidings.
W.J.B. The only thing we know about the relations of divine Persons in the realm of Deity is that They love -- as to the form of Their relations we know nothing -- but we do know that love was there and that love came into evidence, in the Lord Jesus when He was here, did it not?
S.McC. Exactly. As has been said before, the great link between the absolute and the relative is love. The love that was in the relative position is the same love
{36}
which was in the absolute position, and is the great link between the two.
C.D. The word is addressed to the "beloved of God."
S.McC. Showing the place that the beloved saints had in Rome; that great metropolis which was the centre of Imperial rule and administration. They had been taken up in the working out of the administration of grace in the glad tidings and had been placed in this wonderful relation to God, so that they are beloved of God. What a contrast it would be to all that entered into the centre and sphere of Caesarian rule and domination.
R.M.Y. Putting your opening remarks about the truth of the mystery, Christ and the assembly, so peculiar to Paul, along with this line as to the Son of God, is Paul there joining hands with John? Is that a feature of the truth that must be emphasised in the last days. John coming into the matter?
S.McC. Yes, we shall see that later on; only, there is this difference, that John did not have the commission Paul had. Paul was commissioned to announce God's Son as glad tidings, John was not. John comes in, bringing the Son of God before us in a unique way, as we shall see, especially when doctrinal degeneracy has set in in the dispensation.
C.E.J. Would the expression "marked out Son of God in power," stand over against the Imperial system of Rome that you have just referred to? That is, there is another sphere marked by love of which this glorious Person is the centre?
S.McC. Exactly. We think of this sort of power. Perhaps sometimes it is thought in speaking of love that we are dwelling on a weak position, but this is not so according to the truth, as we shall see in this epistle. The working out of the glad tidings involves
{37}
power. It is not a question of light only; it involves that, nor is it a question only of doctrine -- it does involve that -- but it is a question of *power*; power entering into the glad tidings, because in the glad tidings we have God's power unto salvation.
S.E.E. Would the resurrection from the dead mark it out as distinct in that way, giving it a unique distinctness, linked too with Paul's message to the Athenians in @Acts 17?
S.McC. The Son of God here is linked with another world. The resurrection of the dead enters into that; the opening up of a new realm of things where the operations that are so effective are unique.
J.D. As the personification of the glad tidings which you have referred to would be common to Paul, would it have the effect where it is received of attaching the affections of the person who receives it to the Person of the Son of God, and thus set him in relation to another world?
S.McC. Yes, exactly. The gospel in that way detaches us from this world and attaches us to the Person who is the centre of another world. Paul says in @2 Corinthians 1, "the Son of God, ... has been preached ... (by me and Silvanus and Timotheus)," and then he says, "Now he that establishes (or 'firmly attaches') us with you in Christ ... is God." It is the gospel in its detaching power in relation to this world and its attaching power in relation to Christ, the Son of God, the centre of that world and by the resurrection from among the dead.
V.T.S. In @Galatians 2: 20, Paul says, "the Son of God, who has loved me and given himself for me."
S.McC. Yes, we hope to see this afternoon how it enters into that side of things. What we should concentrate on in our enquiry now is the radiancy of the glory in the glad tidings. We often speak of the radiation of divine affections in the family, in relation
{38}
to assembly service and the service of God, but we want to see the radiation of divine love in the glad tidings, that God loves men and He wants to win their hearts. Therefore the attractiveness of the glad tidings from this viewpoint involving the gospel of God concerning His Son.
V.T.S. I am sure we would be thankful for help on this. We have thought that if a man is walking in sin and in a self-willed way we cannot say that God loves that man just as he is, but we have rather become fearful of bringing the love of God into the gospel at all.
S.McC. You say that you are fearful about bringing the love of God into the gospel! What do you mean by that?
V.T.S. We have had it said that, when preaching in the open air, you could not say to all passers by in the street, for instance, 'God loves you.'
S.McC. The very kernel of the glad tidings is that God has drawn near to men in these relationships, intelligible to men, in which the nature and attributes of the Godhead are presented in such a tender way, so that the hearts of men might be won in all their sin and distance from God. Paul says, "God's glad tidings ... concerning his Son," @Romans 1: 1 -- 3.
H.J.M. Did not Mark in touch with Paul catch the blessedness of that as he writes his gospel, "Beginning of the glad tidings of Jesus Christ, Son of God," and filled with God's drawing near to men tenderly in that regard?
S.McC. Exactly. Luke's gospel surely would show us the wonderful link with humanity in that Christ comes in as Son of man linking on with humanity in all its need and discharging the liabilities of the race, the Head of a new race according to God.
W.J.B. "But when the kindness and love to man of our Saviour God appeared," @Titus 3: 4.
{39}
S.McC. I was just about to refer to that passage, in regard to our brother's question. In regard to what you have raised, do you mean that you would not be free to preach in the gospel that God loves men?
V.T.S. No, *I* would be free, but it has been said in relation to all men who would come under the sound of the gospel, especially in street preaching, men marked by distinct self-will and sin, that there would be a difficulty about saying that God loved them. I feel that it has brought us into such bondage that we have lost much that the liberty and the grace and the glory of the gospel is bringing before us, because of a legal outlook that has been marking us in this area.
S.McC. Now, you say, "it has been said." You will pardon my referring to this for a moment. *Who* has said? Is it said amongst us?
V.T.S. Yes, it is said amongst us.
S.McC. Are the brothers here who say it?
V.T.S. I would be thankful if any brother would be free to confirm what I have said.
S.E.E. It has been said in a reading meeting that God does not love the sinner; an emphatic statement which has not passed without challenge, but nevertheless that has been said.
S.McC. I think it is important that we should keep before us what man is abstractly. Paul says in Colossians in dealing with the truth of the mystery that he laboured, he combated, to present *every man* perfect in Christ Jesus. Now that does not mean that only the saints of the assembly were in his view. He laboured to present *every man* perfect in Christ Jesus. We need to understand, I think, and perhaps to be enlarged in our outlook in regard to men; what man is abstractly as God's creature, and God's love to him in that light.
P.B. Does @John 3: 16 help, "For God so loved the world that he gave his only-begotten Son"? Does that
{40}
suggest, do you think, the deep feeling of God in relation to men abstractly?
S.McC. @John 3: 16 and @Titus 3 taken together show us both sides of the position. @John 3: 16 reminds us of what the world is abstractly as God's creation. What a wonderful order of things it is! What a wonderful arrangement it is! God loved it but sin came into it and marred it, but God loved it with a view to the extrication of men from the entanglement of sin, and @Titus 3 alludes to the love and kindness towards men of our Saviour God. That is very plain, in @Titus 3, whether we view the world abstractly or whether we view men. They are part of creation, and God's love in the gospel bears upon that.
W.J.B. Will you say a word as to, "God commends his love to us, in that, we being still sinners, Christ has died for us"?
S.McC. What a touch that is in that great administrative chapter, @Romans 5, that it was while we were sinners Christ died for us; and now God commends His love towards us! Rightly speaking, He had no reason, as it were, to add anything that would strengthen the thought of His love towards us, because His love is *His* love, but because of us and the weakness on our side. He "*commends* His love to us, in that we being still sinners, Christ has died for us."
F.R.G. The desire has been to confine that to those who were sovereignly chosen for blessing.
S.McC. Yes, but what must be kept clear in our minds in cutting a straight line the word of truth is the side of purpose and responsibility. They do not converge. They run parallel but never converge, and we must not run sovereignty into responsibility and weaken what is linked with the latter side of the truth on the part of men.
Rem. "He that will, let him take the water of life freely," is a general statement.
{41}
S.McC. We preach the gospel to men in responsibility and men are responsible as to the light that is presented in the glad tidings.
E.B.McC. That He might have mercy upon all.
S.McC. It says of God that He does not will the death of any. He will have *all men* to be saved. Are we going to be more limited than God? Are we going to say that He has *only* the elect before Him, when the gospel is preached and the scripture says that God will have *all* men to be saved? The truth has to be kept in balance.
C.B.S. In @Acts 9 Paul gets such an impression of the love of God at his conversion that immediately afterwards he preached that Jesus was the Son of God. The love of God to all men that you have been speaking of so affected the apostle that it entered into this question of separation to God's glad tidings.
S.McC. The radiancy of the glory alludes to this in in @2 Corinthians 3. Glory is the outshining of God in love and it should be in all our souls; in fact the preacher should manifest that radiancy in the way he presents the glad tidings.
J.P. What you are saying now supports what our brother Mr. Taylor has had in mind in bringing before us the fact that the world stands provisionally in reconciliation.
S.McC. We must have nothing less than that in mind. Let us think of what the word 'reconciliation' means. The world is standing in it provisionally. We might refer to all the wickedness there is around! The point is that the world stands at the present moment *provisionally* in reconciliation. That is, God's attitude to it is that of favour.
C.D. If we are restricted by thinking of what men are, our preaching would be very poor, but it is a matter of the knowledge of God our Saviour.
S.McC. In relation to the young man that came up to
{42}
the Lord, running into the way in @Mark 10, it says of the Lord Jesus that He *loved* him. I suppose the brethren will recall what Mr. Taylor said about that young man. He said he was a grand ruin, but the Lord loved him.
A.H.S. There has been some confusion over the use of the word 'philanthropy' in the footnote to the scripture in Titus, but philanthropy after all means love to man, whatever its use may be in the world. A count has been made of the hymns in the hymn book that speak of God's love to men and I think that there are about sixteen.
S.McC. The love of God enters into the gospel testimony and if we cannot speak of God's love to men in the gospel, we will need to have another revision. We want to be sober about the matter. It is one of the great things in the glad tidings, God's love to men; that God in the light of @Luke 15 is before us, drawing near with a view to the extrication of men according to divine primary rights. The sheep and the lost piece of silver and the younger son express *primary rights*, that the creature belongs to God.
G.C.L. Paul refers to men in his address at Athens, "Being therefore the offspring of God." No matter how far down they were in sin, he would bring in all the responsibility that men had to God and God's feelings in regard of it.
S.McC. He seeks to touch them on that line from a lower level. You will notice in @Acts 17 that Paul does not preach the Son of God. He is not on the high level of the Son of God in his preaching there, but he is drawing their attention to physical limitations to show how God has come into the matter of physical limitations, making "of one blood every nation of men," appointing the boundary too, "if indeed they might feel after him," showing how we may bring the physical side into the glad tidings. What is in mind in the gospel
{43}
of the Son of God is more the spiritual side in relation to what is linked with another world.
A.G.L. Mention has been made of the beginning of the glad tidings of Jesus Christ, Son of God, in Mark's gospel, and the gospel ends with the commission to preach the glad tidings to all the creation. Paul in Colossians speaks of the glad tidings having been announced to the whole creation under heaven. Is the point of creation the matter that you are stressing?
S.McC. The whole creation is affected by the glad tidings. You can see that in Australia and New Zealand. Where would creation be at the present time if the power of the glad tidings were not here? You can see the lengths to which lawlessness would go, and to which evil would develop. The glad tidings has a great effect on creation.
A.G.L. Do we not need help to view men as fellow creatures, creatures of God?
S.McC. We want to get alongside men and help them in view of their extrication. The Lord is, on the eve of the translation, impressing us with the great work of recovery that is going on, and we want to be in it; involving men, who may have no link yet with God, as well as those who have been withdrawn from, and our brethren around us in the systems. We should be more and more concerned about their recovery.
J.D. What is said here, "grace and apostleship in behalf of his name, for obedience of faith among all the nations." Would that help in regard to what you are saying?
S.McC. It is a very interesting expression, is it not? "By whom we have received grace and apostleship." We can see how the arbitrary side (and I speak of it in a right way), is somewhat tempered and modified by that expression as is always the case, as, for instance, in priesthood based on sonship. Apostleship is linked with grace here.
{44}
E.B.McC. We speak of God revealed. Is His righteousness revealed that He may display His love? He has the groundwork in that righteousness, so that love is not hindered from flowing?
S.McC. Exactly. Every attribute would be the expression, in its working out, of His love. Mr. Raven pointed out years ago that even the lake of fire was a necessity of love.
C.E.J. Could you say a word as to love, mercy and grace?
S.McC. Mercy and grace are activities. They are the working out of love in activity; mercy having to do with the depth of the need, grace having to do with the active will and evil in opposition to God. Mercy is never said to reign. It "glories over judgment," we are told in the epistle of James, but in this epistle grace is said to reign, not mercy; grace is reigning but the mercy seat is set forth. It is the basis of the operations, but grace is reigning.
Rem. Mercy and love are put together in Ephesians, are they not? "God, being rich in mercy, because of his great love wherewith he loved us."
S.McC. We can understand mercy coming in there because it is the depth of need, there is not a pulsation towards God -- "dead in your offences and sins" -- God intervenes in mercy, in the sovereignty of His mercy, and according to His love, the love of purpose that would have us there with Christ above, but then it says, "ye are saved by grace."
Ques. What about the recovery of our brethren who have been withdrawn from, having regard to what was said earlier as to the restricted outlook in respect to the glad tidings and love to all men?
S.McC. Well, the Lord is helping on the lines of recovery everywhere. Those who have departed from the faith are coming back, and the brethren are helping
{45}
them on priestly lines, as room is made for priestly service and priestly help.
N.B.S. Would you say a little more on the thought of reconciliation? You spoke of contemplating it. Perhaps you had that before you in chapter 5.
S.McC. In chapter 5 we come to the great administrative chapter. The knowledge of the Son of God has in mind our full liberation. That is to be kept in mind. Romans has in mind our full liberation from sin, the world and Satan, and the thought of the Son of God enters into the glad tidings. Paul's glad tidings have it in mind because we shall never be happy and free in the assembly, unless we are set free, fully liberated. @Romans 5 impresses our minds with things from the divine standpoint, the wealth of the administration that is towards us in view of our being set up in relation to the liberty that the glad tidings brings in.
P.B. "For if, being enemies, we have been reconciled to God through the death of his Son, much rather, having been reconciled, we shall be saved in the power of his life." That is very emphatic and wonderful, is it not, "saved in the power of his life"? That brings the glory and power of the gospel into our souls, does it not?
S.McC. It is to show us the fullness of the provision that is made. "For if, being enemies, we *have* been reconciled," that is historical. "We *have* been reconciled to God through the death of his Son, much rather having been reconciled" -- again what is historical -- "we shall be saved in the power of his life," showing how the present bearing of the truth comes in in regard to this character of the glad tidings. We are saved through the intrinsic value and worth of that precious life, the life of the Son of God as risen from the dead.
Ques. Does that bring in the administrative side that you referred to in relation to this chapter?
S.McC. Exactly, for it says "we shall be saved in the power of *his* life," that is, the power of the life of God's
{46}
Son, not His life *here* but His life *there* involving the heavenly position.
Ques. It would help if you would say why you referred to @Romans 5 as the great administrative chapter.
S.McC. I think it is important that we should have this side before us in view of the younger brethren, so that they might be wholly liberated as affected by the wealth that is in the administration here, so that as they go on to face the working out of the truth experimentally of @Romans 6, 7 and 8, they have this in their minds. It is to steady us and help us in the working out of the experimental side. We have the Spirit referred to here, not as received exactly, but as administered, "the Holy Spirit which has been given to us."
E.B.McC. We are then formed in love, are we not, because "the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit which has been given to us." Everyone that has the Spirit has the love of God shed abroad in his heart. Is that right? Will he be hindered by legality?
S.McC. Exactly, showing how early this subject of love comes up in Romans. We might have left it till @Romans 8; it is brought into @Romans 8, but here it is like the children of Israel early in the wilderness. The glory is brought to their view. It is not exactly a question of what their state is here; the emphasis is on divine administration, the wealth of it, and what it involves in the saints. It is like a view of the glory in the wilderness.
R.H.G. In Saul's day everyone that was in distress and in debt was attracted by affection to David. Were they brought into liberty in that way?
S.McC. That is the point. David represents this side of things, "come of David's seed." It is the glory and the wealth of the administration of grace entering into the glad tidings as Paul presented it. In stressing the side of the assembly in Paul's ministry, we must stress this side, because unless our young people are liberated
{47}
in the wealth of the administration of grace as in Paul's glad tidings, they will not be rightly in the assembly.
G.H.C. Would chapter 5 give us the compassions of God?
S.McC. Well, I would say more than the fifth. I think the compassions of God would involve the soul experiences of @Romans 6, 7 and 8; so that the whole matter is affecting us and leads us to present our bodies as an intelligent service to God.
P.B. Would the administration of this grace be expressed in what follows in verses six to eight? After it speaks of the love of God shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit which has been given to us, it says, "for we being still without strength, in due time Christ has died for the ungodly," that is, still without strength, Christ had died for the ungodly, and then it continues, "For scarcely for the just man will one die, for perhaps for the good man some one might also dare to die; but God commends his love to us, in that we being still sinners, Christ has died for us." Would that show the administration of this grace that you speak of?
S.McC. Exactly, and the dark background. Romans would impress us with the dark background; but also with the way that God has come into the circumstances, extricating man, not leaving man to himself, but coming down on the basis of redemption and extricating man and setting him up in the power and wealth of this administration.
H.L. Does @Exodus 17 fit into this chapter at all, God's provision for the people after they are liberated, and the rock is smitten, though they do not drink there. Is everything there provisionally from the divine side?
S.McC. Exactly, so that Amalek has to be faced in that light. Our young people need help in their souls as to the wealth of the administration of grace that is presented here, so that as they go through the exercises and experiences of @Romans 6, 7 and 8 involving full
{48}
deliverance, they are strengthened in the going through by what we have here. It is not a question of what they are in the good of (@Romans 5), it is what faith lays hold of as towards us in the wealth of the administration of grace.
D.J.M. It says, "sin shall not have dominion over you for ye are not under law but under grace."
S.McC. That is, it becomes a great asset in your soul as you enter the difficult and testing experiences of @Romans 6 where the waters of Marah involve such bitterness. You begin to touch wilderness life as a believer and the waters are bitter, but the wealth of this, as in the seventy palm trees and the springs at Elim, is a suggestion of this kind of thing; the wealth of the administration is there (not that you can say much about it) in your mind according to @Romans 5, and strengthens you as you go through chapters 6, 7 and 8.
C.D. In the last verse of @Exodus 14, "Israel saw the great *power* which Jehovah had wrought against the Egyptians; and the people feared Jehovah and believed in Jehovah, and in Moses his bondman."
S.McC. It is all to encourage us in faith. Peter uses this remarkable expression "in your faith have also virtue." Now that is an interesting thing linked with @Romans 5, because the believer needs virtue as he goes into @Romans 7 and @Romans 8. Some of us can recall what a terrible experience it was. Some of us perhaps very nearly went out of fellowship over it. But this matter of virtue, courage, as strengthened by the wealth of the administration of grace in @Romans 5, the support of the new husband and the idea of the glory of the Father in chapter 6, all these are strengthening elements to faith, so that we have *virtue* in our faith and go forward in facing the full analysis of good and evil in our souls.
P.B. It says in @Romans 5: 3, "we also boast in tribulations," and then in verse 11, "but we are making our
{49}
boast in God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom now we have received the reconciliation." That is real virtue, is it not?
S.McC. So that what we have been considering represents the very elements of glad tidings, the fundaments of the glad tidings, and we must not think that we are beyond these things, because the Lord is stressing that we should know God better as in relation to the fundaments of the gospel. That is our difficulty and our deficiency. We do not know God well enough in the fundaments of the gospel.
Ques. "Access by faith into this favour in which we stand, and we boast in hope of the glory of God." I was thinking of 'access.'
S.McC. It is remarkable how early it is brought in in @Romans 5, showing the way that God would encourage us from the very outset. The very administrative act of shedding abroad in our hearts God's love, is to inspire confidence in the believer so that he goes forward. He had a heart that had been marked by a lack of confidence in God, and God says, as it were, I will begin there, I will establish a beach-head there and from that beach-head extend the area of the operations until the whole body is secured in @Romans 12.
P.B. Would that bring us to chapter 8, "For ye have not received a spirit of bondage again for fear, but ye have received a spirit of adoption whereby we cry, Abba, Father." Is that the soul substantially formed as a result of the administration of grace as represented in chapter 5, and experience with God in the following chapters?
S.McC. Exactly, so that it is really a land touch in the wilderness. Rightly speaking, sonship belongs to the land, to the heavenly side, but it is like the territory that they occupied in @Numbers 21, provisional territory in which they lived for the moment, not permanent territory. Permanent territory is Colossians and Ephesians.
{50}
But God gives us this provisional enjoyment, as it were, just as we are about to cross over.
E.A.K. Are not our actions and our attitude to one another governed by our knowledge of God as made known in the glad tidings?
S.McC. That really enters into the foundations. If we do not apprehend God rightly, we will not be right in our relations with one another. Romans is filled with military expressions, but what we have failed perhaps to see, at least one can speak for oneself, is that the warfare has to do with *yourself*! We are very good perhaps at making war with others, and in the matter of conflict involving others, but what about ourselves? The way that Romans speaks of war and conflict is in relation to myself and what is going on in me, sin and its operations in me.
R.H.G. Is the great thought in the Son of God that all that God is in grace is established in blessed Man?
S.McC. Exactly, and His love, in that tender relationship. The nature and attributes of God are presented in these known intelligible relationships, the relationship of Son of God. He is representing God, bringing the heart of God near to men.
H.S.H. "His Son," and in @Romans 8 it is "His *own* Son." That is calculated to move our hearts, is it not?
S.McC. That is very interesting. It is as if it would show how the thought is intensified the more you go on in Romans, so "His own" comes into @Romans 8.
C.B.S. Could you say a little more about our young people not being rightly in the assembly, in view of what you have been saying as to grace. Do you mean that the assembly being the vessel of divine grace, as we are to come into it we are to reflect it, and be exponents of it? I just thought that in view of so many young brethren being here, we perhaps could get clear what you have in your mind.
S.McC. I would like to make clear that I was not
{51}
saying that the young people here are not rightly in the assembly. I was referring to the fact that *generally* we would not be rightly in the assembly unless we were rightly affected by the rudiments of the teaching in the glad tidings. It is that which liberates us -- God known in righteousness and in grace and in other ways in the rudiments of the teaching of the glad tidings. We can thank God for the young people and for their being here; only that we are saying that these experiences are very real and we need to link on with them more sympathetically and get alongside of them, especially in going through these matters involving deliverance.
{52}
THE KNOWLEDGE OF THE SON OF GOD (2)
@Galatians 1: 10 -- 24; @Galatians 2: 18 -- 21; @Galatians 3: 23 -- 29; @Galatians 4: 1 -- 7
S.McC. It is well to keep in mind the subject we are considering, namely, the knowledge of the Son of God, the unique place that it has in this dispensation. It is knowledge, we might say, of the highest and most excellent quality. In the letter to the Ephesians Paul is not hesitant to remind us of his knowledge of the mystery, his intelligence in regard of the mystery, but the more we look at Paul's ministry the more we shall see the important parallel line in regard to the knowledge of the Son of God that is running through it. This important line of teaching in regard to the glad tidings of the Son of God is especially to be understood by us in view of our being entirely liberated and set free in connection with the lower levels of the truth. It would matter little what our intelligence was academically in regard to the higher levels of the truth if we are not set free entirely on the lower levels of the truth. When I say lower levels I simply refer to what bears on our salvation and deliverance. We followed through, this morning, the way the knowledge of the Son of God is introduced into the letter to the Romans in view of the complete emancipation of the believer from sin, the world and Satan, and now we come to the reference again in this letter. It is a letter that is corrective and Paul uses language in it that he does not use in the same way elsewhere. He seems to be more agitated than he is in any of his letters, so it has particularly in mind meeting a certain thing. What we should keep in mind in pursuing the enquiry before us this afternoon as to the knowledge of the Son of God, is the substantial side in the minister, Paul. I think it is an important feature for all of us, and especially for those who have any part
{53}
(not that we can say much about it), whatever it may be, in serving, to see that the minister rightly affects the saints by what he is in himself. I thought we might look first of all at how distinctive Paul's glad tidings are in the first chapter, and then the setting out of what there was substantially with him in the second chapter. Then we might see how the knowledge of the Son of God works out in relation to us as saints, our place in sonship and the Spirit of God's Son sent out into our hearts.
H.J.M. Paul is seeking to get pure results from the ministry. One has been impressed lately that Jacob set certain impressions before the flock that brought forth ringstraked, speckled and spotted, but there are none of those results from Paul's ministry or John's. There is to be a pure result, a pure flock.
S.McC. That is very interesting. It is important that we have the pure strain. This letter insists on it, as to Hagar and Ishmael. We must have Sarah and Isaac. The pure strain is linked with the free woman, the system of grace, the line of promise in Isaac.
C.E.J. Is it important to take account of these thoughts of the glad tidings in that way? -- "neither did I receive them from man, neither was I taught them, but by revelation of Jesus Christ."
S.McC. That is, their origin was heavenly -- Paul's glad tidings in relation to the Son of God and particularly bearing upon what he was himself as he says, "But when God, who set me apart even from my mother's womb, and called me by his grace, was pleased to reveal his Son in me, that I may announce him as glad tidings among the nations," verse 15. I believe it stresses Paul substantially, what was to come out *in* him substantially as a minister of the glad tidings.
G.J.G. Do you think that verse 8 puts the gospel on a very high level, really bringing it in as something that is greater than himself? He says, "if even we or an
{54}
angel out of heaven announce as glad tidings to you anything besides what we have announced as glad tidings to you, let him be accursed." Would that be a part of Paul's substantiality that he thus regarded the gospel?
S.McC. Yes. It shows what a place it had with him and how much he was affected inwardly by it that he uses this strong language referred to earlier, "let him be accursed." He is affected by what, as suggested, would entrench upon the pure strain in Christianity.
G.T.D. Would this influence be seen in @Acts 19 where it says, "God wrought no ordinary miracles by the hands of Paul, so that even napkins or aprons were brought from his body and put upon the sick, and the diseases left them, and the wicked spirits went out." Is that what you have in mind?
S.McC. Yes, what he was substantially. We have a remarkable allusion there to what was substantial with Paul. It was not just a matter of speaking. It was a matter of what he was. I believe Mr. Taylor once said in regard to Peter, that he did not think it was conjecture to say that Peter had never seen a man like Paul, a man that was in so much liberty, the liberty of his glad tidings. There never was a man like him in that regard.
W.H.G. Is what Paul is substantially what God has made him in His own sovereign way uniquely or is it a matter of formation?
S.McC. Well, we have to keep the two lines of the truth clear in that relation. One is what the vessel was himself, as separated from his mother's womb -- that was sovereign; and coupled with that, "was pleased to reveal his Son in me," but, when we come to the working out of it substantially, it involves what Paul was formatively, what he became as the truth formed him.
R.H.G. He speaks of serving in his spirit in the glad tidings.
S.McC. Showing how his inward being was affected in regard to the exalted service of the glad tidings. The
{55}
more you look into Paul's service, the more your soul is affected by the glory of the glad tidings. We should never lose touch in our souls as to the glory of the glad tidings. It continues through the letters which Paul writes to the Ephesians and to the Philippians.
C.P.P. Did the apostle pursue a line that would help, first of all in what he did not do -- he did not take counsel with flesh and blood and he did not go up to Jerusalem -- and then what he did do in going to Arabia? Did he pursue a line that would help that glory to develop in his soul as alone with divine Persons?
S.McC. I should think so. He allowed as it were -- other letters would bear it out -- nothing to interfere with what had been committed to him in relation to the glad tidings in this way. He speaks in Corinthians about buffeting his body and keeping it in subjection, that he might not be a castaway, showing the remarkable extent to which he went, that the ministry might not be blamed, as he says in 2 Corinthians.
R.M.Y. What is the great distinction between Paul's gospel and the commission which the twelve had?
S.McC. The twelve largely preached the gospel of the Christ. Paul preaches the gospel of the Christ too, but more essentially the glad tidings of the Son of God. Peter says, "God has made him, this Jesus whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ." The Christ has to do with the ways of God; taking up every feature in regard to the scope of prophetic ministry; the answer to every Jewish hope; the answer to the Gentile position too in relation to the ways of God. The Christ stands related to that line of things. The ministry of the twelve bore on that, the ways of God. But Paul's ministry linked with the heavenly side.
E.A.K. Were the glad tidings of the glory peculiar to Paul? In Timothy we have "the glad tidings of the glory of the blessed God," @1 Timothy 1: 11, and as we had this morning, "the radiancy of the glad tidings of
{56}
the glory of the Christ," @2 Corinthians 4: 4. Did not Mr. Taylor say that the glad tidings of the glory was not preached much among us? Could you help us as to that?
S.McC. Well, it is important that we should see the place it has in Paul's ministry, because the heavenly side is particularly emphasised in it. The gospel of the glory, as we have it in Paul's ministry, particularly links us on with Christ as the centre of the heavenly realm.
J.C. Is not Paul a fine sample of one who "loses his life for my sake and the gospel's," @Mark 8: 35?
S.McC. Yes. He was prepared to suffer the loss of his life to complete his ministry. I think it is important that we should see here the concern of Paul that his glad tidings might be kept free from earthly and human influence, especially from Jewish influence.
G.J.D. We saw in our scripture this morning the necessity of receiving reconciliation, receiving the truth of it into our souls. Paul had done that. In the scripture this afternoon we have the matter of receiving sonship. Is that to be understood by us if we are to preach this glorious gospel rightly? The reception of the truth of reconciliation and the reception of sonship means that only sons are able to preach the gospel. Is that so?
S.McC. It shows how much enters into the gospel. These things are preached, laid out in the glad tidings for faith to lay hold of, to appropriate -- reconciliation and sonship and eternal life.
W.H.G. Would his going to Arabia indicate that the work was formed substantially in Paul by his having to do with God Himself apart from the influence of the Jewish apostles?
S.McC. Yes. And the negating of all that might be linked with any natural propensity in himself, because Saul of Tarsus was a very energetic man, but we find that he chooses the circumstances where certain things would be negated to make way for the pure strain of the glad tidings of God's Son.
{57}
Ques. Is this knowledge of the Son of God on our side in relation to God?
S.McC. Well, it works out in that way in sonship on our side, but then it also involves our relations with one another. It says here, "Then after three years I went up to Jerusalem to make acquaintance with Peter," verse 18. You will notice what he alludes to here. This matter is going to work out in their relations together. He did not go up to preach, exactly, or to speak; he went up to make acquaintance with Peter, "and I remained with him fifteen days" -- a remarkable thing. It is important that our relationships should be on right ground, especially between those who serve, and that what there is in one another should be taken account of.
H.W. Would you say that one difference between Paul and the twelve might be that Paul's ministry began from the light that shone on him, "I could not see, through the glory of that light," @Acts 22: 11? Did he get a sight of Christ in His glorified body, whereas the twelve knew Him as here on earth? Is that what gave character to Paul's ministry, do you think?
S.McC. It does say that the Lord appeared to him on the way to Damascus. But whether he saw the Lord in His glorified body, as we speak of it, would remain to be considered. The Lord certainly appeared to him corporeally in the wayside and that put a distinct impression on all his ministry.
R.H.G. It would appear that the voice from heaven was really the voice of God. God calling by His grace.
S.McC. You mean the voice in @Acts 9?
R.H.G. Really it was the voice of Jesus, the voice of the Son of God, that Paul heard.
S.McC. Exactly, but he is tracing all things up to their source in God here: "When God, who set me apart even from my mother's womb, and called me by his grace, was pleased to reveal his Son in me." He is speaking here of God; what God is doing; what the
{58}
Father is doing in His operations; He revealed the Son *to* Peter but He reveals His Son *in* Paul, meaning that in relation to the ministry which gives us the assembly according to the purpose of God, we have this side of things pressed, the substantial side in the vessel.
V.D. After he went to Arabia, it says, "and again returned to Damascus." I was wondering if that would have any link with the word that the Lord gave to him earlier, "rise up and enter into the city, and it shall be told thee what thou must do," @Acts 9: 6, and whether he was further honouring that word of the Lord to him in what was provided in that locality?
S.McC. I think it would be fair to say that. I believe that is a good word for all of us who have any little part in the things of God, that we should honour the local setting.
S.L. Would you say a little more about God calling him by His grace? What is in mind?
S.McC. God is entering into this great matter of Paul's separation. Things are traced to their source. The context shows that it is a question of men and God. "For do I now seek to satisfy men or God." The mediatorial side comes into view in Christ's bondman, and the like, but he is tracing things up to their source.
C.P.P. Is that confirmed in the way he withstood Peter later on? Brotherly links are established in this chapter, but when it is a question of maintaining the truth is it a matter of doing what is right before God?
S.McC. Exactly, so that as we have often been taught and noted, the good relations established through the acquaintance in chapter 1 became advantageous in chapter 2 when it came to a matter of the truth. It is important that we should see that the source of the glad tidings is stressed in chapter 1, because there is something in what flows from the source. The river does not get higher than the source.
{59}
G.C.L. Does the result go back to its source "they glorified God in me," @Galatians 1: 24?
S.McC. Very good, that is just how it works out. It is throwing into relief this great minister, not just exactly what he said. I think we should be afraid of acquiring a place because we are good speakers. That kind of thing has to be guarded. If there is any place to be gained on moral and spiritual lines we want to gain it by what we are substantially. I think that is what the Lord is aiming at on the eve of the translation. We have been under the most wonderful ministry in the past fifty years, authoritative in character and rich in nature, and the present moment is just a test to us as to where we are substantially in relation to it.
Ques. Is that seen in the Lord Jesus Christ when He says, I am "altogether that which I also say to you," @John 8: 25?
S.McC. Exactly. Paul, too, says, "By God's grace I am what I am." Now that is a salutary word for any one of us. Why should we try to be something more than we are? Why should we try to be different from what we are? We should have a right judgment of ourselves, a right appraisal of ourselves in the light of Paul's word there.
C.D. They glorified God for the miracle of grace that had taken place in Paul. According to what he says he was unknown personally to them, but they heard this, this wonderful miracle that had taken place, "that he who persecuted us formerly now announces the glad tidings of the faith which formerly he ravaged: and they glorified God in me," verse 23.
S.McC. Exactly, "they glorified God *in* me," not *by* me; notice the preposition. They glorified God in me. Think of that kind of glorifying, "they glorified God in me." That is, what was in Paul was throwing into relief the greatness of what God was and what He was doing in His operations in the glad tidings.
{60}
A.J.W. It was a wonderful claim by Paul when he said, "For for me to live is Christ and to die again," @Philippians 1: 21.
S.McC. Yes, it was. F.E.R. said that if we were fully in the gain of deliverance we would be like Christ. We often think of deliverance as on the negative line but the full result of deliverance means that we are like Christ. Christ is supreme with us.
A.J.W. Was there a continuation of Christ in Paul?
S.McC. Chapter 2 brings us to Christ living in him. Here it is *God*. If you keep this passage to itself, it is *God* calling, the assembly of *God*, and satisfying God, "and they glorified God in me." It is the high level on which God is moving and operating in the glad tidings of His Son.
R.H.G. It brings the work of Christ in for the glory of God, and now God is glorified in Paul.
S.McC. "To whom be glory to the ages of ages. Amen," @Galatians 1: 5. I think we want to take full account of the servants in this letter. You get Barnabas coming in and Titus. The brethren will all well know how much the servants are thrown into relief; and Titus a product of the ministry. That is, in this letter it is not a question of force of argument. It involves standing for the truth; but it is not by dint and force of argument, it is what is there in Paul, the minister, and in the results of the ministry. That is we are challenged as to the results of the ministry -- what has the ministry produced?
G.J.D. I was wondering as to the word "announce." Paul often uses that word when he is speaking of the glad tidings. He says that he announced the glad tidings, not preached it, exactly. I wondered if that involved gift, and the attractive way in which the glad tidings were to be presented.
S.McC. No doubt it would. Wherever you saw Paul in the preaching you would get a remarkable impression,
{61}
not exactly as to the eloquence of the man, but as to what the man was; there was something about the man that could not be gainsaid.
V.T.S. Is that why we get what we do at the end of the epistle; not devouring one another, but by love serving one another, and the fruits of the Spirit working out?
S.McC. The letter really contemplates abnormal conditions in the Galatian province. These abnormal conditions were obtaining and Paul offsets all that by what he and Barnabas and Titus were. I think there are many here who have some part in serving. What kind of presence do we bring among the brethren? What do we promote among the brethren? Do we promote liberty? Do we promote joy? Do we promote life and spontaneity among the brethren?
J.P. It needed this kind of spirit to meet the situation at Corinth, "I have sent you to Timotheus, who is my beloved and faithful child in the Lord, who shall put you in mind of my ways as they are in Christ," @1 Corinthians 4: 17. Is that the way abnormal conditions are met?
S.McC. Very good. That would bear out what we are saying that it was a question of what they were as ministers; Timothy reminding the saints at Corinth of Paul, his ways in Christ. Then again at the end of the second letter you will remember he alludes to Titus and himself, "have we not walked in the same spirit? have we not in the same steps?" @2 Corinthians 12: 18, stressing what they were in their movements among the brethren.
J.D. Does what Paul says to Timothy have a bearing on this? He says: "he has counted me faithful, appointing to ministry him who before was a blasphemer," @1 Timothy 1: 13, and later on, "But for this reason mercy was shown me, that in me, the first, Jesus Christ might display the whole long-suffering, for
{62}
a delineation of those about to believe on him to life eternal," verse 16. I was thinking of the words "in me."
S.McC. So that you have that strong expression there as to Paul that he was a delineation of Christ's ways in the case of the Jews. It is a remarkable thing how like Christ he was. If Timothy was a delineation of Paul's ways in Corinth, Paul was a delineation of Christ's ways among the Jews, in relation to the Jews.
S.E.E. When King Agrippa said to Paul, "In a little thou persuadest me to become a Christian," Paul said, "I would to God, both in little and in much, that not only thou, but all who have heard me this day, should become such as I also am, except these bonds." Would that illustrate it?
S.McC. It would, so that there are abundant references to support and confirm the substantial side; and this letter would stress the need of it in a crisis. We have a crisis here and what seems to carry the day is what the servants are, what the minister is and what the ministry is, what it produces.
L.G.L. @Galatians 1: 15, 16 says, "When God ... called me by his grace, was pleased to reveal his Son in me." That seems to be a necessary matter before the announcing of the glad tidings is taken up and what is inward seems to be necessary in order that weight might be given to the announcing of the glad tidings by what the person is, and this has a bearing on what he is able to say.
S.McC. We are all in this matter and it is an important thing that we should all be concerned as to being in the liberty of Christianity according to Paul's glad tidings.
C.B.S. You have been stressing this substantial side as over against what is academic. Can we have some help as to how we are to take it on? We know it was peculiar to Paul but we want it to apply to us. Can you give us some help there?
{63}
S.McC. In love for Christ and making room for the Spirit. The greater our attachment to Christ and the more room that is made for the Spirit, the more we shall be like Christ. Self-judgment in itself is of no value if Christ is not before our souls. We are only left in a vacuum if we are judging ourselves without a definite object and without making room for the Spirit.
C.B.S. Would the Spirit come in there that if we give ourselves over to the Spirit we are formed according to the inward man?
S.McC. Exactly, and as we are with Christ, as Paul was with Him, we shall come out more like Him. I think we want to see more (I am speaking from what one observes in oneself), we want to be impressed more with this substantial side, not in the amount we can say, but what we *are*. What do we promote amongst the brethren? Do we promote liberty? Do we promote joy? Or do we bring in darkness and bondage among the saints? These are things that would enter into our lesson this afternoon.
C.E.J. Does that take us on to the end of chapter 2 and the way Paul speaks there as to the life that he lived, "but in that I now live in flesh, I live by faith, the faith of the Son of God, who has loved me and given himself for me"? I am thinking of what you said as to having not only the matter of self-judgment in our hearts but having Christ as an Object before us.
S.McC. That is it exactly. Self-judgment in itself will never get us anywhere unless Christ is before our hearts. There are plenty around us who go on in self-judgment and are in misery, but self-judgment with Christ before the soul and room made for the Spirit brings us into liberty, freedom and buoyancy.
C.D. So that in saying "Not I" is not enough; we want to go on to say "but Christ."
S.McC. It is interesting the language that Paul uses here. He says in verse 17, "Now if in seeking to be
{64}
justified in Christ we also have been found sinners, then is Christ minister of sin? Far be the thought! For if the things I have thrown down, these I build again, I constitute myself a transgressor. For I, through law" -- now this brings us into @Romans 7 only that we have a more buoyant view of @Romans 7 here -- "have died to law, that I may live to God. I am crucified with Christ and no longer live I, but Christ lives in me; but in that I now live in flesh, I live by faith, the faith of the Son of God, who has loved me and given himself for me." Now this is largely experimental. It is a question of what is experimental with Paul. He uses the personal pronoun.
R.H.G. As to the matter of self-judgment, can we really have a right judgment as to ourselves unless Christ is before us?
S.McC. Not according to God.
D.N.D. Would David in @Psalm 51 be an example?
S.McC. Well, exactly. This is an important thing for our younger brethren. Oftentimes in judging themselves they do not get anywhere and that is in reality the truth of @Romans 7. We get into an occupation with ourselves. We set up for ourselves a standard in our desire to be devoted to Christ and to God, and something has come in and brought in dismalness because we have failed in relation to the standard we have set up. Well, we want to reach what is in mind in the full thought in that chapter. We do not reach deliverance exactly in @Romans 7 (deliverance is in @Romans 8), but we reach the Deliverer, we have our eye on Christ, and we come out of the tunnel of darkness and despair, as it were, with our eye on Him.
H.J.M. I wondered whether it would be illustrated in the butler and the baker both in prison for their offences and both meeting Joseph. The butler going through things, said, "In my dream, behold a vine was
{65}
before me," and that was made to him the pledge that he would be restored to his cup-bearing activities, but the baker did not have Christ before him really, did he?
S.McC. No. That is a good illustration in that relation, so that the baker was not restored, that is, the man under judgment has gone in judgment; there is no revival of that man.
J.E. Does it not help too to view @Romans 8 as the counterpart of @Romans 7? In chapter 7 he discovers a great many things that he wishes were not there, but the great thought in chapter 8 is "Christ be in you."
S.McC. It is interesting to notice these counterparts. We have to notice in preaching the gospel the place that burial has as the counterpart in the great work of atonement, the counterpart to the abandonment.
A.H.S. Would you say something about the expression, "the faith of the Son of God"?
S.McC. It is a beautiful expression here that we want to lay hold of, "in that I now live in flesh," that is now, it is the wilderness, he is not in heaven yet. "But in that I now live in flesh," that means the kind of life in the wilderness, "I live by faith," and then he tells us of the Son of God. It is that kind of faith, meaning that he is governed by the light of another world and the Person who is the centre of it.
A.H.S. And then love comes into it.
S.McC. Exactly, "who has loved me." The historical side is stressed, "the Son of God, who has loved me." He singles himself out. We need more help personally, each of us, in regard to our links with Christ from this viewpoint; that is, it is what Paul is apart from the brethren. The brethren will understand what I am saying.
E.A.K. Is it the thought of the individuality of sonship
{66}
as it has come before us in the ministry, over against the entity in the assembly?
S.McC. That is what the glad tidings of the Son of God have to do with. It is the taking of us up individually in relation to the Son of God, both our individual links and our personal experiences with the Son of God. It is always building up that side so that we should value one another individually in the light of our links with the Son of God, belonging to the system, but each of us having a definite impression and appreciation in regard to the Son of God.
C.P.P. Would it leave us with an impression that this love had in view in its activities our association with Him in this system of glory rather than our side of need?
S.McC. That is right. Running along with the truth in this letter is deliverance from the age and the world. Sometimes we think of Corinth as the side of the world. The immorality and licentiousness in Corinth generally comes into our minds when we speak of worldliness, but it is interesting to note that in the scripture Judaism takes the form of the world. The world takes form in Judaism. So it is important to notice that in this letter our deliverance from that side of things is by the faith of the Son of God.
C.B.S. "I live by ... the faith of the Son of God." It is the giving expression to the experimental side in his own soul as really known through the operations of faith: "I live by the faith."
S.McC. So that as Paul was among them (he was speaking, no doubt, to Peter here in verse 14), you can understand, without conjecturing too much, the tremendous impression Peter must have got as to this man, not just by what he said, but by the liberty of the man, what the man was substantially in relation to his ministry.
Ques. Would chapter 1: 4, "Christ, who gave himself
{67}
for our sins, so that he should deliver us out of the present evil world," and so on, be the deliverance side; but the verse that we are considering, "the Son of God, who has loved me and given himself for me," the attachment side?
S.McC. Yes. The first part is the delivering side, "I am crucified with Christ, and no longer live I, but Christ lives in me," that is the side of deliverance; but then "the faith of the Son of God" gives us a positive link with the Man, the Person, who is the Centre of another world.
V.T.S. Is that the impression that Peter would get of Paul? He would not be bitten and devoured and kept down, would he? He would be promoted in his service and stimulated by Paul, would he not?
S.McC. It is interesting to see how Peter in his letter refers to Paul later, as has often been pointed out. I think the very expression that he uses shows how he values what Paul said to him in withstanding him to the face, because Peter was a princely man, but he was entirely wrong in this matter, and it was all the more serious in that he was affected by the influence of others. It says in verse 12 "before that certain came from James." We often think of the generality of the brethren being affected by influence, but here is one servant being affected by another, and to the extent that he compromises the truth. This shows the importance of ministers being right and solid in their links with the Lord who has given their gifts to them.
C.E.J. Is that seen in that the apostle first speaks to Peter and says, "If thou, being a Jew," but later on he is able to draw attention to himself and what he was, and his links with the Lord, and he uses the personal pronoun "I". He draws attention to himself substantially.
S.McC. It is interesting to notice that. Now we
{68}
should come on to the latter part to show how sonship works out among the brethren. Christ coming into sonship has in mind our coming into sonship, so that we have the Spirit of God's Son in our hearts crying, Abba, Father.
A.H.S. Paul is consciously in this liberty of sonship and says to them, "Be as I am, for I also am as ye." His desire was that they should come into the same liberty which was in him substantially.
S.McC. And especially does it throw into relief in the end of chapter 3 the greatness of the saints. It says in verse 25, "But, faith having come, we are no longer under a tutor; for ye are all God's sons by faith in Christ Jesus." We want to see the dignity of the saints on this line, that the time of tutorship has passed. The saints are not exactly in infancy now. It is the great matured thought linked with sonship according to the purpose of God: "ye are *all* God's sons"; not the ministers, not the gifts, not those that are spiritual. It does say later in @Galatians 6: 1, "Ye who are spiritual" when it comes to dealing with sin and those who are overtaken in it, but it does not say that here. It is "ye are all God's sons by faith in Christ Jesus." That is such a great matter in our localities. We should not treat the saints as if they were in infancy and need of tutorship and guardianship from this viewpoint.
H.J.M. In this section is it not really an historical resume of God's ways in the testimony with men? There was a time when man was under tutorship was there not, but it does not belong to the present period in that setting.
S.McC. That is the truth exactly. It is not that time now. It is the time when all the saints are God's sons by faith in Christ Jesus. It is not the time of infancy, not the time of tutorship. It is the time of the full thought as to sonship.
Ques. The bringing in of faith: "faith having
{69}
come," does that indicate that we are to take the matter up in faith in a positive way with our eyes on Christ the Son of God?
S.McC. Well, it is alluding to the great change, the incoming of Christ. "But faith having come," would bear on the coming in of Christ in manhood, not exactly to the day of Pentecost in @Acts 2 but it would have in mind the coming in of Christ, "faith having come." He is the Leader and Completer of faith, He sets on the great matter.
P.B. One is greatly impressed by the importance of what has been said. I was thinking in regard to the young people, "ye are all God's sons by faith in Christ Jesus." How encouraging that would be to the young!
S.McC. It is a great thing that they should carry that away with them. If that were the only impression that every one of us got from this reading, what an impression it would be! We are all on the one common platform. We all can start together and go on together, as God's sons by faith in Christ Jesus.
W.J.B. As soon as we believe in Jesus, God has no other thought, no less thought than this in mind for us.
S.McC. And we are to have no less thought in regard to the saints than this.
J.C. It was the basis for God sending forth the Spirit of His Son, "because ye are sons."
S.McC. Yes. We are sons before we have the Spirit. It is the sons that get the Spirit. "Because ye are sons, God has sent out," notice that. I think that is a beautiful reference. "God has sent out." It is not the time yet of the world to come. You remember how Noah sent out the dove, but it is not the time of the millennium. It is the time of the Gentiles, Paul's ministry among the Gentiles, and I think it is an allusion to that: "God has sent out the Spirit of His Son into our hearts, crying, Abba, Father." It is very fine, I think, God's operation here in the sending out.
{70}
R.M.Y. Are we not apt even to make the matter of the Spirit somewhat legal? Here it is the question of "because ye are sons, God has sent out the Spirit of His Son." Have we not to view one another on that line as those who have received the Spirit?
S.McC. It is interesting in relation to what you say in regard to our having to do with the young people when they ask to break bread. What are we looking for? We are often concerned about this matter of the Spirit. I think the thing we should look most for in regard to their having the Spirit is the family link that they have. I think the family link is one of the surest evidences of whether they have the Spirit or not.
D.J.M. It says here as the first evidence of the Spirit's fruit, "love, joy, peace."
S.McC. Yes, it may not be there in great quantities, but the elements of it are there; the feature of it is there; it will grow; it will increase; because we are to increase and abound in love; but it is there and it is a sure evidence of a soul having the Spirit.
A.H.S. Does that mean that having this apprehension, they are in function in the assembly?
S.McC. Exactly. You are conscious that they have got a link with divine Persons, a link with the Father.
{71}
THE KNOWLEDGE OF THE SON OF GOD (3)
@John 1: 14 -- 18; @John 3: 13 -- 18; @John 5: 20 -- 25
S.McC. The knowledge of the Son of God seems to be a prime matter in John's ministry. He makes more of it than the other evangelists, even to the extent of giving us in his gospel a whole long chapter (chapter 9) devoted to a soul who arrived at the knowledge in some way. The fact that the work of the ministry is operating in view of our arriving at the knowledge of the Son of God would certainly serve to show the prime importance of it. It would seem to link with the completing of things in the dispensation, and the fact that John's ministry makes so much of the apprehension of the Son of God, both in the gospel and the epistles, would serve to bring home to us the importance of it at this time upon which John's ministry bears. It bears upon the time when doctrinal degeneracy has set in and where, in the public body, a good deal has been resorted to in years gone by to try and prevent that degeneracy -- the creeds and the like, protestant reform and everything on that line -- it all tried to stem the tide, but it has been futile. John in his ministry brings in elements of the teaching, such as life, that would help us in difficult days. The thought of life runs collaterally through the gospel with the knowledge of the Son of God. We might look first at it in the first chapter in relation to the uniqueness of the Lord Jesus in this position in manhood, "the only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father," and then we might see how linked with the thought of the Son of God in chapter 3 is this great gospel vista, an enlarged vista in the field of the gospel. Then in chapter 5, bearing upon the service of God, the divine family, the great thought of quickening, the voice of the Son
{72}
of God coming in too in quickening power, especially having in mind our part in the assembly in the service of God. As we alluded to it at the outset, God, while in absolute conditions, is unknowable, yet He has come within our range in Christ in relationships that are calculated to affect our souls. In these relationships, the nature and attributes of God are set out. This first reference in verse 18 is particularly attractive. Our attention is drawn to the uniqueness of Christ in manhood here, "the only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father."
J.N.G. Is there a difference between the titles "Son" and "Son of God"?
S.McC. I suppose there would be a reference in the Son, when the title Son is by itself, particularly to the Person, the Son, that Person. The Son of God is more what He is in relation to God, as representing God. God has come so near to us in that relationship.
J.E. Would the "bosom of the Father" refer to the place or position that He has taken in the economy?
S.McC. It alludes to the place that He has come into in manhood. Verse 14, "The Word became flesh, and dwelt among us (and we have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father)." It is a figure of speech there in the bracketed remark, but here it is a literal reference to the position that He was in as coming into manhood.
J.E. And he remains, would you say?
S.McC. Yes, it would seem that He remains in manhood for ever, not that we can bind anything on a divine Person. If He is pleased to come into conditions that involve limitations for Him, that is His prerogative, we could not have bound it on Him, but it would seem as if He retains it for ever.
C.P.P. Would it be an expression of special affection as existing and known in that expression as to the bosom of the Father, and do you understand that that
{73}
would cover his place here in manhood and His present position too?
S.McC. Yes, I should judge the reference in verse 18 is particularly to His place here in the days of his flesh including, of course, what and where He is now on high, for He is still a Man. But I think John the evangelist here is drawing our attention particularly to Him as in manhood here and the point from which the declaration goes forth.
J.N.G. It says, "he hath declared," the "him" being in brackets. Is it God or the Father?
S.McC. Well, it would include both. "No one has seen God at any time; the only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared him." It is a reference back to "No one has seen God at any time." It would include both.
V.T.S. Does this knowledge lead us on to the greater knowledge of God? I was thinking of the peculiar glory of Christ, that He is the Word. The Father is not the Word and the Spirit is not the Word. Is it a peculiar glory of Christ?
S.McC. It is. There are certain things that specifically appear in relation to each divine Person, such as the Father being the Source of glory, the Source of light; and the Holy Spirit being the power for the apprehension of divine Persons as They are viewed, the apprehension of the truth; the Father is not that nor the Lord, the Holy Spirit is that. The Lord Jesus is the Word, not the Father or the Spirit. The Lord Jesus died for us. There is a specific glory about each of the Persons in the arrangement in which They may be viewed, into which They have come in grace. I think the great thing in verses 14 to 18 is that we should apprehend by the help of the Spirit something of the excellence of manhood in Jesus in this setting in the only-begotten Son who is in the bosom of the Father; the excellence that is linked with the knowledge of the
{74}
Son of God in this relation. Paul alludes, in the great epistle of heavenly refinement, to things that are more excellent. I think we get a touch in this particular section as to what is most excellent in the Son of God in manhood.
W.H.G. Can you tell us the difference between what it says in @Exodus 24, "they saw God, and ate and drank," and "No one has seen God at any time"? Would that bear too on the excellence of what has been set forth in the Son of God?
S.McC. Well, of course, the Son of God had not come into manhood in @Exodus 24. This is unique here in @John 1. Everything that went before must look on to the incarnation. Sonship rightly awaited the incarnation. That is, a divine Person has come into this position of sonship which is the highest thought of God for men. We have to learn the excellence of it as in a divine Person in this position.
C.P.P. Are these features of the uniqueness of Christ indicated in the expressions, firstly, "the only-begotten Son," causing Him to stand out before us, and then the One "who is in the bosom of the Father"?
S.McC. Yes. "The only-begotten Son" is a term that conveys the thought of endearment; a strong expression of endearment of Christ to God in this position. He is unique. It is obvious that that could not be carried into Deity, because you could never think of One divine Person being an object of special attractiveness to Another divine Person in conditions of abstract Deity. It must allude to the divine arrangement into which divine Persons have come. Two Persons are subordinate to the supreme thought of the Father in that arrangement.
E.A.K. Is it the type in @Genesis 22, the father and the son going together, and the mutual relations of affection between them?
S.McC. Exactly. That chapter and @Exodus 24 which
{75}
has just been alluded to, are two of the greatest chapters in the Old Testament. @Exodus 24 throws into relief the greatness of the Mediator, and here we are in the presence of One who declares God, "*He* hath declared him," the emphatic 'He' mentioned.
N.B.S. Does this expression, "who is in the bosom of the Father," bring home to our hearts the perfect suitability of the Son to declare Him?
S.McC. Yes. And we are to be impressed with the way in which the declaration comes. It is God coming out to be known by men in relationships intelligible to men, and in relationships in which the nature and attributes of God are to be set out, for God is love.
G.H. So that His fullness is connected with "and dwelt among us."
S.McC. Yes, alluding to His place here; it would be an allusion to His manhood.
P.R.P. Is 'begotten' unique to the Lord Jesus in relation to the matter of sonship?
S.McC. In the sense that we are not sons by birth. The Lord Jesus is viewed in that way as unique when it comes to sonship. *We* are sons by adoption, so there is a difference in that way.
R.M.Y. What does the declaration cover? Does it cover the whole life of the Lord Jesus here? Does it include His death, carried through to resurrection?
S.McC. I think it is a general statement as to what came out in Him as Man. Declaration is a public matter, involving the whole position, not like revelation which the assembly comes into specifically. Declaration is the full public position, that all that is to be known of God is out in Christ. "He has declared," that is, it is an historical matter; the whole declaration is out.
C.E.J. Does the word 'truth' enter into that? "Full of grace and truth."
S.McC. You will notice that grace precedes truth. "Full of grace and truth," both are needed, but grace
{76}
comes first. You will notice that both at the beginning of John's gospel and at the end of John's gospel, the side of grace is emphasised, "whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted to them; whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained." The side of grace in remitting comes first; not that we would detract in any sense from the thought of truth, it has a great place in John's ministry, but grace is first here. It says, "Of his fulness we all have received, and grace upon grace," not truth on truth. "For the law was given by Moses; grace and truth subsists through Jesus Christ." John would help us to see that we can go a long way on the line of grace; truth will come in; we can count on it coming in; it will come in to regulate, to adjust, but truth furnishes us with the standard.
Ques. "Grace and truth subsists through Jesus Christ." The verb is singular. Can we have the truth in this dispensation apart from grace?
S.McC. You will notice the note 'k' to the verb 'subsists' says "'has come' (i.e. into the world), that is 'now begins to be' ... The world 'began to be' through him ... So 'grace and truth came into being.' I am not satisfied with 'subsists,' but it is better than 'came' which gives the idea of coming into the world. They began to exist de facto down here. The verb is singular, and 'grace and truth' go together in the Person of Christ. Nothing subsisted by the law, it was a rule given; but grace and truth actually commenced to be, not in God's mind of course, but in revelation and actual existence down here. But its so taking place supposes its continuance." It shows the uniqueness of what we have coming in, in relation to Christ in manhood. It says "the law was given by Moses." We have a certain standard in the ministry of Moses, but "grace and truth subsists through Jesus Christ."
C.P.P. Does that expression in the note, 'supposes its continuance,' give a link with your reference to @John 20?
{77}
This is a new movement on the part of divine Persons, light coming that had never shone before, but having come, it is to continue and by extension in the saints?
S.McC. Exactly. That is, that it goes right through so that the dispensation is characterized by it. The same with righteousness; "righteousness of God is revealed." It is God known in that way in the outshining of what He is. Grace and truth would allude to God outshining in this way.
R.H.G. God is no longer hidden in thick darkness and cloud in the giving of the law, but has come out in the light?
S.McC. Yes. God is declared.
Ques. In connection with the thought we have been considering of grace and truth subsisting, is grace seen in relation to the truth in manhood in Christ, and is the truth the declaration of the Father?
S.McC. The very name Father is the expression of grace; God known in grace. I think grace has to do with the line of supply; truth gives us the standard, the regulating side as to what is to be known of God.
H.E. Does the apostle refer to this in @1 Timothy 3: 16, "God has been manifested"?
S.McC. Yes, that would allude to the great mystery of the whole matter, the mystery of the incarnation. We cannot comprehend its greatness, "the Word became flesh, and dwelt among us." God is there like the great sight in @Exodus 3 which Moses turned aside to see. What is continually in one's mind in regard to this section is the particular feature of the knowledge of the Son of God as seen here, the excellence of what is here, "the only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father." I think we want to make room for the Spirit to help us to contemplate this and to feed upon it; we have food here for spiritual affections; food, we might say, for divine affections; the bread of God would be in it.
W.H.G. Is that why the word "fulness" is used in
{78}
relation to the Lord? "Of his fulness," connected with "grace and truth."
S.McC. Would you say something more as to what you have in your mind.
W.H.G. "We have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father, full of grace and truth; ... for of his fulness we all have received, and grace upon grace." I was asking if the word 'fulness' was employed by the Spirit to express what is apprehended? There is excellence and glory in manhood.
S.McC. Yes. If we think of the fulness of the earth, what comes into our minds is the trees, the fruits, the minerals, the life. When we think of the fulness in relation to Christ's manhood how much comes into our minds -- His fulness! What comes out in that kind of manhood here for the divine eye! "The bosom of the Father" as we know, and have been taught, alludes to the side of receptivity. The word in the Greek conveys the word receptacle. The preposition 'in' denotes movements towards; we have the movement of Christ towards this position. He is in a position in which He never was before and then the reciprocal side in the bosom of the Father. He was received into it in all the excellence of what was there in that kind of manhood.
S.E.E. It says of the writer of these words that he was in the bosom of Jesus. Is that where he himself acquired the knowledge of the Son of God?
S.McC. It shows that he was in a place of love, does it not? There was something attractive about John the evangelist as in the bosom of Jesus.
J.D. Does this bring in the peculiar place of delight He really has with the Father?
S.McC. That is just what it alludes to -- the Father having the Son in this way; there was nothing ever like it in the universe before, that a divine Person should come into this position. The excellence that attaches to
{79}
it is to be noted. We want to have our minds helped in the contemplation of it, our affections fed in the contemplation of it.
J.D. Would all this help to stimulate us in the service of God; the contemplation of this glorious Person and the place He has with the Father?
S.McC. Exactly; it would add to the richness. We want to make room in our minds for the thought of richness in the service of God, and it is the knowledge of the Son of God in this way that makes way for it. How prone we are to be governed by light and our academic knowledge of truth in the service of God, but this would help us to see the importance and the excellence of this kind of knowledge, and the richness attaching to it.
C.D. Is there a peculiar beauty about this presentation of Christ which appeals directly to the heart and the affections, and calls for adoration?
S.McC. It does; He is unique in it.
A.H.S. @Colossians 1 speaks of "the Son of his love," and later on in the chapter, "in him all the fulness of the Godhead was pleased to dwell."
S.McC. The reference in Colossians to "the kingdom of the Son of his love" is interesting. It is an extended realm involving the saints. Here, "the only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father," links with the "Son of his love," the peculiar place he has in divine affections.
J.E. Would it help to see that the movement is entirely His own, and that prior to any thought of Him being sent, is He not attracted into this place, the bosom of the Father?
S.McC. He comes into it in coming into manhood. It says, "the Word became flesh, and dwelt amongst us." It was His own act throwing into relief the greatness of the Person who became flesh, and He came into this position in which He never was before.
{80}
R.M.Y. Is this side of things something acquired only by contemplation? While ministry and teaching may call attention to it, this knowledge comes by reflection.
S.McC. Yes. And the help of the Spirit would be particularly needed for the understanding of this kind of thing, because from verse 19 onwards we get certain persons who want to know certain things. They are after something; they want to know something; and John the Baptist is very specific in speaking to them; but they do not know. "In the midst of you stands, whom ye do not know." John does not mince matters in relation to them. He specifically puts them in their place in the class to which they belong. The Lord Jesus later says in chapter 3, "We speak that which we know," alluding to a class of persons who have a certain kind of knowledge, and we want to be amongst that class.
C.P.P. As to the Lord's expressions to Mary in chapter 20 where He says first, "I have not yet ascended to my Father," and then, "I ascend to my Father and your Father," is that distinctiveness that He retains based on what we have been reading here?
S.McC. It is all linking on with the unique place that He has and we are reminded of it in @John 20 in the very expression, "my Father and your Father," not 'our Father,' but "my Father and your Father." However much and great our association with Christ is as His brethren, He is always unique; even in sonship. We may be brought into sonship as we are in @John 20 by implication there, "my Father and your Father," but He is unique. There is a uniqueness about Christ's sonship which we always do well to keep before us.
C.B.S. Does the voice out of the cloud have that in mind as distinct from James and John? Does the voice have in mind the uniqueness of the glory of the Son of God?
{81}
S.McC. Yes. The testimony of the Father to Him; He stands alone in that uniqueness.
Rem. We are to contemplate the mutual affections between the Father and the Son.
S.McC. Yes. The reciprocity of love in the wonderful realm in which divine affections are flowing between two divine Persons, the Father and the Son, is to be taken account of.
J.N.G. Is the contemplation of the excellence of Christ in His affection for the Father needed to fill out the doctrine of Christianity?
S.McC. Yes. John's ministry has particularly in mind degeneracy in doctrine in the public body. John would stress in his ministry the great need of understanding what we have here, that it is in -- these circumstances that we get the testimony to eternal life. Eternal life is bound up with them.
N.B.S. Would the word of John the evangelist, "we have contemplated his glory," colour the whole of his gospel? Is it a setting out for us under the hand of the Spirit of the result of his contemplation that we might enter into it?
S.McC. Exactly. It is apostolic of course, "*we* have contemplated his glory"; it was the unique place that the apostles had, as they speak of it in @1 John 1, that God has come so near in this way that John uses even the word 'handled' in the first epistle. It is wonderful to think of it! Divine infiniteness coming within the range of human finiteness; there is something so spiritually exquisite and grand about it that we need to allow the Spirit to help us more in viewing Christ's manhood from this point that John the evangelist gives it.
J.C. Does @Hebrews 1 link on with that, God speaking in Son, and He being "the effulgence of his glory and the expression of his substance?"
S.McC. Yes. @Hebrews 1 would link with @John 1 in the sense that "In the beginning was the Word, and the
{82}
Word was with God, and the Word was God." That is, in @Hebrews 1 the Person is God; the One Who is speaking is God; it is God speaking Son-wise. In @John 1: 18 we have two Persons, not one Person -- "the only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father," an allusion to two Persons in a realm of reciprocal affections, giving us an impression as to the glory of the economy that is in mind. It does not come into view formally until a little later, but these statements are all the background of it and bear on it and allude to it.
E.B.McC. Did John come into this somewhat, leaning on the Lord's bosom?
S.McC. It has in mind the Son of God. Sonship in this way has in mind our coming into sonship so that we should understand the greatness of what is in the divine mind, that a divine Person has come into the position to set it out in perfection. *We* come into it -- always keeping in mind of course that the place of a divine Person coming into that position must always be unique -- later on, but John's gospel never speaks of sonship in the saints, it is always sonship in Christ.
J.D. Does the enquiry of the two disciples, "where abidest thou?" enter into this?
S.McC. Yes, and we might well inquire too, so that the Lord might take us into this environment, that we might be impressed with the excellence of manhood in this setting. It is not in the exercise of rule on the throne, not in relation to the vast ramifications of the administration of the kingdom, but in this refined and glorious setting, manhood in sonship in Jesus in the bosom of the Father.
D.J.M. Would the verse in @John 17 link, "I have made known to them thy name, and will make it known; that the love with which thou hast loved me may be in them and I in them?"
S.McC. It shows the greatness of what is in the divine mind that the quality of that love is to be in the
{83}
saints, showing the high level in which the saints are viewed in the Lord's prayer in @John 17.
A.G.L. Is the contemplation of this chapter to prepare our hearts for chapter 3?
S.McC. It is. When we come to chapter 3 it is not now what sonship is to the Father in Christ, it is not the inward position and the richness and excellence linked with the inward position. Now, it is more the public testimony that is in mind. It says, "For God so loved the world, that he gave his only-begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him may not perish, but have life eternal. For God has not sent his Son into the world that he may judge the world, but that the world may be saved through him." That is, we are now to see the bearing of the Son of God in this great matter of the public testimony, the great gospel vista that is open before our souls here.
R.G. What do you understand by the "world" here?
S.McC. I understand it to refer to the divinely ordered system of things that God created and had His pleasure in but into which sin came and which it marred. God will yet revert to it: "the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world," showing that Christ has in mind to remove the stain, remove what has marred this divinely ordered system of things so that God will have it again as before.
Ques. Does our appreciation of what the Son is for the Father's pleasure in the first chapter help us now, in what the Son is for men, God's love for men shown out in the Son?
S.McC. That is it. It is to bring the elevated platform of the glad tidings before us. The glad tidings does not just have in mind forgiveness of sins and the relief of man. There is a glorious vista opened up in relation to the glad tidings. The heavenly side of eternal life is stressed in relation to the glad tidings here, God having in mind that men should not perish. The fact
{84}
that it goes on to say that "He gave his only-begotten Son that whosoever believes on him may not perish, but have life eternal," would show that men are in mind. It does not say that 'the world may believe on Him and may not perish, but have life eternal,' it says that "whosoever" -- alluding to men -- "believes on him may not perish, but have life eternal."
G.C.L. It says here "whosoever believes *on* him," not '*in* Him.' This Person becomes an Object of faith, an Object for our hearts, does He not?
S.McC. That is it, "believes on him." The Person becomes a great Object of faith in the glad tidings, as He says in @John 14 in view of His going away, "Let not your heart be troubled; ye believe on God, believe also on me," meaning that He was going away and He was to become the Object of faith. That is what is in mind here. So that in regard of what we were saying the other day, it is important that the love of God to men should enter into the glad tidings, or else what kind of a gospel do we have?
H.L. "For God *so* loved the world" intensified the feelings that God had in relation to it.
S.McC. That is not God's love for the assembly. I do not know of any formal and actual reference to God loving the assembly. There are references to Christ loving assembly, but not God. It does not say that Christ loved the world, but it does say *God* loved the world, "for God so loved the world," and that is the basis of the gospel testimony. The gospel testimony goes forward on that basis.
F.R.G. Would you say @John 3: 16 still stands? It has been suggested that that refers to what God thought or His feelings before Christ suffered and died here.
S.McC. As Mr. Taylor has said, it is the great gospel testimony. Man, of course, belongs abstractly to this great range of things. It is called in other instances the "habitable" world, which must be an allusion to
{85}
men and their place in it. Men are in mind here in the working out of it in regard to eternal life. It says, "For God so loved the world," that is, the ordered arrangement of things in which his pleasure was found, "that He gave His only-begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him may not perish, but have life eternal."
Ques. Would J.N.D.¬s note make it clear, 'he has loved men in view of eternal life?'
S.McC. Exactly. Of course, it might be said, Well, he loved the ones who were predestined; he loved the ones who were selected, which would be true, but we do not preach the gospel on that basis exactly.
G.J.G. Are you helping us to see we must get God's view of the world? You have spoken of God's view and the vista of glory which opens out in the gospel. Do we need to arrive at that?
S.McC. It is very important that we should get God's view in regard to the world and this matter of men and eternal life, because eternal life is a wonderful blessing coming in in relation to John's ministry in this section, as we have been taught. It is linked with the upward line, the Son of man lifted up on the way out of the world. It is not linked with the world in its departure from God, it is linked with the upward side, which is leading out of the world.
A.J.W. Would you make a distinction between the world and whosoever?
S.McC. The world refers to a system, a divine arrangement of things, but 'whosoever' alludes to individuals, to men, for abstractly men are part of the divine arrangement. We may say, Well, look at the awful conditions that mark men. But we must never forget what man is abstractly; that he is God's creature. We must remember that, abstractly, however far man sinks in sin, he is God's creature.
J.C. Would you allow the expression that God loves
{86}
men compassionately but He loves His saints complacently? Would that help?
S.McC. Let us analyse that a little. He loves men compassionately. He loved man as part of the divine arrangement before sin came in. We get the abstract side in @John 3: 16 and God never relinquishes any primary thought. He has never relinquished @Genesis 2, the great thought of the man and the woman, however much sin has marred man.
J.E. The difficulty I think in some of our minds is not as to the abstract, but as to the concrete. I don't think there has been any difficulty as to the testimony of God's love for men in @Titus 3; that has been proclaimed, as far as I know, generally. And the thought that God loves men in an abstract sense as part of His creation, is abundantly clear; but whether we can apply that in a concrete way to every man, presents difficulty in my mind, because Esau for instance was not loved, was he? God said that he hated Esau, and to be honest I must ask for help at this point because I am not clear.
S.McC. We are on a different line when we come to Jacob and Esau. That would be no ground to bring in God's thoughts in relation to men in a general way, because when it says God hated Esau, it was because Esau rejected the blessing. In the light of the gospel; we would hardly go to persons and tell them that God hates them.
A.J.W. It is said after his death, is it not?
S.McC. Yes. We preach the gospel to men in the light of God's favour toward men and His primary rights over men, and their responsibility. That was why the Lord Jesus came in on the side of man because of God's primary rights; he is the Kinsman Redeemer, as we have in type in Boaz.
J.E. That is the gospel testimony; one is clear about that, but to meet casually in the street a man who
{87}
might be a definite Christ rejecter and say to him, 'God loves you,' is the difficulty in mind.
S.McC. That is drawing a very fine line in regard to the matter. We have to maintain the balance of the truth. We might just as well say that in the preaching we might be speaking to those who are lost, but we do not know, and we must take account of men in their responsibility to answer to the glad tidings. As to the Jew, the wrath of God abides upon him, @John 3: 36, but the world stands provisionally in reconciliation (@Romans 2: 15).
C.D. Is it not better to have the larger view -- God our Saviour will have *all* men to be saved? There is a word that Elihu said to Job, if God only thought of Himself, gathered up to Him His breath, all flesh would expire together and man would return to the dust. The fact is that God does not only think of Himself, He thinks of men and would have *all* men to be saved.
S.McC. I think we need to cut in a straight line the truth, and not confuse purpose and responsibility, and the love of divine goodness and the love of relationship We must keep the lines distinct, and if the love of God to men does not enter into the gospel, what have we got here in @John 3? What have we in @Titus 3? We have these scriptures to prove God's love to, men in the gospel.
J.E. The testimony as to God's love to men is abundantly clear. There is no difficulty with any of us as to that. It is preached in the gospel because we do not know just where men are.
S.McC. I understand that one or two have been taken up in this matter and spoken to after preaching about God's love to men in the gospel. That is a serious matter. Man proves his own position in rejecting the gospel, but we cannot assume to be in the place of God and to know all things from the beginning, because we are not omniscient. We preach the gospel
{88}
to men on the ground of "whosoever"; we know that the work of God comes to light and it is essential that the love of God in its general bearing should come into the gospel. It would be serious if the service of the glad tidings was being interfered with, and persons were being hindered in preaching the love of God to men in the gospel.
C.P.P. Do you think that the scripture in 2 Corinthians where the glory of God is spoken of in connection with the preaching, would involve the outshining of God in love and would bear upon it, because those who are lost are mentioned in that scripture, but that does not seem to affect the preaching? Would that be right?
S.McC. I think we need to be careful lest we get on to the lines of what is Calvinistic; lest we should say that the gospel is *only* for the predestined. We know it brings to light those that are.
E.T. We used to sing, "Once for chosen sinners slain," it is now, "Once for guilty sinners slain."
S.McC. The word is very careful to point out in @Romans 9: 22 -- 23, "And if God, minded to shew his wrath and to make his power known, endured with much long-suffering vessels of wrath fitted for destruction; and that he might make known the riches of his glory upon vessels of mercy, which he had *before* prepared for glory." Now, notice it does not say, 'which he had before prepared for destruction.' The 'fitted for destruction' alludes to what persons like Esau have done in their responsibility in rejecting the blessing, whereas when it comes to the vessels of mercy, it says, "which he had *before* prepared for glory." There is quite a difference. In the former, the long-suffering is to be noted.
H.J.M. With how many of us the barriers have gone down as the sense of love of God towards man has come to us in the glad tidings!
{89}
S.McC. It is the foundation, the basis of the glad tidings, God's love to men expressed in the way Christ has come in (@Titus 3: 4).
S.E.E. You remarked that God loved men before sin came into the world. Is it that the simple fact of sin coming into the world has not changed God?
S.McC. In the primary side, @Genesis 1 and 2, the arrangement involved the man. The woman is included in the man on the racial side, and in @Genesis 2 the divine arrangement involves the man; the man is part of the ordered system and that is what God loved. Sin has come into the world and marred man but God does not love sin, He abominates sin, but then man abstractly is still His creature. He has primary rights over that man. The whole environment in @Luke 15 in the sheep, the piece of silver and the younger son is God's primary rights. The younger son sets out the thought of the Gentile, how he is brought near.
J.D. Is that not God's great thought. He never gives it up, does he? In @Revelation 21, "the tabernacle of God is with men," it is God and men, is it not?
S.McC. It is. If men are in the lake of fire it is because they have rejected the gospel and the testimony as to the rights of God.
Ques. "Towards all, and upon all those who believe."
S.McC. Exactly. It is "towards all," let us not minimise that. If we get on the line that is being suggested, we will be saying it is not for all. We will be saying that it is only for some.
C.D. So in that way the preaching is really a sounding out to men. I was thinking of the word in @Proverbs 8, "Unto you, men, I call, and my voice is to the sons of man," verse 4.
S.McC. It is very wide here as to its going out towards all, "whosoever." Mr. Darby shows in the margin that God loves men in view of eternal life. It says in @John 1, "the life was the light of men."
{90}
Ques. I was thinking of the two thieves, how they reviled the Lord, yet the change of mind came in. Then one said, Lord, remember me when thou comest in thy kingdom. There were two in opposition to Christ, were they not? Yet there was forgiveness for one of them because he asked for it.
S.McC. It was available to the other, too, if he had cared to avail himself of it.
W.J.B. So the hymn says, "Wilt thou yield to love's entreaty?" (`321:1).
S.McC. Yes.
G.B. Does @Genesis 1: 26, 27 come into it, the matter of man there?
S.McC. We have always to keep that in mind in relation to man, that he is created in God's image. The likeness may have been destroyed, through sin and all that has come in, but @Luke 15 shows us how God has come near to secure men according to divine primary rights over men.
A.H.S. Is not the declaration of God by the only-begotten Son in chapter 1 to the race?
S.McC. The declaration is not limited, it is the whole public position, "the life was the light of men," not one, two or three, it is *all* men who are in mind. John's ministry helps us as to that, that men are in mind. Whether they come into it or not is another matter.
{91}
THE KNOWLEDGE OF THE SON OF GOD (4)
@1 John 5: 10 -- 13; @John 5: 20 -- 25; @John 17: 1 -- 3, 25, 26; @John 20: 17, 18
S.McC. I think we should keep in mind this afternoon the bearing of the knowledge of the Son of God as apprehended and enjoyed by us, on the service of God, the assembly being the great vessel of that service. What is to be noted in these passages in John's writings is that the thought of life is linked with the Son of God in a great and extensive way; and it is important that we should see the bearing of eternal life upon the service of God because it is basic to it. We are reminded in the chapter we have read from 1 John of the dignified setting of life. Part has been read to convey some impression to us of the richness and dignity of the subject in the positioning of the life in the Son. Then the matter too of the witness in ourselves, "He that believes on the Son of God has the witness in himself," @1 John 5: 10, is an important thing because it brings us to what we *have*, what there is in us, which is a great matter in regard to the service of God. It is not a question of academic terms. John's ministry would help us as to something that we have arrived at in ourselves in regard to the truth, where we are in the truth and what we have arrived at as bearing on the service of God, life being essential to the service of God. Then the thought of quickening, the side of divine sovereignty in @John 5, which gives us an extensive view of the great range of divine operations, having in mind that we should be quickened in view our part in life, the service of God being in mind. In @John 17 the last verse bears on the assembly as the vessel of the service of God. The Lord Jesus says, "that
{92}
the love with which thou has loved me may be in them and *I* in them," @John 17: 26. What would be next the Lord's heart would be what we have in @Hebrews 2 in relation to that statement in @John 17, "in the midst of the assembly will I sing thy praises," (or hymn thee), @Hebrews 2: 12. Then the final reference in @John 20 is to our association with the Son of God in these marvellous relationships which are implied in His message through Mary to His brethren, "my Father, and your Father, and to my God, and your God," @John 20: 17.
P.R.P. Would it be right to link @Romans 8, the Spirit witnessing with our spirits, with this thought of the witness in ourselves?
S.McC. It would. The witness in that way is linked with the Spirit, "He that believes on the Son of God has the witness in himself," showing the great advantage of having the Spirit. As having the Spirit we have a definite means within ourselves of arriving at where we are in relation to the truth, so that the truth is not just in terms as they have it around us in creed or in ceremony.
G.J.G. You spoke of the thought of the service of God linked on with eternal life and the Spirit's workings within us and the power within us. Do we not experience when together in the service of God that we are carried along in the stream, and should we take account of that in this connection?
S.McC. Yes, I should think so. It involves a living state of things, and we have often noticed that sometimes we are carried beyond our measure in the service of God, no doubt, because of that current which underlies and enters into the service of God in the thought of life and eternal life.
{93}
R.M.Y. Is there a difference between life and eternal life in this connection?
S.McC. Eternal life and life are sometimes alluded to in a synonymous way in different settings. "And this life is in his Son," @1 John 5: 11 would be an allusion to eternal life, the great objective realm and environment in which the life is seen, "that God has given to us eternal life; and this *life is in his Son*." It is not exactly what is in *us*, but "this life is in *his Son*," -- the positioning of the life, eternal life viewed in that objective way. In @John 5 life is viewed as affecting us subjectively; the subject of life in relation to quickening is before us and its subjective effect upon us. We are made to live.
H.J.M. In relation to being carried in the living current, would @Ezekiel 47 bear on that; the waters going out from under the house, the extent of them, the increasing depth of them and growth in relation to them?
S.McC. That is a good illustration of it in @Ezekiel 47. I think we should know something about this in the service of God, the bearing of life upon it, so that we are spiritually fluid in the service of God. It would help us and save us from rigidity and running the service of God into definite moulds. If some reference is made, it may be by a young brother, to something that is out of keeping, as some of us may think, with the light that governs the position at the moment, we are not upset by it, but we flow into the matter, in the power of life, and the thing is carried along in a fluid way.
H.J.M. When Ezekiel returned along the river he found a lot that was not there at his first movement. Would that bear on it too?
S.McC. Exactly. Mr. Taylor was once asked, in
{94}
regard to the covenant, why he referred to it now in the way in which he did, in relation to what he had said about it before. He referred them to that chapter in Ezekiel, where Ezekiel saw some things when he returned that he had never seen before, showing that Christianity involves life, and it is especially important to see it in the service of God that we must have *a living* state of things.
J.D. And John writes that they may *know*. Is the emphasis there, "that ye may *know* that ye have eternal life"? Is that not necessary in the service of God?
S.McC. Well it is, "that ye may *know*." It is a question of knowledge. And we have the means of arriving at where we are in the truth. Sometimes we allow our minds to get into a sea of mixed thoughts and we do not know where we are. But we want to make room for the Spirit because we have a means of arriving at where we are in the truth as having the Spirit, having the witness in ourselves, not in somebody else.
J.D. Would the word in @John 4: 14 help? "*In him* a fountain of water, springing up into eternal life."
S.McC. Showing how eternal life is basic to the service of God in @John 4. All around us we see how life is missing.
E.B.McC. It says, "And it is the Spirit that bears witness, for the Spirit is the truth," @1 John 5: 6. Further down it says that God bears witness. Is the Spirit, God there? Is that the thought?
S.McC. "If we receive the witness of men, the witness of God is greater. For this is the witness of God which he has witnessed concerning His Son." Is that the verse you are alluding to?
E.B.McC. Yes. Is that the Spirit there, because it says
{95}
up above that it is the Spirit that bears witness to the truth?
S.McC. Yes. The Spirit is God. We always have to keep that in mind, just in the same way that John reminds us that the Lord Jesus is God.
E.B.McC. The truth is all that has come out, is it not, from the days of 130 years ago by the Spirit, and we are to be familiar with it and know it? Is that right? the right hand of God; commensurate with that down here the Spirit is the truth subjectively in the saints. The emphasis on the water in this section -- the water and the blood -- is important because we cannot have the service of God rightly without a purified state of soul, and that is all involved in the teaching here; the great importance of it must be laid hold of if we are to enjoy life and have our part in the service of God; as Hezekiah says, "The living, the living, he shall praise thee, as I this day," @Isaiah 38: 19. If we are to have part in that, it necessitates the maintenance of the water side with us, a purified state of soul.
P.B. Is the thought of the Son quickening whomsoever He will a further thought than just receiving of the Spirit?
S.McC. Yes, we have to view the truth in that way in its parts to get the full value and bearing of any feature of the truth at a given time. The quickening, as we have it in @John 5 and @Ephesians 2 in relation to the saints of the assembly will not be known by any other family in the same way as it is known by the assembly. It is linked with the presence of the Spirit in us.
G.H.W-n. Is this the aspect of the service of God towards us, while in @John 20 it is God-ward?
S.McC. Well, we are thinking of what underlies the service of God and our part in it. Eternal life is
{96}
essential to the service of God. I am thinking of serving God in the assembly; eternal life is essential and basic to it.
S.E.E. Would anything outside of that be of the character of dead works referred to in @Hebrews 9? The apostle refers to their conscience being purified "from dead works to worship the living God," @Hebrews 9: 14.
S.McC. Yes, that would bear upon it. The service of God is a good deal before us in the epistle to the Hebrews, and it is a great matter that the service of God should be characterised by what is living. There is something so attractive about life. It is such a contrast to dead theology, dead creed and ceremony. So that this thought of eternal life being basic to the service of God, is most important.
S.E.E. Would it not impart a spontaneity and a buoyancy in the service which is sometimes lacking with us?
S.McC. That is what one is thinking of. If we are relying just on mere outlines of the truth and mere terms in themselves without the enjoyment of life, as we have it here, we shall lack in this buoyancy. It is not that we set aside the light that governs the position; it is important that the service of God is regulated by light (which governs the position) whatever feature of it we are engaged with.
Rem. The knowledge of the Son of God is so important -- "He that has the Son has life," @1 John 5: 12.
S.McC. Yes. The knowledge of the Son of God -- the liberty of Christianity is bound up with it. One of the great features in the service of God is the matter of liberty. You will remember how it is stressed in @2 Corinthians 3. Even the authority of the Lord Jesus and the authority of the Spirit are brought to bear upon the matter of liberty in regard to the service of God.
{97}
W.C.B. Does the expression, "He that has the Son has life," mean that the Son is held in our affections in that way?
S.McC. Yes. In Colossians He is said to *be* our life. A remarkable thing that; that the Person of Christ is so laid hold of in the assembly that He becomes our very life.
H.J.M. Would @1 Chronicles 25 bear on what you have in mind -- the matter of harps and lutes and cymbals? While the chapter is full of the thought of instruction, the thought of affection and sonship and the spirit of fathers, all enter into it.
S.McC. The whole of that section is suggestive in regard to the service of God. The great line of demarcation in regard to what is real and what is false around us lies in regard to this matter of life, and it of just a matter of doctrine. It involves doctrine, but "He that believes on the Son of God has the witness in himself," is more than doctrine.
V.T.S. I was thinking of that man in the early chapter of Acts that Peter helped. He was walking and leaping and praising God. He had not been converted very long, had he?
S.McC. No. He is a remarkable man. He understands the principle of Christianity; that life, as it is understood rightly in Christianity in relation to our links with Christ, is enjoyed on the principle of nearness -- contact with the Person not on the principle of distance, so that he *held* Peter and John.
J.N.G. When you refer to this verse as to witness in himself, is it a question of our enjoyment really of the knowledge of the Son of God?
S.McC. Yes. It is helpful for the younger ones to understand this verse, because we all know -- we might as well be simple about it -- that sometimes we just
{98}
wonder where we are in regard to the truth, what we have arrived at and where we stand. It is important that we should revert to this great fact that we have the Spirit. We have a determinate means of arriving at where we are in the truth, not through a keen mental faculty in reading a book of the ministry, but where we are in the truth through the help of the Spirit.
S.E.E. Would having the Son, and thus having life, mean that we hold it objectively but would having the witness in ourselves mean that we have it substantially? It refers to the life being *in Him*, "and this life is in his Son."
S.McC. Well, the witness in ourselves stresses the inward subjective side. When it says in verse 12, "He that has the Son has life," it is not just light. That *is* substantial. "And this is the witness, that God has given to us eternal life; and this life is in his Son. He that has the Son *has* life," is written to impress us with the richness of the subject, the positioning of it where nothing here can interfere with it. It is beyond the reach of things here, beyond the power of evil here. "God has given to us eternal life; and this life *is in his Son*." That is the heavenly exalted position of it. It is not exactly said to be in heaven, although it is a heavenly reference. It is said to be "in his Son"; in that Person.
G.C.L. Would a clear line of demarcation be seen in verse 19? "We know that we are of God, and the whole world lies in the wicked one." Then there is a substantial stabilising verse following, "And we know that the Son of God has come, and has given us an understanding that we should know him that is true; and we are in Him that is true, in his Son Jesus Christ. He is the true God and eternal life."
S.McC. All that impresses you in regard to this
{99}
matter of where we are in the truth, because there is so much around that is spurious, so much too that the enemy would use to entrench upon our joy and our happiness in relation to our links with divine Persons. But John's ministry would help us basically as to where we are. This is another touch, "the Son of God has come, and has given us an understanding." It is a question of an understanding here; "that we should know him that is true; and we are in him that is true, in his Son Jesus Christ. He is the true God and eternal life."
A.J.W. "These things have I written to you that ye may know that ye have eternal life," chapter 5: 13. When we come to the point of knowing it, it takes us beyond what is written.
S.McC. Yes, it means, as the note says, "conscious knowledge"; not only what is in the Scriptures, but that we should have the conscious knowledge of the thing. They say in certain systems of teaching around us that if you have any difficulty, to take the passage of the Scripture and stand on it, but that does not give you the thing in itself, for we have to understand the place of the Spirit in relation to our enjoyment of the truth.
J.D. Would you say a word as to believing; "He that believes"?
S.McC. It is a matter of faith. John is stressing faith. He says, "Who is he that gets the victory over the world, but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God?" verse 5. He begins first of all by saying, "Every one that believes that Jesus is the Christ is begotten of God," verse 1. That is one side, linked with the moral side, but when we come to verse 5 and the victory over the world, it is a question of the spiritual side; "he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God." And all these elements that are brought forward in the water and the
{100}
blood, and then the reference to the witness of the Spirit, are to help us in regard to a full clearance in view of our enjoyment of life in all its richness as presented in this passage here; this life that is in God's Son, that exalted position.
H.W. We are impressed with the immensity of the position, the Christian's position. He not only takes his bearings from Christ on high, but he can take his soundings and find out where he is. If we were more deeply impressed with the wealth of the position, we would be preserved in the truth, as John says, "walking in truth." We sometimes overlook how rich this position is for us.
S.McC. How important it is, especially for the younger brethren, that they should understand the force of this passage, "He that believes on the Son of God has the witness in himself." Oftentimes, as you say, we need help in taking soundings. John's ministry helps us in that, so that we should get our bearings in the truth.
J.P-s-n. The Spirit really helps us in the maintenance, of the line of faith, does He? The Lord says as a result of the teaching in regard to the sending of the Spirit in @John 14, "because *I* live *ye* also shall live. In that day ye shall know that I am in my Father, and ye in me, and I in you," @John 14: 19, 20. The Spirit would maintain us livingly in the enjoyment of this.
S.McC. There you have life in its highest aspect in John's gospel; that is, life operatively. Eternal life is not so much life operatively; it is life as linked with an objective environment where God is known. But in @John 14 and in @John 6 reference is made to life operatively in the saints and that is effective through our nearness to Christ: "because I live ye also shall live." Our life is bound up with His life.
R.H.G. Does believing that Jesus is the Son of God
{101}
bring us consciously into a vast system of glory which centres in Him?
S.McC. That is what we want to get hold of. Faith is a great matter in this realm. There are two great resources in Christianity, faith and the Spirit, and, speaking reverently, we are to learn how to use these resources. It is a great matter that we should employ faith, draw upon faith, in regard to the richness and dignity of this realm that John would impress our minds with, and that is linked with God's Son.
C.E.J. Would Paul and Silas in prison have this in their hearts when they sang praises to God?
S.McC. You could see how it was substantially with them, so that they were reigning in life, as it says in @Romans 5. I think we all need help in that, I know I do, as to *reigning in life*, so that our businesses are not on the top of us. We are on the top of our businesses, and our circumstances, reigning in life. That is what Paul and Silas were doing.
D.J.M. Does the Spirit keep faith active in our souls?
S.McC. His service would be constantly directed towards that. Now in @John 5 we should be impressed with the immensity of the operations that are before us here and the prime place that the voice of the Son of God has. It says, "Verily, verily, I say unto you, that an hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear *the voice of the Son of God*, and they that have heard shall live." This is a remarkable expression "the voice of the Son of God." How much would enter into that voice! And it is a great thing that it should be heard. It says, "they that have heard shall live."
H.J.M. Where is that voice heard?
S.McC. In Christianity.
H.J.M. I am sure of that indeed. Mr. Raven has referred it to the greatness of what has been expressed in the death of the Son of God.
{102}
S.McC. There has been a remarkable touch in that. Christianity is characterised in its uniqueness by what is imparted through the voice of the Son of God.
F.R.G. Does it link with "For the Father loves the Son." The voice of the Son of God is linked with love and the Father's love to our souls.
S.McC. This whole realm, as we were noticing in Palmerston North the other day, is radiant with divine affection. We have the radiation of divine affection here. "For the Father loves the Son and shews him all things which he himself does." We want to be drawn over to this, to see the prime matter that divine Persons have in hand. The Father is operating, the Son operating; the Spirit too is operating, as in the next chapter, the Spirit quickens. The service of God is in mind.
D.J.M. You said earlier that the assembly understands quickening as no other family. Would you explain that please?
S.McC. Well, because of the inward character of it at the present time, and because we have the Spirit in a way which no other family will have the Spirit. While the Spirit is not alluded to here, this would contemplate the presence of the Spirit in the saints.
D.J.M. And would Paul's word come in, "has quickened us with the Christ," @Ephesians 2: 5. Would that be unique to the assembly?
S.McC. Exactly. @Ephesians 2 and @John 5 go together, in that the assembly is the particular and peculiar subject of these sovereign operations. Israel will be quickened in a national way, as we know from the Scriptures, especially Ezekiel, but not in the same way that the saints of the assembly know quickening.
J.N.G. What is quickening? Is it a present actual thing in the soul? It is not linked with faith, is it?
S.McC. No. Resurrection is linked with faith. We
{103}
are to notice the difference. Quickening is linked with the voice of the Son of God and the presence of the Spirit, but resurrection is linked with faith. If we were to go out into the world and tell people that we were raised, they would think we were foolish, because we are still in our bodies. Resurrection is a faith matter, but quickening is not a faith matter. Quickening is an actual divine operation which affects our souls and makes us to live through the Spirit which indwells us. It is an actual matter.
R.M.Y. Is it something more than new birth?
S.McC. It is not the line of new birth here. We get things in embryo and principle in new birth. But the quickening as we have it here contemplates the presence of the Spirit as received.
P.B. So the quickening would involve the voice of the Son of God. It would involve a definite impression of Christ, the Son of God, and would be power in the soul.
S.McC. Well it is, it is power in the soul. Think of the power that it will wield when the Lord comes, when all that are in their graves, the dead in Christ, shall be raised first. Think of the power of that voice! Think of it now morally and spiritually in the saints of the assembly, so that we are made to live! It is an actual substantial fact, that we are made to live spiritually.
J.D. Is it important, "an hour is coming, and now is"? We have that same word in chapter 4, "But the hour is coming and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and truth," @John 4: 23.
S.McC. Yes, there would be a link in that way. We know what the voice of the Son of God is now; "and they that have heard shall live."
C.E.J. Is there any link with what Paul says at his conversion and what Ananias said to him? "The God
{104}
of our fathers has chosen thee beforehand to know, his will, and to see the just one, and to hear a voice out of His mouth," @Acts 22: 14. Paul hearing a voice out of His mouth, was so affected that he got the light of the Son of God in his soul and the light of another world.
S.McC. That is interesting, because he was so affected in all his ministry by this matter of the Son of God.
D.J.M. Does quickening involve our affections, that we are made to live in our affections?
S.McC. Yes. We are made to live in relation to divine affections. It involves the affections. In the new birth we are not exactly made to live in the divine nature. It is not a question of nature so much: "That which is born of the Spirit *is spirit*," @John 3: 6. It is the thing in its element and character. But when we come to quickening, we come to what stands related to a state of death. We are quickened out of a state of death, made to live. New birth is not being quickened out of a state of death. New birth is a sovereign act of the Spirit upon a responsible person. Quickening is not presented in the same way.
A.J.W. Would that be seen in @Romans 8: 10, 11, the operation of the Spirit there?
S.McC. Of course the quickening there is alluding to a future time, the time of the rapture. When the Lord shall come, the Spirit will have the last touch in relation to our bodies. He will quicken these mortal bodies. He will not take us to heaven. The Lord will do that. But the Spirit with regard to us who are living and remain, will have that last touch in regard to our bodies here. Of course the Lord comes in and He transforms our bodies like unto His own body of glory, but the Spirit has that definite touch in @Romans 8: 9 at the moment of the translation.
J.P. In Colossians we have the raising before
{105}
quickening, as in John. In Ephesians the quickening precedes the raising: "has quickened us with the Christ ... and has raised us up together."
S.McC. It helps us to see the truth in its parts and the context in which it appears and the prime matter in hand. In Colossians and in John the resurrection is a prime matter; it goes on to speak of the resurrection. Resurrection seems to be the greater thought on the public side in Colossians and in @John 5, but quickening is the greater thought in @Ephesians 2.
R.H.G. Is quickening essential for us to have our part livingly in sonship?
S.McC. You mean as to our enjoyment of our part in the divine realm, because we are sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus, not by quickening. But then when you come to the state linked with sonship, it contemplates the presence of the Spirit and the state that is formed suited to that.
R.H.G. I was thinking particularly of our part in the service of God.
S.McC. Yes exactly.
D.J.M. Raised up in Ephesians goes further than resurrection, does it not?
S.McC. Yes, it takes us to ascension in Ephesians. The platform of the assembly's position is not resurrection, it is ascension. But on the public side, resurrection is the greatest witness to the power of God. Quickening, as we are referring to it has to do with the inward, spiritual, heavenly line; but resurrection has to do with the public testimony of God.
C.H.G. Would you say a little more as to the connection of quickening with the divine nature?
S.McC. It is a sovereign divine act. It is a question of what divine Persons are doing on this high elevated level, having in mind not exactly our relief. That is not the point. It is a question of the divine pleasure, a
{106}
question of the service of God, and for this reason quickening is needed, for this is not to be in terms, it is to be in life, quickening having that in mind. Peter speaks of the saints as partakers of the divine nature.
H.J.M. In @John 5 it finds expression in honouring the Son and honouring the Father.
S.McC. It is an interesting thing how that comes in here, that while the Son is presented in a subordinate way in regard to the operations, yet His equality is stressed. It says, "that all may honour the Son, even as they honour the Father." John has a way of reminding us in the presence of mediatorial operations that we are never to forget the co-equality of the Son with the Father.
Ques. Would verse 24 be the result of abiding in Christ?
S.McC. "Verily, verily, I say unto you, that he that hears my word, and believes him that has sent me, has life eternal." That is, that is the characteristic of the person who has eternal life. He hears Christ's word and believes Him that has sent Him. That character of person has life eternal "and does not come unto judgment, but is passed out of death into life." So that the service of God involves a sphere of life, and not only involves a sphere of life, but it involves persons quickened in that life, made to live in that life, so as to serve God suitably.
C.P.P. Does the question of life underlie the enjoyment of relationships as we move on in our minds to the service?
S.McC. It enters into our part in the relationships: quickening affecting us subjectively, so that life in this way is a very real matter spiritually. Resurrection is a faith matter. It is what we arrive at by faith, "raised with him through faith of the working of God," @Colossians 2: 12.
{107}
That is a matter of faith. But quickening is a real matter in @John 5 that affects us spiritually.
G.J.G. Are we to give ourselves over to these divine operations and understand their working in us? The words "Verily, verily," come in three times very close together here, as if we are to understand that this great matter is the work of divine Persons.
S.McC. These words "Verily, verily" are important. As we have been taught, the epistles are primary; the gospels are not primary, they are confirmatory. We could never establish Christianity from the gospels. The gospels extend beyond our dispensation. They involve the world to come. The epistles are dealing with Christianity; that is, Christ at the right hand of God and the Spirit down here in relation to which Christianity is established. We come back through the epistles into the gospels, and John is the gospel that we should begin with, and the gospels confirm us in what is set out in the epistles, these "verilys" bearing on it.
C.D. Is Hezekiah an example of one who is quickened? He says, "Thou hast recovered me, and made me to live," @Isaiah 38: 16. Then he goes on to say, "The living, the living, he shall praise thee, as I this day ... And we will play upon my stringed instruments all the days of our life, in the house of Jehovah," verses 19, 20. I was thinking of what you were saying as to the living having part in the service of God.
S.McC. It is a beautiful portion in Isaiah, as if to impress us with Hezekiah's experience, because that is what it is. It is "The writing of Hezekiah king of Judah, when he had been sick and had recovered from his sickness," @Isaiah 38: 9. It is what is experimental, and the Psalms are filled with it; some of the prophets too help us as to it. Hezekiah's writing is full of the thought of what is experimental; that is, what we really arrive at in ourselves in relation to the service of God.
{108}
D.C.W. In @John 5: 21 it speaks of the Father raising the dead and quickening them and "the Son also quickens whom he will." Would you say something about that in relation to its bearing on the service of God?
S.McC. And the next chapter, if we might just refer to it, verse 63, "It is the Spirit which quickens, the flesh profits nothing." We can see what a prime matter this quickening is, that it is linked with every one of the Persons of the Godhead -- the Father, the Son and the Spirit. They are all in the matter of quickening.
R.M.Y. Is there any responsibility on our side? I think we all yearn for more buoyancy and more liberty in the service, but we cannot achieve our own quickening, can we?
S.McC. No, the quickening is a matter of divine sovereignty. Verse 25, "Verily, verily, I say unto you, that an hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that have heard shall live," involves our links with the Son of God, hearing His voice, like the man in @John 9. He arrived at the truth of the Son of God, as we had in @1 John 5, "Who is he that gets the victory over the world, but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God?"
G.J.D. Does it involve spiritual perception as to the movements of the Lord amongst us. We sing the hymn, "We live of Thee, we've heard Thy quick'ning voice." (`137:3) Is it a matter of spiritual sensibilities in the service to hear that voice?
S.McC. Exactly. Think of the greatness of it! How it draws us out of everything here! Some of J.N.D.¬s hymns are filled with the thought of it. The Son of God is linked with another world. It speaks later of those that "shall *go forth*; those that have practised good, to
{109}
resurrection of life, and those that have done evil, to resurrection of judgment," verse 29. It is linked with the moral side there, the side of responsibility.
C.P.P. Is it right to say that quickening is a historical matter and also a present experience to be known by us as we go along?
S.McC. The enjoyment of it would be a constant matter with us. Quickening is a sovereign action. It is not exactly viewed in relation to what is chronological, either here, or in @Ephesians 2. In @Ephesians 2 quickening does not stand related to a particular moment of time. It is presented in relation to the totality of the work of God from Pentecost to the rapture, embracing every bit of the work of God.
W.H.G. Is verse 24, inserted between the previous verses dealing with the sovereign side, to give us our side in connection with faith?
S.McC. Yes, that is it, the characteristics of the person who comes into the gain of life. He hears Christ's word and believes Him that has sent Him.
J.D. Would the quickening be that the Persons of the Godhead are really operating in love in view of this?
S.McC. Love is linked with the whole matter. It is a question of our being made to live in relation to divine affections. We are in a realm of love. It is not only that we are arbitrarily brought into it by a divine operation, but we are affected constitutionally, affected spiritually, so that we live in it. We are at home in the presence of divine love.
R.C.R. So is the Lord in @John 17 asking to be glorified that He may give the saints eternal life, in view of their part in the service of God, that God may be glorified?
S.McC. That is the thing that is in mind. It is a great extensive realm in @John 17 again, just as in @John 5,
{110}
but it is particularly made to bear upon the saints of the assembly, just as in @John 17: 2 the millennium would be in mind, the world to come. But the chapter resolves in its teaching into the saints of the assembly, and the particular application of the service of Christ to the saints of the assembly, as it says, "Father, the hour is come; glorify thy Son, that thy Son may glorify thee; as thou has given him authority over all flesh, that as to all that thou hast given to him, he should give them life eternal. And this is the eternal life, that they should know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou has sent." Then He proceeds to speak of the saints of the assembly, the prime matter of the moment.
R.C.R. "Glorify thy Son, that thy Son may glorify thee." Is "glorifying thee" through assembly? Does He give us eternal life to bring us into this, to glorify the Father?
S.McC. "Father, the hour is come; glorify thy Son, that thy Son may glorify thee." We are to be reminded in the closing chapters of John's gospel of this realm of glory. The service of God involves glory. You will remember in @John 13 the Lord says in verse 31, "Now is the Son of man glorified" -- alluding to the cross -- "and God is glorified in him," that is, moral glory linked with the cross, the going into death. And then, "If God be glorified in him, God also shall glorify him in himself" -- that is, in God -- "and shall glorify him *immediately*." The "immediately" is pointing to the greatness of the present time of the assembly, that it is not deferred till the millennium. There will be wonderful glory in the millennium in regard to Christ and the administration, but the glory is not deferred. He glorifies Him immediately, that is the present time in the assembly.
C.B.S. As to that matter of glory, and what you have
{111}
been saying as to quickening, would you mind saying a word now as bearing on the service of God as to change according to @2 Corinthians 3?
S.McC. It is very real. 'Metamorphose,' the word used in @2 Corinthians 3, is a very strong word, not very often used. Once or twice again it is used, and it means a substantial change, that this matter of "from glory to glory" is not light exactly; it is not that a mere picture passes before our eyes at one section, then another picture passes before our eyes at another section. It is what the saints are substantially as affected by the service of the Lord Spirit.
@John 17: 26 has in mind the time of the assembly. It says in that verse, "That the love with which thou hast loved me may be in them and *I* in them." That is, the Lord is thinking of the greatness of the assembly as the vessel of the service of God, all the knowledge linked with Himself bearing upon it in all its distinctiveness.
H.J.M. Does that bear on @Ephesians 3, following the glad tidings of the unsearchable riches of the Christ, the administration of the mystery, then Paul's great prayer as to the Father and the Spirit, Christ dwelling in our hearts by faith, and then glory in the assembly?
S.McC. Exactly, so that the magnitude of these things is to affect us.
V.T.S. In this connection of glorifying Him immediately and the Son of God being glorified, would you say a little about its connection with worship?
S.McC. It is to bring out the richness of the assembly realm; that it is not just a realm where we are getting through as supported in wilderness surroundings by the exercise arbitrarily of divine support, but the assembly is a realm of glory, where divine Persons are operating in glory, both in regard to Christ and in regard to the saints themselves. The assembly realm affords the place
{112}
for the immediate glorification of Christ before the millennium is introduced. That is the force of the word "immediately."
S.E.E. So that the climax of love is reached in glory?
S.McC. Exactly. "That the love with which thou hast loved me may be in them and I in them." This involves a glorious state of things, but a state of things too in life, eternal life underlying the whole position, and in which we are to be marked by spiritual fluidness in the service of God. That is the great feature of life; so that we do not get into rigidity, crystallisation, in regard to terms in the service of God.
V.T.S. I had that partly in mind when I was speaking of worship. Are the glories of Christ to come into expression at any time in the service when the Lord is before us, and worship?
S.McC. Anything that conveys a ray of His glory should elicit an Amen from our hearts and souls. Of course we must keep in mind that we are regulated by the light that governs the position, but we should not be easily deflected by something that we think refers to what is outside the immediate range of things that is engaging us. There is need for spiritual fluidness.
Ques. Can we be fluid in regard to His glories as Man and His glories as God? We do not need to separate them by a long pause, they can run one into the other?
S.McC. Well, the Lord never changes personally. There would be liberty to refer to Him as God at any time, because the Person is the same Person. What He became has never altered what He was. He is always the same, unchanged and unchangeable, and a passing allusion to the greatness of His Person is not out of keeping at any time. The difficulty once arose in America as to giving out Hymn 181 after the Lord's supper. It
{113}
was thought by some that that was out of keeping, but Mr. Taylor insisted that it was quite in keeping, but we must always remember who the Lord is personally. While He is before us as Man, that does not in any sense change what He is personally; He is the same Person, unchanged and unchangeable. The same applies to the Spirit; the Spirit is the same as to His Person in the subordinate place He has taken as He is in the abstract relations of Deity; They have changed as to outward form and attitude, but the Persons are the same.
F.R.G. So in manhood, as Man He is still the Object of worship?
S.McC. Certainly, because it is a divine Person who is Man; it is an important thing to keep the truth in balance. Some of us were referring yesterday to the matter of the Lord's death; we must be careful not to say that He died *only* as to His body; that *Person* died. It is important that we should keep that in mind or we weaken the whole structure of the atonement. *That* Person died! A divine Person in manhood.
J.P. It is who He is in His Person in manhood really that induces worship.
S.McC. That is really the ground on which we *do* worship Him, do homage to Him, because of who He is personally.
Now in @John 20 we do not get sonship alluded to directly, but indirectly, by implication, both in Christ and in the saints. Jesus says to Mary, "Touch me not, for I have not yet ascended to my Father; but go to my brethren and say to them, I ascend to my Father, and your Father, and to my God, and your God." We come to the great end in the service of God where we enjoy as having come into the knowledge of the Son of God, the uniqueness of our links with Him associated with Him as His brethren in relation to His Father and our Father and His God and ours.
{114}
G.H.W. The Lord links His knowledge of the Father at the end of chapter 17 with their knowledge of Him as the sent One, "but I have known thee, and these have known that thou hast sent me," verse 25.
S.McC. Yes, the Lord says, "and the world has not known thee, but *I* have known thee." He is presenting the contrast in Himself, then He links the saints on and says, "These have known that thou hast sent me." So the Lord Jesus refers earlier in the gospel to, "We speak that which we *know*," chapter 3: 11. That is, we belong to a class of persons who know things. The world does not know, but He says, "*I* have known thee, and these have known that thou has sent me." It is a wonderful thing to be in that range of knowledge.
J.N.G. There are three appellations used in @John 17 as to the Father by the Lord. He says, Father, Holy Father, and Righteous Father. They are not terms which we generally employ. Should they be unique to the Lord Jesus or should we have liberty to employ them?
S.McC. Mr. Darby had liberty in his hymns, "O Holy Father" is one of his expressions. I should certainly think we could use that if we had the liberty to use it, although what we are to be impressed with here is the intelligence of the Son of God in speaking to the Father in this way. His intelligence and knowledge would be unique. And in @John 20 we should see how the liberty of Christianity as bound up with the knowledge of the Son of God, involves that we should appreciate and enjoy these wonderful relationship in which we are associated with Christ on the heavenly line.
H.E. If it is not holding you up, you referred to the Person going into death. What constitutes the Person please?
{115}
S.McC. Well, what can we say about that, because no one knows the Son, but the Father.
H.E. What had you in mind in stressing that? I was thinking of His Spirit being committed into the hands of the Father.
S.McC. We must be careful in speaking of the Son and His Person lest we should pry into what is beyond us. What I said was that we must not weaken the atonement in implying that He *only* died as to His body. That *Person* died. We must keep that in mind, because the whole structure of the atonement rests on that, from the cross right through to the resurrection. It rests on that Person, a divine Person in manhood and what he has done.
C.P.P. So the word was "Come, see the place where *the Lord* lay," @Matthew 28: 6.
S.McC. The grave was a real thing to the Lord, a real experience. We must not attempt to define just how He could be there and how He could be in another position. We have to beware lest we should intrude into what is beyond us. He said to the thief, "Today shalt thou be with me in paradise," @Luke 23: 43. The Lord left the body, as the believer leaves the body at dissolution. But we must remember that with the Lord Jesus the grave was a vicarious matter. The burial was a vicarious matter. It was an essential part of the atonement. The Lord was abandoned, and the answer to it is in resurrection. There was no answer publicly till the resurrection.
C.P.P. And in the resurrection it was the Person who was raised. *He* was raised.
S.McC. Exactly, the glory of the Father entered into it. It speaks of the "pains of death" in @Acts 2, a remarkable thing. What can we say about it? We cannot say just how long it was, but there was some experience there as the Lord took His life again, and
{116}
the pains of death were loosed. What can we say about the infiniteness of these matters involving that Person?
F.R.G. So that Paul in speaking of the glad tidings in @1 Corinthians 15: 3, 4 speaks of how "Christ died for our sins, according to the scriptures; and that he was buried; and that he was raised the third day, according to the scriptures."
S.McC. As to the sufferings of Christ on the cross and the grave the Lord entered into the grave in all its reality, but it is a question of what is negative and passive in that relation.
S.E.E. Do we understand from what you have said that the sufferings of Christ terminated at the cross and did not enter into the grave?
S.McC. It is important to keep in mind how Scripture views the matter, and publicly and positively the sufferings of Christ are linked with the cross, but we have to take account of the experience of the grave and burial in a passive way as the counterpart to the abandonment. The first cry the Lord raised, "It is finished," meant that the dealing with sin and sins was completed. But the second cry has to do with His entering death and vicariously terminating not the sin and the sins, but the *man* that sinned.
S.E.E. One would be a cry of anguish, would it not, but the other a cry of power?
S.McC. Both were cries of power. The first cry has to do with the exhausting of the judgment of God, bringing out the greatness of the Person that was there, that He exhausted the judgment of God in regard to the matter of sin and sins.
E.B.McC. Did He do that as Man or as God, on the cross? It has been said that God died on the cross, but I do not like the term at all.
S.McC. We are speaking of a Divine Person in manhood.
{117}
We cannot put the Lord into the place of active Deity at the cross. That leads to confusion. We must be very careful in these holy matters and holy subjects that we do not go beyond what we are intended. In all that has come up and what is said now, the importance is to see that the whole work of the atonement involved the abandonment, His death and burial, and resurrection. The Lord was heard in resurrection. He cried, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" His cry was answered in the resurrection, according to @Psalm 22; from the horns of the unicorn He was heard.
E.S.T. Do you suggest that the abandonment extended through the three days and three nights in the grave?
S.McC. No, I said it is the counterpart. The abandonment finished at the end of the three hours. The sense of the relationship was resumed, so that He says, "Father, into thy hands I commit my spirit." The relationship itself was not broken, but all *conscious sense* of the relationship was broken, so that at the end of the three hours it is resumed. He says, "Father; into thy hands I commit my spirit." But on the vicarious side, in regard to us, the burial is an essential counterpart to the abandonment in that the sinner is put out of sight. Publicly the answer to the forsaking is in resurrection.
F.R.G. Death would directly refer to the reality of His manhood, would it?
S.McC. Yes. It is a divine Person in manhood. The experience of death to Him as Man, in that He laid down His life in relation to one condition, and He took His life in relation to a new condition, was a real experience, an essential experience on our account, not on His own account. It would be blasphemy to think of it in that way. It was vicarious because of us.
D.J.M. He was put to death as to His life in flesh.
{118}
THE OVERCOMER IN RELATION TO GOVERNMENT (1)
@Revelation 3: 7 -- 22
S.McC. The thought in mind in suggesting this passage is in relation to the idea of the overcomer and the thoughts of government that come out in relation to the overcomer, but there are one or two things that we may take notice of in the word to each of these assemblies. It is very interesting that so much should be made of the idea of government in the two final phases of church history which run together, in Philadelphia and Laodicea. The allusions to the temple of God and the city of God are distinct allusions to the idea of government, for the temple was the centre of all government of old in Jerusalem, as it will be in the world to come. Then there is the thought of the throne and the promise to the overcomer in the Laodicean position. "He that overcomes, to him will I give to sit with me in my throne; as I also have overcome, and have sat down with my Father in his throne."
The references to the overcomer in these passages would help us to understand the dignity of divine administration and divine government. Preceding this is the word to the angel of the assembly in Sardis, pointing us to the time of the Reformation and what has been since that time, where the Spirit of God is stressed to begin with. No doubt the basis of the Reformation was good and many godly men had part in it, and God was with certain features of the movement to a large extent, but it degenerated into the employment of the human mind and human strength, and the Spirit of God and the resources linked with the Spirit were set on one side. Therefore we get conditions as they are in the public body around us.
{119}
But when we come to Philadelphia, stress is laid on the dignified and refined features of divine administration, in the allusion to Christ as having the key of David, and the promise to the overcomer. "And to the angel of the assembly in Philadelphia write: These things saith the holy, the true; he that has the key of David, he who opens and no one shall shut, and shuts and no one shall open."
In the suggestions of "the Holy," and "the True," and "the key of David," the Lord is indicating that the best is before us in this suggestion in relation to administration. "The Holy" and "the True" stress the moral conditions that are linked with it, and the thought of "He who opens and no one shall shut, and shuts and no one shall open" would help to establish us in regard to what the Lord has done, His service to us, so that the ground might be held in the light of that service.
H.W. These are very helpful suggestions you are bringing before us. In this matter of divine administration you have the present moment in mind?
S.McC. Yes, exactly. The fulness of the administration will work out in the world to come, but we are to understand it morally and spiritually now, for Christ in having taken His place in heaven is functioning as Man in relation to the great administration which is working out from that position. There is also the world to come, but it enters into the present moment in a particular way, the Spirit here in the assembly standing in relation to the provision of Christ on high, functioning as Man in heaven, the Centre of this great administration.
E.B.McC. It is important that the Lord says, "I know thy works"?
S.McC. It is. That is, the Lord is looking over the position here. "I know thy works." There is nothing passes His knowledge.
{120}
E.B.McC. These conditions may obtain, they may be true, but no company could claim today to be Philadelphia, would you say?
S.McC. No. That would be presumption of the highest kind and character. The Lord, as we have been taught, has nothing less in mind in what He speaks of in regard to Philadelphia than the whole assembly. We may get certain concrete expressions of the features of it in those who are walking in the truth, but the Lord has nothing less than the whole assembly in mind in this " ... and shall know that I have loved thee." He is not speaking to any particular section of the assembly but to the whole assembly.
F.R.G. "The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of the Christ?" It represents every believer who has the Spirit of God.
S.McC. Yes. The bread never includes less than all the saints. It may find practical, concrete expression in those we know and walk together with in our partaking of the one loaf, but abstractly the loaf always includes all the saints.
F.D.C. In @Isaiah 22, to which I suppose this scripture alludes, the feature of glory comes in very prominently in connection with the administration. Have you that in mind, that there should be glory in the administration today?
S.McC. Very good. Read that passage please.
F.D.C. "And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will call my servant Eliakim the son of Hilkijah; and I will clothe him with thy robe, and strengthen him with thy girdle, and I will commit thy government into his hand; and he shall be a father to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and to the house of Judah. And the key of the house of David will I lay upon his shoulder; and he shall open, and none shall shut; and he shall shut, and none shall open. And I will fasten him
{121}
as a nail in a sure place; and he shall be for a throne of glory to his father's house, the offspring and the issue, all the small vessels, as well the vessels of cups as all the vessels of flagons." @Isaiah 22: 20 -- 24.
S.McC. We have a remarkable reference there to the character of the administration that is suggested here. "He that has the key of David" involves glory, and all right administration according to God involves glory, and involves the making room for all that there is among the saints. In that verse reference is made to the small vessels as well as the large. Where you get administration working out according to God, there is room made for every bit of the work of God among the saints. It would be the heavenly side that would be stressed, so that the key of David opens up the best.
H.W. Would you say that there is recovery in a large measure to original conditions, Ephesian conditions, seen in Philadelphia?
S.McC. Yes. The thought of David enters into Ephesians. In Colossians the "Son of His love" would be an allusion to Solomon, but in Ephesians "accepted in the Beloved" is more the reference to David, and the fact that "out of heaven" is made mention of here, and the holy city which comes down out of heaven, stresses the heavenly side. It is important that we should make room for love of a heavenly character. David is the great love man of the Old Testament. He knew how to love and he knew how to be loved. His whole administration is characterised by that.
J.P-s-n. So in speaking of the matter of government he says, "The ruler among men shall be just."
S.McC. Very good. "He that has the key of David" would bring all these thoughts into our mind, and it is important that we should see the idea of justness, because where you get administration according to God working
{122}
out among the saints, it will be marked by fairness and justness.
R.J.W. The Lord says, "He who opens and no one shall shut" before "and shuts and no one shall open." Is that the divine administration of grace?
S.McC. That is it. It links with the Magna Carta suggested to us in @John 20. "Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted to them; whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained." The remission comes first, and the opening comes first.
H.W. We may not all understand your reference to the Magna Carta.
S.McC. I am alluding to what beloved Mr. Taylor said in Sydney in 1947 that @John 20 was our Magna Carta. The great idea is opening first. Remission comes first, emphasising the spirit and the grace of the dispensation. The key of David would suggest that side of things. David represents par excellence the thought of grace in the Old Testament.
E.B.McC. It was David who opened up the great praise service, which we have come into now. Would "the key of David" suggest what he unlocked and opened up?
S.McC. Yes. Where you get administration according to God working out among the saints, you will find the saints promoted in liberty in the service of God. If they are not, the question would be whether the administration is marked by the right features.
H.W. Therefore, would you say, the great importance of our studying the way the Lord presents Himself to us in each letter and being formed by it?
S.McC. Exactly. "The Holy" and "the True" is a very important reference, because a correspondence would be expected on the part of those to whom it is addressed. It is a presentation of the Lord Himself outside the features that are named in the first chapter.
{123}
Every other reference begins with something that marks the Lord as presented in the first chapter, but not when we come to Philadelphia. There seems to be something special here.
D.B.J. Would you develop that a little more, "the Holy" and "the True" and its bearing on us in administration?
S.McC. I think that where you get the Davidic side stressed, you always get correspondingly, conditions in the saints responding to it; as for instance in @Revelation 22, when the Lord says He is the Root and Offspring of David, you get immediately following "the Spirit and the bride say, Come." That is, there is a subjective answer. So it was when David overthrew Goliath, there was the subjective answer in the daughters singing and dancing with tambours, with joy, and with triangles.
F.D.C. Does it involve the testimony as well as the service of God?
S.McC. I think so. That is what one is thinking of. There is an administration of grace involved in "He that has the key of David," but linked with this is "the Holy" and "the True", stressing moral conditions among the saints, not just ecclesiastical position.
E.B.McC. Is it in mind that every fresh line of truth that comes out would call forth an answering melody and song to it? Is that why we needed a new hymn book?
S.McC. Yes, exactly. You would expect where administration is working out properly and rightly an enlargement in the service of song.
E.B.McC. We read of David's stringed instruments, and he speaks of the instruments which he had made. Would this involve our being formed in love?
S.McC. Yes exactly. There is great stress on the love side in Philadelphia. Philadelphia itself means
{124}
brotherly love, and David means the beloved. Then the Lord says in verse 9, "I will cause that they  shall know that *I have loved thee*." Even to Laodicea He mentions certain whom He loved, as if the love side is stressed in these two words.
J.P-s-n. I was wondering if you would help us so that we might have enlarged thoughts as to administration or government.
S.McC. Administration covers a very wide sphere. It underlies the service of God and enters into the matter of the gospel and the matter of the care of the saints. Careful perusal of the Old Testament will show that every great administrator was marked by a care and love for the people of God, a peculiar care in the matter of the flock, the flock being linked with every great administrator in the old Testament, Joseph, Moses, and David, they were all men who had a care for the flock.
H.K. Could we have a little help as to verse 8, " ... and hast kept my word, and hast not denied my name"?
S.McC. That shows how the Lord values the keeping of His word. It is an important matter that we should come under the influence of Christ and not let the word of man govern us, but be marked by keeping Christ's word.
"I know thy works: behold, I have set before thee an opened door which no one can shut, because thou hast a little power, and hast kept my word, and hast not denied my name." The preciousness of that Name! The renown linked with it! It comes into the great administrative gospel. @Matthew 18: 20, "For where two or three are gathered together unto my name, there am I in the midst of them." Great value is placed upon the name. Matthew is very important in that way. The Lord Jesus is the true Son of David, and Matthew mentions
{125}
Son of David before Son of Abraham, stressing the importance of the Davidic side in the working out of administration. What you find with David is the great regard he had for God's anointed and his care for such as the young man he found at Ziklag.
V.T.S. Is our strength in administrative matters dependent on these basic features being worked out in us?
S.McC. Yes. The stress is on the basic side.
H.W. Does all this help to emphasise the need of moral conditions if there is to be administration according to Paul's setting up and teaching, " ... as I ordain in every assembly"?
S.M.C. We do not depend on force or human power in administration and the maintenance of the truth, but on heavenly influence and moral power. The great point is heavenly influence and government here, the Lord having the key of David. No one had more moral power than David. David acquired moral power because of what he was. When we come to verse 12 what is specially stressed is the matter of heavenly influence and government.
F.R.G. There is a feeling in this country that we have been too much governed by rigidity instead of fluidity in relation to administrative matters.
S.McC. Well, I am sure it is important that we should see the greatness of what is in mind in regard to Philadelphia. It is a choice phase in which the Lord has peculiar delight, specially coming in over against the synagogue of Satan. The assembly is in His mind as particularly marked off over against all that is around us in the public profession.
D.B.I. Is that seen beautifully in Abigail in @1 Samuel 25?
S.McC. Abigail is a remarkable woman. She is one
{126}
of the choice ones who understand administration. She comes in with a definite supply to meet the conditions. She not only has the supply, but the spirit and grace that mark her are in keeping with the supply. The Lord would set every one of us on the line of overcoming. The overcomer in Philadelphia comes in for the best and most exalted thoughts that are in the Lord's mind. "Hold fast what thou hast, that no one take thy crown." We are to be concerned that what we have should be held.
J.B. Patience and endurance entering into the matter?
S.McC. Exactly. "I also will keep thee ... " What a promise that is!
E.B.McC. Did the keeping of His word and not denying His name come in with Mr. Darby?
S.McC. Exactly. I think the principle of it is operating all the time in this day of revival.
E.D.W. Do we get that in David, his patience is waiting for the time when God would move for him? He would not put forth his hand against the Lord's anointed.
S.McC. It is a word to us tonight that the Lord has personally given to us (see note g) an opened door which no one can shut. Not just opening the door, but *giving* us an opened door. We should all be concerned as to the blessing promised to the overcomer. While in many ways it may look forward to what is to come, the point to see is that we are to come out in features of the overcomer now. We should bring into our local gatherings these rich thoughts, this heavenly influence. We should come out in this choice Philadelphian influence now in regard to administration. "And I will write upon him the name of my God, and the name of the city of my God, the new Jerusalem "
{127}
These figures or symbols bring into our minds great richness of thought in regard to administration.
H.W. Would you be free at this juncture to say something as to Christ's God, *My* God, so repeated here?
S.McC. I suppose it would link with @John 20, " ... My God and your God." The Lord is bringing the fullest thoughts into our minds, so that it is His God. It is not just the city in its millennial relation, but the city in its eternal relation. It is Christ's God, and that is what is before us in @John 20, "My God and your God," only in @John 20 "your God" is mentioned, but not in Philadelphia.
H.K. Is it right to say that we are brought as near to Deity there as is possible?
S.McC. Exactly. We are alongside of Christ here, Who knows God in a way we could never know Him. The thought of Christ's God would involve the knowledge of God in the fullest sense. These are exalted thoughts.
J.P-s-n. That would give real substance in the soul in rising to the highest thoughts in the service of God.
S.McC. And also in the working out of the administration publicly.
F.R.G. It would always be in the dignity of this feature of "a pillar in the temple of my God."
S.McC. That is it. A pillar suggests stability and dignity. The administration would be marked by that in the overcomer. "He shall go no more at all out" stresses the heavenly and the eternal side. "I will write upon him the name of my God."
H.W. Does the writing upon him involve that he is descriptive now of that great thought of representing God?
S.McC. That is what I thought. That is, as you take account of a brother or a sister, you get a true
{128}
impression of God, Christ's God. He is coming out in the representation of God, marked by what marks God. That is what the Lord is seeking to help us in regard to, writing upon us the name of His God. We are to be representative of God as peace-makers, etc., as in @Matthew 5.
V.T.S. Is that why in those opening chapters of Matthew, in His words of instruction to His disciples, He speaks of stability? We shall not fall if our house is established on the Rock.
S.McC. Matthew helps us greatly as to abstract thoughts. It is the great administrative gospel. He alludes to Jerusalem, the city of the great King, and he also alludes to the pearl of great price, and the assembly against which the gates of hades shall not prevail. We are to understand the dignity of thoughts that are divinely presented in an abstract way. Whatever the breakdown may be and the failure, we are to make room for this kind of thing in those that overcome, the city of Christ's God, the new Jerusalem. Think of brothers and sisters appearing with the renown of that city marking them, the refined character of their speaking and thoughts, and shedding the benign influence of heaven. All that enters into the writing of the name of the city of Christ's God.
H.M. Would you say that Mephibosheth was a true overcomer in that he could say with regard to Ziba, "let him even take all"? @2 Samuel 19: 20.
S.McC. Mephibosheth is a remarkable man. He held the ground in patience and was faithful to David in relation to all that came in. In type he kept the word of Christ's patience.
Verse 12 involves a great range of administration and government morally, seen in its fulness in the holy city in the millennial day and throughout eternity too, but to be seen now in the overcomer in the Philadelphian
{129}
phase. It is important that we should see to this in our localities.
A.W.W. Is all this developing the feature of glory in the saints, so that when we come to chapter 21 the holy city is seen coming down out of the heaven from God having the glory of God?
S.McC. The assembly is a great vessel of administrative glory.
A.W.W. So that as a young brother or young sister stands before a tribunal, the feature of glory is being worked out.
S.McC. In the verse referred to in Isaiah the person becomes a throne of glory. Not only is the Lord Jesus the One who supports everything, but He is the throne of glory to His Father's house. It opens up the way that the administration works out under His hand, glory marking it. The dignity of sonship would enter into verse 12, because the great feature of the city is liberty, the saints formed in the light of Paul's ministry.
F.D.C. Does this help us to understand why sonship is hinted at in @Matthew 17 and then the little child is mentioned in the next chapter, going on to the truth of the assembly and administration in the assembly? The overcomer would move in the dignity of sonship.
S.McC. I think that enters into this verse. The Lord suggests that these things are to be seen in the overcomer. The whole thought of the city would be seen in the overcomer. The administration is not arbitrary; it is not the bringing of things through by force and dint of human strength. It is a question of moral conditions, moral authority, moral weight and power among the saints, in persons who are under the hand of Christ. There is what Christ makes us as under His hand.
A.R.G. The thought of "the Holy" and "the True" would be a real challenge to us.
{130}
S.McC. It is important that we should be corresponding to Christ in that relation. We have often heard a good deal about the assembly, and it is a great thing that we should come out as overcoming in the features of the assembly in her heavenly glory as suggested here, as coming under the hand of Christ.
G.L.S. So that what would be seen would be a development of the Lord's personal teaching as in @John 10, the sheep hearing His voice.
S.McC. Well exactly, so the only right way we can influence anything, as John's gospel would help us to see, is by coming in from heaven, as formed in the spirit and grace of heaven, in matters. That is the kind of influence and rule and government that counts.
J.B. Is that seen in Moses at the end of Deuteronomy, "My speech shall flow down as dew"?
S.McC. Yes. Moses was a great administrator. What a man of moral influence he was! What love he had for all the saints and how he cared for them. The door is open to every one of us to come under the hand of Christ in this way, so that we should each be concerned as to this matter that there might be a right representation of God and the city of Christ's God among us.
F.R.G. Although this is a collective setting, the assembly at Philadelphia, does what you have been saying in relation to overcomers show that in a day of brokenness the thing can only be maintained on the basis of what is individual?
S.McC. That is the way it is put here.
F.R.G. There is the danger of our setting up a little assembly and just moving en masse. Is the position held on individual lines?
S.McC. Yes. We work out the collective position through @2 Timothy 2 as departing from iniquity as individuals.
{131}
E.B.McC. As we come into the city, the new Jerusalem, we are touching what is collective.
S.McC. As we come into it through the door of @2 Timothy 2, the whole spiritual range of blessing in a collective way is opened up to us.
F.R.G. One feels that many of the administrative mistakes which have been made, have been because we have wanted to move together and have not taken account of individual exercises.
S.McC. It is a great thing to see that, and the Lord would promote the concern with every one of us. The assembly is in His mind and the assembly is to be in all our minds, but we are all to be concerned individually as to this matter of overcoming. It would set up an exercise with every one as to where we are in this matter. "He that overcomes, to him will I give to sit with me in my throne; as *I* also have overcome, and have sat down with my Father in his throne." Think of the dignity and glory linked with divine administration in that setting, and all the benefit we derive at the present time from that administration!
H.M. Would you say a little as to what is involved in, " ... I also have overcome ... "?
S.McC. Well, He overcame. He went right through. Overcoming would allude to His going right through death and rising again. It is not just presented here on the basis of the arbitrary exercise of divine power in raising Him from the dead, but He has gone right through on the line of overcoming, and has sat down with His Father on His throne.
H.W. His last word to the disciples in @John 16 is, "In the world ye have tribulation; but be of good courage: *I* have overcome the world."
S.McC. The Lord would bring to our minds that word, that every one of us might be set on the line of overcoming. This brings wealth into the local position,
{132}
that there are those who are prepared to be overcomers, to face things and overcome and bring in power.
D.B.J. The book of judges begins with Caleb offering his daughter Achsah to the man who could take Kirjath-sepher, and Othniel took it. Should we be concerned to overcome in order to come into the enjoyment of God's thoughts as to the assembly?
S.McC. Very good. There is special need of overcoming the city of the book. We want to overcome the city of learning, the city of mere human intellect. The power of the Spirit of God is linked with those who are prepared to overcome on that line. The believer has moral authority in himself, with himself, so that he is not overcome by features in himself; and he has moral authority with others.
J.B. What you are stressing is what is needed in out local administration.
S.McC. Well exactly, so that the brethren are carried in all administrative matters on the basis of this kind of administration, that is coming in from heaven.
H.M. There was no argument in @Acts 15. James simply said, "Brethren, listen to me." Is that moral authority?
S.McC. Well it is. The Holy Spirit comes into the matter. They link the Holy Spirit on with what they arrive at.
{133}
THE OVERCOMER IN RELATION TO GOVERNMENT (2)
@Revelation 12: 1 -- 6; @Revelation 21: 9 -- 27; @Revelation 22: 1 -- 5
S.McC. These sections which we have read from this book open up to us a great range of governmental glory. We were referring last night to the character of things and the Lord's word to Philadelphia in chapter 3, the One who has the key of David, then the writing on the overcomer so that the overcomer would appear in the features of glory linked with the great vessel of government and administration, the city that comes down out of heaven. This whole book shows us how one kind of government is set aside, the government that has disintegrated and deteriorated in the world, like the image in Daniel's time with its head of gold coming down to the feet of clay, which reminds us of the deterioration in human government and administration. And this book shows us how every feature of the world system will be dealt with by God, every feature of lawlessness linked with the world system will be overthrown; but the book also shows us the positive features of government and administration according to God, the dignity and glory that are linked with these features, maintained and carried through despite what may come into the ways of God, so that the holy city in chapter 21 appears intact in all the range of governmental glory that is presented in it. One thing that is to be noted is how the thought of suffering is linked with these features of glory; the woman in travail that we have alluded to, and the holy city as the Lamb's wife, suggesting the one who has been formed sympathetically with Christ through suffering, to have part with Him in the administration of that day. We should see in regard to this woman that all
{134}
the figures of speech that come into view, the symbols, in relation to her -- "clothed with the sun, and the moon under her feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve stars" -- all represent administrative and governmental glory, and the thought of the male son who is in mind represents what is according to God, of course suggesting Christ first of all in a very distinctive way. The enemy, as presented in the symbol of the dragon, is represented as waiting to destroy the male son, but we find how God has the matter in hand so that this side of things might be protected in the woman and the male son, representing how government is rightly taken up and to be worked out according to the divine thought, the woman suggesting the subjective side of things, the state of things amongst the saints, in which there is suggested suffering in view of divine thoughts being arrived at. This great thought of the male son, who shall shepherd the nations, represents a choice divine thought in regard to Christ, and the Spirit of Christ amongst the saints.
H.W. Do you think we get help in the consideration of the importance of this great matter of government in tracing it back to @Genesis 3, where another will than God's came into the universe, and the dealing with this matter of evil?
S.McC. Yes, so that we have the promise made there to the woman as to her seed, what would come in. The enemy is always against the throne of God, as it says in connection with Amalek in Exodus, "The hand is on the throne of Jah." This woman would be linked I suppose with Israel primarily, and what there is set out in Israel, but we are thinking more of what she symbolises, which may be applied to the saints at the present time.
E.B.McC. Would you say that we need not fear? Everything will go through; that is what we had
{135}
last night as to the opened door, no one can shut it. The power is there. He shepherds us. There is shepherding in this chapter, and the shepherding goes on.
S.McC. Yes. So we need to learn more and more to see how things go through according to God. While it involves a good deal of suffering perhaps in the working out of it among the saints, and while the antagonism of Satan may appear great under this form presented here, God is behind the matter. He is taking account of everything, so that the woman has *there* (that is, in the wilderness, not in heaven) a place prepared of God. We know that we have a place prepared on high. The Lord Jesus has gone on before us to prepare for us a place there, but we want to understand that God has a place prepared for us *here* in the very sphere where there is no resource to see us through outside of what we have in God.
E.D.W. Is that the connection with the wilderness here?
S.McC. Yes. We have no resource in it but what we have in God. It is the sphere that is marked by the absence of human resource that would meet the exigencies of the moment. The wilderness is a sphere where exigencies arise, but they are to be met by the resource that we have in God.
D.B.J. Would that be the bearing of the sun and the moon and the stars being brought in?
S.McC. Yes, we have something beyond the reach of man in these figures, which convey to us rule and government in a supreme way, the sun being the father of the solar system, representing the supreme idea in the solar system of rule and government; the moon being the subservient, subordinate side; the stars representing the distributive side more in regard to light; but they represent government which is not exactly within man's range to interfere with, that is government in an abstract way, as presented in these symbols employed here.
{136}
H.W. What is all this in view of, this thought of government and so much said about it? Has God some great end to reach?
S.McC. I think so; the male son, Christ. Christ is in mind in an intensified way in the male son. Every feature of divine government and administration working out has in mind Christ. Christ arrived at this way, through travail and pain and sorrow. It is what the saints are on the maternal line, on the subjective side in suffering and in sorrow, but the divine end being that the male son might be brought in.
H.M. Would Paul in some way enter into these exercises as he speaks of it in Galatians, "When God who was pleased to reveal His Son in me " he says, "but I went to Arabia ... "
S.McC. Yes, it would show how he did not link himself on exactly with what would add prestige to him according to the flesh, or what would be resources in man's way of thinking, but where no room would be made for the flesh.
F.R.G. Would you say a little more and open out what you mean by the abstract form of government which cannot be interfered with?
S.McC. Well, the woman clothed with the sun and the moon under her feet and upon her head a crown of twelve stars represents great features of governmental glory which we are to understand in an abstract way. The enemy's attack is directed towards the male son. These features of administrative glory are all linked with the bringing in of Christ on this line as the male son, the intensification of the masculine side noted in the male son.
V.P. Would Paul being met on the road to Damascus illustrate this, where the Lord says to him, "I am Jesus whom thou persecutest"?
S.McC. Well, there would be an allusion to the
{137}
saints suffering there. Paul was directing his activities against this great thought. The enemy was in the matter to destroy the saints.
V.P. The great aim of the enemy is to destroy the man-child. In destroying the saints he was destroying what was of Christ, destroying what was appearing here on the earth, for the Lord said, This is my body.
S.McC. And the two features of divine administration are linked with the male son, that is, Christ in that light; and the enemy is always seeking to attack that kind of thing; therefore the need of understanding this side amongst the saints as to the woman, representing not what the saints are in the way of gift or in the way of leadership, but what the saints are in a suffering way, the subjective side of things in our local gatherings.
J.P-s-n. So that this maternal side is marked by a preparedness to sacrifice everything for ourselves in order that what is for God might be preserved. In Solomon's time the maternal element was there with the mother who would let the other woman have the child in order that what was of God might be preserved.
S.McC. Yes, so that this maternal side is to be noted. The Lord would help us to see the importance of this side in the support of true and right features of government and administration according to God, because the male son is in mind. That is the divine thought.
H.W. Would the thought that you have before you be connected in any way with the scripture in @John 16 where the Lord says, " ... she no longer remembers the trouble, on account of the joy that a man has been born into the world." Is that in line with your thought?
S.McC. Yes exactly. It is Christ apprehended in that way in relation to this great thought of divine administration, that Christ is the great end in mind, but Christ as we might say, seen in the working out of the
{138}
administration among the saints. In one sense it may allude to the rapture and what may obtain there, the male son including both Christ and the saints.
E.B.McC. The sun, moon and stars are to give light and to protect the interests of Christ here amongst the saints; that is, they have light at all times, like Joshua, "Sun, stand still upon Gibeon; And thou, moon, in the valley of Ajalon!" He commanded that; that is, it is regulated for the brethren.
S.McC. So these great features of rule and glory are linked with the saints under this figure, the woman. She represents Israel, primarily, but represents what there is among the saints now. We are to see how these features of rule and glory are linked with the saints *on this line*.
V.T.S. These sufferings amongst the saints, do they include, as well as the sufferings in the testimony, the sufferings amongst the saints in standing for principles that are right?
S.McC. That is what I have in mind. It involves of course the public position, but what one is thinking about is more what there is in our gatherings, and the great need for this side amongst us, travailing, suffering, in view of Christ represented in the male son having His proper place. The enemy is out to destroy and to swallow up that side. All human administration -- Babylon is a great embodiment of the thing -- leads to the distinguishing of man according to the flesh, but administration according to God makes way for the incoming of Christ as here in the symbol of the male son.
A.W.W. Is the distinguishing of man according to the flesh what was happening in Galatia, and is the apostle entering into these exercises which you speak of, saying that he is prepared to travail again in birth until Christ be formed in you?
{139}
S.McC. All that would enter into what we are saying. At Corinth too we can see how divine administration was being attacked by the enemy in what came in there in the different personalities, whereas the great end in divine government and administration is to bring in Christ among the saints, in the symbol of the male son. It is one thing to understand what we have for instance in chapter 11: 19: "And the temple of God in the heaven was opened, and the ark of his covenant was seen in his temple ... " We might say, Up there everything is all right. Christ is apprehended there in relation to what the "ark of his covenant" would suggest: all the grace that is available for the working out of divine thoughts there in that position, but then we have *this* position here, that the enemy is standing by to offset what is working out in the local gatherings among the saints.
E.D.W. Is that what we get in verse 10, "the accuser of our brethren"?
S.McC. That is it. That is how this thing works out. The attack on the male son works out this way that the accuser of our brethren has been cast out. That is the one that is waiting to destroy the male son. He is the accuser of the brethren. That gives us a cue to what marks the enemy's activities on this line.
J.P-s-n. So the great test is as to whether positive features of the work of God are being feelingly brought into evidence in the saints. Our prayers and exercises should be to that end.
S.McC. Exactly, and the travail, the need of real suffering that Christ may come in in this way to take up every thread of divine government and carry it through according to divine glory, not the making way for human glory.
A.W.W. Is verse 11 interesting as following on what is said in verse 10, "And *they*" (that would be the
{140}
brethren, I take it) "have overcome him by reason of the blood of the Lamb, and by reason of the word of their testimony, and have not loved their life even unto death"?
S.McC. Well exactly, showing the importance of these features, "the blood of the Lamb, and by reason of the word of their testimony, and have not loved their life even unto death." That is, they are prepared for martyrdom in order that divine thoughts might go through.
H.K. Why is he called a great red dragon in verse 3?
S.McC. I think it is a suggestion to our minds in a symbol of what is pompous, imperious, standing out in a very distinctive way, a great *red* dragon. Red is a very distinctive colour that stands out; and the *great* red dragon would represent what is pompous and imperious in the working out of this kind of thing that is operating against the male son, a symbol of Christ. Christ coming out in this way through the travail and suffering of the saints.
E.B.McC. Do we see his power in the casting down of the third part of the stars of the heaven to the earth? It is on the earth that this great struggle is going on at the present time. He has power and we see it in the great systems around us.
S.McC. So that we are to understand that this is not in heaven. This is representing what is going on down here in the wilderness. The child is caught up to God and to His throne, but the woman fled into the wilderness where she had there a place prepared of God, showing how God is taking account of these matters, and we are to understand the feature of divine resource from this side.
F.K.G. Is Paul a great illustration for us of one who suffered both from persecution from without as well as among the saints? There were those who turned away
{141}
from him, and yet he says that the Lord delivered him out of all, delivered him out of the lion's mouth, and so on.
S.McC. Yes, so that we get in verse 10, "Now is come the salvation and the power and the kingdom of our God, and the authority of His Christ; for the accuser of our brethren has been cast out ... " While these things have a future bearing, we are to understand the principle on which deliverance works now, and the greatness of the resource that is towards us in deliverance in these matters. "The salvation and the power and the kingdom of our God, and the authority of His Christ ... "; that is, God's Anointed, the authority of God's Anointed all entering into this matter of deliverance.
H.K. Is the casting out here to make room for the assembly?
S.McC. No doubt it is; to make room for the child, the child caught up to God and to His throne. That involves the saints, and the awful events that follow the rapture, if we look at it dispensationally. The rapture would no doubt be involved in the child being caught up to God and to His throne. Christ and the saints are involved in that. Satan is cast out and tremendous events follow, but what we should see is the principle of divine intervention. Despite all the difficulties, God is in these matters making a way for us, and preparing a way for us, even affecting things here so that we might be cared for.
D.B.J. So that we carry on the government in peace. "Of the increase of his government and of peace there will be no end."
S.McC. So we should never give up what is in out souls in the way of teaching and light as to divine government. We should cling to it, through suffering and travail, because Christ is in mind. God has in
{142}
mind the male son. The true thought of administration and government is in the male son, but the sufferings and sorrows of the saints are linked with the introduction of it.
V.T.S. Is that what Paul is seeking that the saints in Galatia should do in faithfulness. He says to them, "It is right to be zealous at all times in what is right." And the result of his travailing for them and doing what is right would be that Christ would be formed in them?
S.McC. The great answer would be Christ coming out in the saints in this strong energetic way which will offset the whole principle of false administration in the world, for that is what is presented in the male son in principle. We have in the male son what offsets and upsets and sets aside every feature of human administration.
F.D.C. What is the meaning of shepherding with an iron rod?
S.McC. I suppose on the dispensational side it would allude to the firmness with which things will be held in that day, but with us at the present time shepherding and the iron rod would be the principle of grace operating in rule and administration. The iron rod will come in after the church is translated, but the shepherding today would be on a different principle.
E.B.McC. Administration would go on in the assembly at the present time, that which is to come out in the world to come, and we saw it in the scripture last night, "I will cause that they shall come and shall do homage before thy feet, and shall know that I have loved thee." That is really true today in a measure, is it not?
S.McC. That *is* true today, if we have eyes to see it, and the administration is the same now as it will be in that day in principle. Then it will be the shepherding *all* the nations with an iron rod; that is, the inflexible
{143}
character of the administration of that day. But now the Lord is on the Father's throne and He is shepherding according to *that* great principle at the present time.
E.B.McC. We have to be prepared to take it up, like the union question taken up and settled in some places. The power has been there to withstand it and to free the brethren.
S.McC. Because all these things are directed towards the destroying of Christ among the saints under this figure of the male son. All these activities are on that line.
S.L. These activities have been in evidence lately, but the Lord has come in in wonderful delivering skill and overcome. There is the spirit of overcoming marking the saints at the present time.
S.McC. T hat is the point to see, that they are overcome by positive features of suffering and travail on the subjective side, the state of the saints in the gatherings entering into this great matter, that the full thought of the male son might come in.
S.L. There is nothing we shrink from more on natural lines than suffering, but suffering and glory go together. Mr. Raven has said that God will not display in the world to come anything that He has not borne witness to in testimony here firstly.
S.McC. So oftentimes we may think in regard to matters that it is a question of gift and leadership coming in to deliver. Well, that is one side of the position, but the side in the woman is needed. All the saints come into the matter on the maternal line, concerned that the male son might be brought forth.
D.B.J. Is that what would balance us in certain matters? Even though a wrong lead may be given, if there is this feature in the saints generally, it will bring in balance.
S.McC. Because the male son is the energetic side,
{144}
the intensification of the masculine side, and the saints are concerned that this side should come in according to God.
Now we come to chapter 21, which is mostly in mind. This portion which we read is very full and more than we can take up in detail, but we are to see the greatness of the glory of government in this city, the holy city, Jerusalem, which comes down out of the heaven from God. She is the Lamb's wife; that is, the suffering side is alluded to, for the Lamb is a sufferer, and He is mentioned time and again throughout this portion; and the wife would represent the saints as formed in correspondence with Christ in this light, and able to take up their part with Him in this great realm of governmental and administrative glory according to God. So that what is stressed in the city is substance. It is the substantial side. That is what is suggested in the woman bringing forth the male son too. It is the substantial side coming forth through suffering and travail among the saints. And here it is the substantial side coming out from heaven, what the saints are as formed in relation to heavenly light, heavenly truth.
F.R.G. In chapter 19 it speaks of the wife: "the marriage of the Lamb is come and His wife has made herself ready." That would refer to the preparation of that vessel in suffering today?
S.McC. It would. All that is going on now has in mind our preparation for this time that is alluded to here, but the features which appear here are to mark us now as understood and appreciated by us, as we see the solid and substantial side in the holy city.
H.W. Is your point in connecting these two scriptures that these great and glorious features seen in the 21st chapter are formed in the saints as a result suffering and preparedness to take up things sufferingly?
S.McC. That is what I thought. She has the glory
{145}
of God and her shining was like a most precious stone. Then we have the allusion to the variegated features of glory in the stones, the different impressions conveyed. All that suggests the glory acquired through suffering, and fitting the saints for their part in divine administration and government in this way.
H.W. So that the great end seen is that a man's measure is reached. Is that the thought of the man-child coming out again?
S.McC. That is it. So we should all be concerned that positive features are reached, not just negative features; that is, we may be glad, as in this book, that evil is overthrown and lawlessness is set aside in the world when the Lord comes in. But there is more than that; that is, the city comes in in all its radiancy as substantially formed in the truth, "*having* the glory of God," and becoming a great benign influence in the sphere in which the administration is operating.
J.P-s-n. In chapter 12 the woman was nourished, which would suggest a building up, and does that enter into these positive features coming into evidence now?
S.McC. One is thinking of the constitutional side in regard to these matters of government and administration. We need to see the importance of the constitutional side. The side of life is important, and we need to see the importance of the constitutional side, what is built up in the saints in a positive way to offset all the features of man's world and the principle of man's administration.
V.T.S. Was that energy maintained with Caleb? How often we fail and become faint-hearted, but we need to be sustained and maintained in this substantial side and this energy.
S.McC. Well exactly. Caleb was one who went through with the light of the glory in his soul,
{146}
undeterred by all the unbelief and murmurings which he had to suffer in the wilderness journey. It says of the city in verse 16, that the length and the breadth and the height of it are equal. That is to stress in our minds the solidity of this vessel of government and administration, the substantial character of it.
H.W. Answering in every respect to the measure of a man, that is Christ?
S.McC. So that it links on with the male son, in the principle, I mean. Where does its substantiality come from? John's gospel is the backbone of scripture, as we have been taught recently, and he stresses substantiality, both in the gospel and in the epistles, and the city stresses substantiality. Where did it come from? It comes from the predominance of love amongst the saints. John stresses love -- the love of God, and the love of Christ, and the love of the brethren -- in his ministry. And here the numeral twelve, twelve gates, twelve tribes, twelve foundations, twelve names of twelve apostles of the Lamb, is all to inculcate into our minds the importance of this feature in regard to government and administration.
E.D.W. Does it too give us the greatness of God's purposes? I was thinking of the twelve tribes here and the twelve apostles of the Lamb. I wondered whether it links with the blessing of the nations being included in the blessing of Abraham, "In thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed."
S.McC. Well, it is remarkable how the twelve enters into everything, even into creation. It is remarkable how the twelve enters into matters according to the divine operations. There is something that God has for us to learn in it, and especially this matter of love working out in the sphere of governmental and administrative glory. That is where we need love. We often think of love in the service of God on Lord's Day morning and drawing near to serve God, but we need
{147}
love predominating in relation to what is working out in government and administration.
H.W. The Holy Spirit seems to delight in bringing before us this glorious vessel in chapter 21, apart from Christ altogether, this divine workmanship and the accomplishment of the great end that God had in mind. Would you connect it in any way with the word in @Ephesians 1, the assembly as the fulness of Him who fills all in all?
S.McC. This would be the answer to it. We have here what corresponds, with @Ephesians 1. She is associated with Christ in the administration and marked by His fulness. What is shining out in her is on that line.
S.L. In @Revelation 5 we have a Lamb standing in the midst of the throne as it had been slain, having power to take up everything for God.
S.McC. Here, she is presented as the Lamb's wife. What a glorious entity she is, and we are detained here in all these verses with the glory of this vessel in divine government and administration.
E.B.McC. No matter what the suffering is, there is the great and high mountain. "And he carried me away in the Spirit, and set me on a great and high mountain." That remains and shows how substantial everything is. We are entitled to ascend the great mountain, are we not?
S.McC. The Spirit is available to us in that way, so that we are able to rise above what is linked with things here, in order to get a right and proper view of administration according to God. The administration here is not to repress evil. It is to bring in the knowledge of God. The city has the glory of God, and the leaves of the tree that is linked with the city are for the healing of the nations. The curse shall be no more. It is all to show us the benign character of
{148}
the administration, the positive features of good brought to bear upon the position.
H.W. Humanly speaking, it is a most remarkable combination that is presented to us. The bride the Lamb's wife, and "he showed me a city." The side of affection is suggested in the bride and the wife, and then administration in the city.
S.McC. It shows how this matter of administration involves love. The administration throughout all eternity will be on this principle, because love is not static. Love will be in movement, in operation, throughout all eternity in a glorious character of administration peculiar to that scene. But here it is intensified in these thoughts, the bride the Lamb's wife, and then the numeral twelve. It is the great love number. It presents our readiness to work divine thoughts out with one another.
F.R.G. Does @Ephesians 4 have that in mind, "holding the truth in love, we may grow up to him in all things, who is the head, the Christ; from whom the whole body, fitted together, and connected by every joint of supply, according to the working in its measure of each one part, works for itself the increase of the body to its self-building up in love"?
S.McC. That shows the flexibility that is linked with this great realm of things. It is a great thing that this number in its spiritual meaning and suggestion should be made more room for in our minds, so that we are prepared to work things out with one another, not *without* one another, but *with* one another, prepared to make room for one another. That is the thought in the twelve.
D.B.J. Would it bear in a particular way too on the question of recovery? I am thinking of the word later, "Blessed are they that wash their robes, that they may have right to the tree of life, and that they should go
{149}
in by the gates into the city." The twelve would have in view all, is that the idea?
S.McC. Well, the whole administration of the city seems to bear upon a wonderful supply of grace to meet the current need, and there is enough in it to meet what is current, just as there is enough now in the assembly to meet what is current according to the divine thought.
H.K. In chapter 12 there is a woman clothed with the sun, but here in verse 23 the city is spoken of as having no need of the sun. Could you help us?
S.McC. Well, it is a symbol in chapter 12, that she is clothed with that supreme symbol of government. The woman, generally speaking, is not viewed as in government. It is to show us how God clothes Israel and clothes the saints of the assembly with this great thought of government. But in chapter 21 the great thought is that God is there in the city. God and the Lamb, and there is no need for natural light, no need for human resource, because God and the Lamb are the light and the temple of it.
H.W. What you are saying reminds us of something Mr. Taylor pressed upon us in Glasgow, speaking of the saints as the governing class. This is a great thought to get into our minds, what God is working out on these lines amongst us, setting us together in our localities.
S.McC. So that the true features of the governing class should be set out amongst us in that way.
J.P-s-n. So that in matters of light, you spoke of the sun and the moon not being needed in the city or in the assembly now, it should be in evidence, as we see in Corinthians, the temple being there, and matters being met as issues come forward.
S.McC. So that all these features linked on here show how replete the city is to meet whatever may
{150}
exist, because the saints in the world to come will have a wonderful place in the administration of that day. Whatever has to be met, will be met *through the assembly*. The knowledge of God will be there, disseminated in that day, and how important it is that we should appreciate that now, and especially this matter of the twelve. It is twelve tribes, and twelve angels and twelve apostles. That shows the distributed glory belonging to the city. While the city in itself is a glorious entity, yet linked with it are these glorious thoughts which speak of the variety of what God has in it, and we are to make room for it in our local gatherings.
J.P-s-n. And yet with the great variety there is perfect unity.
S.McC. There is great diversification, but great unity and that is what the saints are. You don't expect all the saints to be the same. They have all got their distinctive impressions of Christ and of God. There is great diversification amongst the saints, but unity in relation to it all.
F.R.G. Why do the twelve tribes come in?
S.McC. I think it is to show us that every divine thought is carried through. We do not give up any divine thought. It is carried through. It is the twelve tribes, not of Israel, but the twelve tribes of the *sons* of Israel; that is, we have intensified in our minds the personnel, the sons of Israel, the personnel of the people of God.
F.R.G. It is a spiritual idea.
S.McC. Yes, and the dignity of the saints in this light. If we are going to express these glorious features of government and administration, we want to see the saints from this spiritual viewpoint and appreciate them from this viewpoint.
F.D.C. What is the meaning of the river today?
S.McC. The whole first five verses of chapter 22 are
{151}
to show us the transparency and clearness that marks this administration. " ... bright as crystal, going out of the throne of God and of the Lamb. In the midst of its street, and of the river, on this side and on that side, the tree of life, producing twelve fruits, in each month yielding its fruit; and the leaves of the tree for healing of the nations." It is to enforce in our minds in the teaching the blessedness of this character of administration, the clearness, crystal-like clearness and transparency that marks what is going out, which is very important. There is no opaqueness there.
H.K. Would @Ezekiel 47 link on with this chapter?
S.McC. Well, it does. You mean the thought of the river, and the fruitfulness linked with it. The tree of life coming in here gives us a remarkable suggestion as to Christ.
F.D.C. Is the substantiality in relation to this feature of the river brought about as we make room for the Spirit? I was thinking of the references to the Spirit in @John 4 and @John 7. Is that the way we begin on this line?
S.McC. Yes, it is all part of divine administration. I suppose the symbol would allude to the great part the Holy Spirit has, whether in relation to what is for the saints, or in relation to what is for men, "going out," "river of water of life." It says in verse 17, " ... he that will, let him take the water of life freely." It is a remarkable thing that in verse 17, which brings us to the present moment in the literal working out of the thing, we have a reference to what marks the holy city. It is the availability of the divine provision, both for the saints and for all men.
E.B.McC. You mean at the present time. This river is flowing now, and we see the healing of all nations in the sheet let down from heaven.
{152}
S.McC. The river is going out of the throne of God and of the Lamb; that is, it is working out in relation to these matters of administration, so that administration according to God as it works out brings these life-imparting influences with it.
S.L. So we take account of divine wisdom in forming the vessel of divine glory in view of heavenly administration here in a scene of contrariety.
S.McC. However small our local gatherings may be, however weak, we are to cleave in our souls to these positive features in regard to divine government and administration through the saints, because the conditions may deny it at certain times, but we are to cling to them abstractly if we cannot see them concretely. It is the only way in which we can help in the working out of the truth.
G.L.S. Would the very contrariety be productive of that which is to be seen of suffering love in this time?
S.McC. Well the sufferings would bring out things amongst us.
F.D.C. Would a person seeking recovery be attracted to this feature of the clear river bright as crystal, and come to drink, to take of the water of life?
S.McC. Well that is the point, that anyone should be affected by this character of administration. There is something attractive in it, not what is repelling. It is drawing in its power, no opaqueness, no darkness in it, clear and transparent.
R.J.W. "By this shall all men know that ye are disciples of mine, if ye have love amongst yourselves." Is that the testimony?
S.McC. Yes, the Lord says that in @John 13: 35. The great basic feature of divine administration is love working out through the saints, working out in divine Persons themselves, and then working out through the saints.
{153}
THE SERVICE OF CHRIST IN LEADERSHIP (1)
@John 10: 1 -- 30
S.McC. I am thinking of the service of Christ in leadership of His people, and how the spirit of it is to work out amongst us. We might read first in @John 10 this morning, and perhaps we may amplify it later from the Old Testament.
The services of Christ towards His own are many, and the particular one that is before us is leadership, involving administrative service to His own, working out in love for the saints and care for them, and having in mind, as it says in verse 16, "There shall be one flock, one shepherd," the great point of contact between John's ministry and Paul's. Mr. Darby said that in insisting on Paul we are not to forget John; although we must always keep in mind the distinctiveness of Paul's ministry, in that he had certain formal commissions which John had not.
One thought that we might begin with this great portion in John's gospel, which refers us to the leadership of Christ, as in verses 3 and 4, "He calls his own sheep by name, and leads them out. When he has put forth all his own, he goes before them, and the sheep follow him, because they know his voice." It is important that we should understand the service of Christ in this character of leadership. There is His leadership in regard to the service of God, the service of song in the assembly, but this leadership has to do with the saints in their defenceless character as in a scene of contrariety, yet marked by the features of the work of God; and, as such, coming under the divine notice and attention, and served by divine Persons in an exalted manner, so that the standards that enter into this section dealing with the Shepherd and the sheep are elevated standards;
{154}
the Lord alluding in verse 15 to "as the Father knows me and I know Father." He says in verse 14, "*I* am the good shepherd; and I know those that are mine, and am known of those that are mine, as the Father knows me and I know the Father; and I lay down my life for the sheep." And then again He says, verse 17, "On this account the Father loves me, because I lay down my life." And then the great thought of things being carried through enters into this kind and character of leadership, so that, as He says in verse 27, "My sheep hear my voice, and *I* know them, and they follow me; and *I* give them life eternal; and they shall never perish, and no one shall seize them out of my hand. My Father who has given them to me is greater than all, and no one can seize out of the hand of my Father. I and the Father are one." We can see thus how the sheep go through in principle in these verses. "They shall never perish." The work of God in that way goes through, whatever may come in, whatever may be linked with the perishing, the falling short of great divine objectives which the Lord is keeping before our minds as to His sheep here, "And they shall never perish, and no one shall seize them out of my hand."
We can thus see the effectiveness of leadership as in Christ; and as contemplating this kind of leadership, the spirit of it is to work out among the saints, so that there is the corresponding care for the sheep, as comes into view in the service of Christ. We are to have in mind that the saints might be liberated from the world, as set out in the principle of the Jewish fold, and brought into the abundance of life, the wonderful conditions collectively, where life in abundance is known and enjoyed, involving buoyancy amongst the saints. These thoughts may yield further as we enquire together in relation to this service.
C.E.J. Has the Lord, in His personal attractiveness,
{155}
so secured our hearts that He has an influence over us, so that we would be governed by His voice; and the first matter of leadership would appear to be the leading out, as you suggest?
S.McC. He has acquired an influence over us, an important thing; as in verse 4, "when he has put forth all his own." At the end of verse 3 we read, "He calls his own sheep by name, and leads them out. When he has put forth all his own, he goes before them"; this is an allusion to the influence that He has acquired over the sheep, which have certain practical affinities with Himself, because He is presented in this gospel as the Lamb of God.
P.B. Do we get a suggestion of a sheep coming forward in the previous chapter? It says in @John 9: 35, "He said to him, *Thou*, dost thou believe on the Son of God?". Then further down the man said, "I believe, Lord; and he did him homage."
S.McC. The ninth chapter throws into relief the personal service of Christ to one of His sheep, and the influence that He acquires over that person, so that when He says to him, "*Thou*, dost thou believe on the Son of God? He answered and said, And who is he, Lord, that I may believe on Him?", showing the influence that the Lord, the Son of God, had acquired over this sheep of His.
W.J.B. Does personality enter into this matter of leadership? It says, "because they know his voice," not 'His Word.' It is the person they recognise by the voice. I wondered if what a man *is*, bears on this matter of leadership?
S.McC. Well, it does. Personality has a great place in John's gospel. You get the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the Son of God, the voice of the shepherd here, the wonderful suggestions of personality which
{156}
enter into these great matters of leadership that we are contemplating. You can see it in Paul himself. As Paul is speaking to Timothy, helping him in regard to the truth, he says, "knowing of whom thou hast learned them," @2 Timothy 3: 14, alluding to the personality that entered into his ministry and his service to the saints.
J.C. It was said of David, the Shepherd king, "thou wast he that leddest out and broughtest in Israel."
S.McC. Yes, David, as we shall see later on, was marked peculiarly by this great administrative grace in care for the flock, the people of God.
J.H.H. I was thinking about your remark, "and he calls his own sheep by name." I was thinking of what it meant to Mary, at the end of John, when He called her by name, "Mary," opening up to her how spiritual were the relationships, would you say?
S.McC. Very good; showing the personal character of this service, that it is not a service, you might say, en masse; although it does involve this great thought of the one flock and the one shepherd, yet it brings out the individuality of the saints, and the personal observance of each of the saints under the eye of Christ in this administrative service.
P.B. Conscious knowledge is the great point between the shepherd and his sheep here?
S.McC. Yes, and the link of affinity; as we have said, the Lord is presented as the Lamb of God in this gospel, and the saints are viewed as the sheep. The Lord is referred to correspondingly in @Isaiah 53 as the sheep, as well as the Lamb. We are thus reminded of the affinity between Christ and His own. John says in chapter 13 that Jesus "having loved his own who were in the world, loved them to the end." That is the end in the sense of going through all things.
G.H.W-n. Would you open up the thought, "and leads them out"? What does that involve?
{157}
S.McC. Well, I think it is the gracious character of the administrative service of Christ to bring us out of the world, as it takes form in the Jewish fold; for in John's Gospel the great principle of the world is embodied in the Jewish fold. We sometimes are very much concerned about deliverance from the fashions of the world, but do not see the importance of being delivered from the world in the figure of the Jewish fold.
J.D. Has the Spirit a great place in this feature of leadership that you are speaking of? It says, "to him the porter openeth." Is this great feature of leadership underlying it?
S.McC. Well He has; and it is important that we should see how the Spirit of God comes into this matter of Christ's service in leadership to the saints. "To *him*", the emphatic 'Him', the personality is stressed, "to *him* the porter openeth"; as if the Spirit of God is making way for this Person, and no other person.
G.W.B. Does what you are saying bring out the personal link between the soul and the Lord?
S.McC. Yes, that enters into it. Our links with the Lord. "He calls his own sheep by name"; that enters into it basically. But the great point in the chapter is the collective position; the collective position is the prime thought in the chapter; but the individual side enters into it basically. Everyone of us, as a subject of the work of God is affected basically.
J.H.H. I was wondering if you would help us on the thought in verse 16, "And I have other sheep which are not of this fold: those also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice." I was wondering if there might be a solemn suggestion that there were those who did not hear His voice.
S.McC. There were. Those in the gospel that are presented as the Jews here, that are linked with the Jewish fold, they did not hear His voice. A very solemn
{158}
thing. John's gospel is stressing from beginning to end the need of being delivered from the Jewish character of things, in view of getting the gain of the ministry of Christ, as presented in this relation.
F.E. Would you say that, "to him the porter opens" is still a present service of the Spirit, making way for Christ?
S.McC. It is; and you might say that in principle the Holy Spirit will always make room for the Spirit of Christ in this way amongst the saints; and the saints will recognise this kind of spirit in administrative service wherever it is found.
R.C.McC. Why is this stranger mentioned? Is it suggested that these sheep have learnt to know the voice of Christ?
S.McC. There are different things that are referred to here. It says, "Verily, verily, I say to you, He that enters not in by the door," (we are to notice that, "the door", the legal, legitimate way of coming in; I am referring to the legal way, in the right and proper sense) "but mounts up elsewhere, *he* is a thief and a robber; but he that enters in by the door is the shepherd of the sheep. To *him* the porter opens." Though we are affected as we think of Christ coming into His public ministry and service, having in view that the sheep might be led forth, how also the Holy Spirit makes way for Him, as He comes into that service.
N.B.S. What is meant by the defencelessness of the sheep? Does that provide an occasion for the peculiar tenderness and fullness of divine care and provision for them?
S.McC. Yes, I think it is important that we should see that the sheep represent, in that way, the general character of things in the body of the saints. The thought of the one flock is the great point of contact between John's ministry, and Paul's ministry in relation
{159}
to the body. The answer to the flock in Paul's ministry would be the idea of the body, that wonderful entity; the saints in holy, sensitive, spiritual relation with one another, and the Holy Spirit pervading that entity.
C.E.J. Would that come in in @Ephesians 2: 15, 16, "That he might form the two in himself into one new man, making peace; and might reconcile both in one body to God by the cross"?
S.McC. As has often been noted and pointed out, reconciliation in @Ephesians 2 involves unity in affection. Jew and Gentile are brought together, but not just as a matter of doctrine. Reconciliation involves that they are brought together, and it works out in unity of affection between one another. It is a great thing that there should be that between us. The Lord is serving administratively at the present moment, in view of the imminence of the rapture to bring us together, not only in unity of light, but in unity of affection.
J.C. What is the present application of the thought of the fold? The fold is to be entered before the shepherd leads them out. Has it a present application?
S.McC. The fold, of course, here alludes to the Jewish fold, the Jewish position; and it would have application in principle to what may carry Jewish features at the present time in the public position around us. The Lord has in mind, in the grace and wealth of His service on administrative lines in John's gospel, to set us free, wholly free, from Jewish influence.
P.A.H. Was that seen in @John 20, the doors being shut through fear of the Jews. There was power to shut the doors?
S.McC. So that the saints, through the service of Christ, have come to this great point that the doors must be shut, because of this element that would interfere with life more abundantly amongst the saints.
W.J.B. I heard Mr. Taylor say in conversation in
{160}
Auckland in 1936, that one of our greatest dangers was Jewish tendencies.
S.McC. He has often said that; and in recent times in New York he stressed the awfulness of legality, the darkness linked with the Jewish element, as it exercises influence amongst the saints, hindering them from arriving at what the ministry has in mind: whole thoughts, full thoughts in regard of the truth.
W.J.B. Would you say that one of the greatest dangers in regard of it is its specious character. It is mistaken for spirituality?
S.McC. Its intriguing character to the natural mind, as imparting a certain amount of prestige which the flesh always loves is subtle; whereas christianity in its fulness involves that there is one Man that the sheep know, and that is the Shepherd. They know His voice, as it says, "When he has put forth all his own, he goes before them, and the sheep follow him, because they know his voice." I believe that in current matters the Lord has been acting in administrative service as the Shepherd, exercising influence over the saints generally, putting them forth in view, as it says, of what comes in later, pasture. "He ... shall go in and shall go out," showing the liberty of the brethren to move freely in this realm that the administrative service of Christ as the Shepherd stands related to.
P.B. Were not the Judaising teachers in Galatians mounting up some other way and confusing the saints there in regard to the fold and the flock, and robbing them of the glory of the gospel which had been presented by Paul?
S.McC. They were not coming in by the door. The door would represent the glory of the ministry. Think of what stands at the door in Luke's gospel, the great anointed preacher and all the grace linked with it. We
{161}
might in principle think of that as standing related to the door.
J.H.H. I was struck with your mentioning about being delivered from the influence of Judaism. I was wondering if you might see in Peter's epistle how completely he had been delivered from that, when he speaks to the elders and exhorts them, "shepherd the flock of God which is among you," and so forth; "and when the chief shepherd is manifested," and so forth.
S.McC. Yes, what a remarkable word he gives there! The flock of God. "Shepherd the flock of God." That is, it is divine property here. The feasts of the Jews are constantly alluded to in this gospel. Things have become such amongst the Jews that they have acquired them for themselves. Our liberty stands linked with the Lord and the service He is rendering here. And the important thing we should see is that this Jewish element has to be dealt with in each of our hearts. Some of us may be sitting by and thinking of other elements, but what we want to see is that this Jewish element is in every one of our hearts, and the Lord is desirous of leading us out of it.
J.C. In @Acts 20, that great love chapter, Paul speaks twice of the flock.
S.McC. He does, so that love enters into this great matter. It is a great feature of John's ministry. It underlies the service of the shepherd here for the sheep.
Ques. So that in verse 9 when it says, "he shall be saved," is the character of salvation particularly what you have been referring to as the salvation from the Jewish element?
S.McC. Peter said to the others in @Acts 2, "save yourselves from this *untoward* generation." It would be something on that principle, on that line.
J.D. Are we to be impressed with the greatness of
{162}
the One who has taken on this service? The continual reference to "I am," "I am the door," and so on?
S.McC. It throws into relief the peculiar place that Christ has in His service in this great matter. Chapter 9 has been alluded to; it shows to us how the man there will not listen to the voice of the stranger. He might have well come under the influence of the strangers in the way that they had to do with him, but the work of God becomes aggressive in him, and he follows, as it were, the voice of the Shepherd.
R.C.McC. Why does Paul refer to bewitching? "O senseless Galatians, who has bewitched you?" Is that the voice of the stranger?
S.McC. It is, and it is a question with them of despoiling the sheep, the flock; they are not thinking of the gain of the sheep, but of their own personal gain.
G.W.B. So does verse 9, referring to the matter of being saved, and going in and out and finding pasture, suggest something to us of the value and greatness of the door?
S.McC. The Lord says in verse 7, "Jesus therefore said again to them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, *I* am the door of the sheep. All whoever came before me are thieves and robbers; but the sheep did not hear them." You see we have to keep to this characteristic idea among the saints, that they do not hear the voice of the stranger, and we want to apprehend better this characteristic feature among the saints, and to make way for it among the saints. Maybe some of us would have been saved more from certain things, if we had made room for this characteristic feature among the saints.
G.W.B. Do you mean to indicate to us by that, that the great body of the saints hear the voice of the Lord, and to show us the great importance of knowing what is really found among the saints?
{163}
S.McC. There is something amongst the saints in the work of God, that, in the sheep, stands in affinity to the Shepherd.
W.L.W. Is the service of the Shepherd set out clearly and in detail in @Ezekiel 34, bringing Christ as Prince before the saints as a shepherd as a climax? "Ye, my flock, the flock of my pasture, are men: I am your God, said the Lord Jehovah," having the flock in view and manhood?
S.McC. The prophets have in mind in their ministry the wane that has come in, and their ministry would bring about stimulation and revival where there has been decline, and keep before the saints the best thoughts. And that is what the administrative service of Christ has in mind in this relation, "and shall go in and shall go out and shall find pasture. The thief comes not but that he may steal, and kill, and destroy: *I* am come that they might have life, and might have it abundantly." That is life in the collective position, known and enjoyed among the saints, through the service of Christ's leadership in this regard.
P.A.H. "He shall be saved, and shall go in and shall go out, and shall find pasture." Does the thought of salvation involve a sphere of salvation, known in the assembly really?
S.McC. That is what is in mind. It is the collective side that is in view in this chapter, the enjoyment of things in the collective position, what we are to one another in the assembly, forming this great sphere where we enjoy the truth in its fulness.
G.J.G. Should it be a word of warning to us, if the saints do not take a matter on in liberty, as to any matter that might be in hand?
S.McC. It is a question of the voice that we are listening to, and the importance of our basic links with Christ being right, our affinities with Christ being made
{164}
room for in our souls. So that, as He acquires influence over us, we make way for His leadership, and not the leadership of those who are referred to, that are all around us in the general professing body, who are not caring for the sheep, for the flock; the false shepherds, as they are alluded to in the prophets.
K.A.W. Does the reference to the wages throw into relief the principle of the shepherd who cares altogether for the sheep?
S.McC. And therefore it behoves everyone of us to allow our hearts to be searched. What have we got in mind, even now, at this moment? What is in mind? Is it personal gain, just for us along the lines of the flesh? Or have we got in mind the one flock, the one Shepherd; what the Shepherd is, and what the sheep are in relation to His leadership?
E.N.J. Is the word to Peter, "lovest thou me more than these," a very important matter? Sometimes it is said, we *must* consider for the Lord; the Lord's word is, "lovest thou me more than these?"
S.McC. It shows what a prime place it has in John's ministry, that the gospel should open with a reference to Christ as the Lamb of God; and that in the body of it we should have this wonderful chapter, devoted in such detail to the service of the Shepherd and the character of the sheep; and then that we should have one who has failed on the lines of leadership, recovered; the Lord's personal service to him, as it were, in dilating before his mind and his soul, the greatness of the sheep.
S.L. The Lord seems to be very jealous, does He not, of the matter of, "lovest thou me more than these?" Peter put himself in the forefront, but he had to learn the lesson with the Lord, did he not?
S.McC. It is a great matter that we should see the place that the saints have in the mind of Christ, in the mind of the divine Persons, because the Father comes
{165}
into this matter. The Father is operating in this matter, as well as Christ in relation to the sheep.
C.E.J. Would you say something as to verse 10? "*I* am come that they might have life, and might have it abundantly." I was just wondering whether having life abundantly would involve just what you say, that the Spirit of Christ is at liberty amongst the saints and filling everyone?
S.McC. It throws into relief before us the greatness of the collective position, because life in this way is not enjoyed individually, it is enjoyed amongst the saints collectively, the life more abundantly, "*I* am come that they might have life, and might have it abundantly." There is therefore, the need for the sheep, as it were, being in the full gain of the service of Christ, leading them out from all that is extraneous to the position, extraneous to christianity, that they might know the fulness of the truth, and enjoy, as suggested, on this side, life abundantly.
J.H.H. I have been thinking, too, of the remark you have made several times of the Lamb of God. You remember two of John's disciples followed the Lamb of God, "and they abode with him that day." Is that necessary, in a sense, in every heart, that we may enter into this thing fully?
S.McC. So the importance of our personal links with Christ, as to whether the truth in all its fulness has involved the development of these links in their strength, which means our salvation from every wind that might toss us and carry us.
G.W.B. Is there a significance in the fact that in @Revelation 21, it says, "I will show thee the bride, the Lamb's wife." And then, "The Lord God Almighty is its temple, and the Lamb," linking it on with what has been said as to the nearness of Christ to the assembly?
S.McC. Well, He *will* be near in the holy city, very
{166}
near to the saints. In the administration of that day, He will be known through the assembly. Not that we would limit it to that, because He is a divine Person, He shall come to His people, His feet shall touch the Mount of Olives; we cannot limit it entirely to that. But generally the Lord will be known through the assembly in the glorious administration of that day. But what we want to get hold of is how He is known now, the peculiar way in which we may be held in relation to Christ, over against the disrupting movements that are around us, that would deprive us of getting the truth, and getting the enjoyment of the truth in its fulness.
N.B.S. The Lord says twice, "*I* am the door," and twice, "*I* am the good shepherd," and on the second time on each occasion, He enlarges on the thought; is that to encourage us that we might grow in the apprehension of what He is as Leader in that way?
S.McC. This word 'good' is to be noted in these relations. "The good shepherd." He does not say, 'I am the right shepherd.' What He says involves that, in the teaching of the chapter, but He says, "*I* am the good shepherd." He says in verse 11, "I am the good shepherd. The good shepherd lays down his life for the sheep." The very word 'good' should bring something into our mind, because there is so much that is bad around us.
H.S.D. Would you enlarge a little on the Lord's words in verse 15, "I lay down my life," in relation to this subject?
S.McC. Well, that is a great matter that we should see, that this administrative service involves a preparedness to lay down our lives for the brethren, for the sheep. John is inculcating this kind of thought into our minds. True leadership involves that the saints are not run away from, and left. True leadership involves that the saints are stood by, even supposing it costs our
{167}
lives. Of course, this is unique here; we must keep before us the uniqueness of the Person of Christ. He says, "I lay down my life, that I may take it again." That could never be said of us. That is a divine Person that is speaking. He laid down His life in one condition, and took it again in another condition.
J.H.H. So that the writer to the Hebrews has taken this in to his heart. He says, "the God of Peace, who brought again from among the dead, our Lord Jesus, the great shepherd of the sheep."
S.McC. Very good, and you notice that before that he says in chapter 13: 9 -- 13, "Be not carried away with various and strange doctrines; for it is good that the heart be confirmed with grace, not meats; those who have walked in which have not been profited by them. We have an altar of which they have no right to eat who serve the tabernacle; for of those beasts whose blood is carried as sacrifices for sin into the holy of holies by the high priest, of these the bodies are burned outside the camp. Wherefore also Jesus, that he might sanctify the people by his own blood, suffered without the gate; therefore let us go forth to him without the camp, bearing his reproach." That coupled with what you are saying, brings in the line of teaching which we have in this verse, the sheep going forth.
J.H.H. That was the scripture that the Lord used through a brother to bring me into fellowship.
S.McC. Very good. It is important that we should see the value of these scriptures. As we move on in the chapter, the Lord says, verse 14, "*I* am the good shepherd; and I know those that are mine, and am known of those that are mine, as the Father knows me and I know the Father; and I lay down my life for the sheep. And I have other sheep which are not of this fold; those also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one flock, one shepherd. On
{168}
this account the Father loves me, because I lay down my life that I may take it again. No one takes it from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have authority to lay it down and I have authority to take it again. I have received this commandment of my Father." The Lord is bringing the Father on to our view now, to impress us with another divine Person coming into this matter of the sheep, interest in the sheep; and not only has the Lord, as the Shepherd, a personal interest in the sheep, but the Father has too, especially as we come down to the later verses, to this matter of perishing.
C.T.McC. Is that why he uses the word 'must', verse 16, "those also I must bring"? Is that on account of what divine Persons have set themselves on doing?
S.McC. That is why we are here this afternoon. It is the great service of Christ to the Gentile world. Where would we have been if it had not been for that? He has brought *us*. "Those also I must bring." We have been brought, and we have heard His voice. "There shall be one flock, one shepherd," as if the Lord delights in holding this thought to the end of the teaching that has gone before in the chapter.
J.C. Does the Lord in this wondrous act of devotion to death provide the Father, we say reverently, another motive for loving Him?
S.McC. We are to understand that principle in John's Gospel, the promotion of the activity of love. The Lord Jesus sets it out as a divine Person in relation to another divine Person. He, the Lord Jesus in manhood, He promotes the activity of love, gives motives and reasons for that love to be active toward Him; a remarkable thing. And we should be concerned about it, in relation to one another and in relation to divine Persons.
J.D. So that 'one flock' and 'one shepherd' would
{169}
really involve that, would it not, thinking of the love that you are speaking of?
S.McC. It does involve that, that the unity is a unity in affection, not just an arbitrary unity. The unity that is suggested in the body involves spiritual sensitiveness in our relations with one another; and in the sheep, in the flock, it involves these affinities in one another, and our links with Christ.
C.T.McC. Is it significant in that way that the first fruit of the Spirit in Galatians is love, where they were in danger of biting and devouring one another?
S.McC. Well, that is to be noted, and John is the great love gospel. The administration of Christ working out in John's Gospel involves this subject of love, and it involves it amongst the brethren too, and we are to make way for it. Solomon's porch comes in here now, which is to be noted, the great suggestion in Jesus walking in the temple in the porch of Solomon. "The Jews therefore surrounded him, and said to him, Until when doest thou hold our soul in suspense? If *thou* art the Christ, say so to us openly." They were charging Him with their deficiencies, with their difficulties, whereas *He* was not the source of their difficulties, they were the source of their *own* difficulties. How often that is the case, that we charge others with the source of our difficulties when we have ourselves to blame.
W.H.F. Would that be suggested in @Ephesians 6: 23, where the apostle speaks of "peace ... and love with faith, from God the Father and the Lord Jesus." Two divine Persons commending peace, love and faith to the brethren.
S.McC. It is remarkable that that letter should end that way, full as it is with heavenly light, bringing before us the whole scope of the truth, and we must keep that in mind, the whole scope of the truth, and it finishes with that word, involving practical conditions
{170}
among the saints. We cannot arrive rightly at the truth in its fulness, as a whole thought, unless there are practical conditions among the saints, that would make way for it.
W.H.F. I was particularly connecting it with your reference to the Lord in Solomon's porch, and the readiness of the flesh to blame somebody else, and indeed overlooking the Lord's rights.
S.McC. The sheep would never overlook the rights of the Shepherd. They know His voice, they hear His words. They are intelligent, but their link of affinity with the Shepherd as His own sheep saves them from the voice of the stranger.
E.H. There is constant reference to hearing; does that suggest in the whole of the chapter that our minds are to be held rightly?
S.McC. Yes. And especially that organ, the ear. To what am I listening? Is it a voice that corresponds with Christ, a voice in which there is affinity to Christ's voice; or is it the voice of a stranger that I am listening to?
P.R.P. Would you say something in that connection as to verses 14 and 15 as to the knowledge?
S.McC. It would involve the Spirit in the saints, because John's ministry, really contemplates the fulness of the dispensation. Christ at the right hand of God and the Spirit down here. As he says in chapter 8, "*I* am the light of the world"; in its fulness that really involves Christ in heaven at the present moment, the light of the world, and John's ministry contemplates that.
G.B. Would you say a little more as to why Solomon's porch comes into this chapter?
S.McC. Well, it is an interesting thing that the porch of judgment should come up in the chapter that is dealing with the sheep and the Shepherd, as if we were garrisoned in our minds by the thought linked with the
{171}
teaching here in the chapter as to the Shepherd and the sheep, the one flock, and the one Shepherd; we shall be helped as to this position that Solomon's porch suggests, where moral questions are resolved.
J.C. The truth is that there is only one Shepherd. The Lord Jesus Himself charged Peter as a shepherd. Peter uses the word to others and so does Paul, but there is really only one Shepherd.
S.McC. And therefore the importance of hearing His voice, as in verse 25, "Jesus answered them, I told you." They say to him, "If *thou* art the Christ, say so to us openly." What had He been doing all the time? The truth had been coming out all the time, and they are trying to imply that He was not saying things openly, when the teaching was there, as He refers again in the end of the gospel saying that He had done nothing in secret. It was all there for them to take account of; but that is the working of the Jewish mind. And He says, "The works which *I* do in my Father's name, these bear witness concerning me; but *ye*," the emphatic 'ye' do not believe, for ye are not of my sheep, as I told you." The Lord is very defined in His language here. And then He says, "My sheep hear my voice, and *I* know them, and they follow me; and *I* give them life eternal; and they shall never perish." Now this involves the fulness of the truth, because the Spirit is here to guide us into all the truth; and the Lord has in mind that we should reach the full thought on the heavenly line.
G.H.W-n. Does the Lord, in speaking of the Father, bring in the great family thought?
S.McC. I think it is stressing more the activity of grace. He is presented in John's Gospel in relation to Christ, "my Father." It is *His* sonship that is in mind. When you get the expression, "the Father," and "my
{172}
Father" here, to us it would be more God known in this wonderful Name of grace.
P.B. What you are really emphasising is that the sheep characteristically recognise the shepherd's voice over against every other voice, and they believe, and they are subject to being led; and they are in the joy and the power of eternal life, and in the conscious security of the Father's and the Son's love in activity toward them in grace?
S.McC. And that produces a sense of security; as He says, "they shall never perish." I think we all want this sense of security, as amongst the sheep of Christ and belonging to the flock, and we should have a sense of security, that we are in a sphere of security where our lives, as it were, are not in danger, but we are going all the way in view of the whole truth, not falling in the wilderness, but going all the way.
E.N.J. Where there is warmth in the flock, over against the winter conditions in the Jewish position?
S.McC. That would be the point. The pasture, the life abundantly, and life eternal, and they shall never perish! While it is a negative thought, it is a wonderful thought that we have security and are positively in the enjoyment of life as linked with that position.
J.H.H. Would you say that it progresses in the 11th and 12th chapters? One who hears His voice is at table with Him. What security he would feel, what safety he would feel!
S.McC. So that the family of God figuratively comes on to our view, and the personnel of the family of God in the succeeding chapters.
R.C.McC. Would you say something about the hand of Christ, and the hand of the Father?
S.McC. Well, they are figures of speech which are employed to intensify in our minds the care of divine Persons in relation to us as the sheep of Christ. And
{173}
it says in verse 31, "The Jews therefore again took stones that they might stone him," as if they would meet all this kind of ministry with that kind of attitude and that kind of feeling; how it should help us, every one of us in our hearts! Jewish elements are there latent in every one of our hearts; not just some hearts, but in every one of our hearts, and have to be judged to get the full gain of the administrative service of Christ in the light of this chapter.
G.W.B. Is there something very attractive when the Lord says, "My Father ... *is* greater than all."
S.McC. Well. He is stressing the supremacy of the Father; the Father is the supreme governor in the universe. And then He says, "My Father and I are one," showing how the Lord's equality with the Father is brought on to our view, again the dignity of the Person; because we are reminded all through John's teaching as to the dignity of the Person who is the Shepherd.
{174}
THE SERVICE OF CHRIST IN LEADERSHIP (2)
@Genesis 37: 1 -- 24; @Genesis 41: 46 -- 57
S.McC. What we are considering together is the service of Christ in leadership in relation to His own, specially having in mind what they are as the flock, subjects of care and administrative service in that relation; and also how the spirit works out amongst us. It is thought that we should go over to the Old Testament to amplify these thoughts which appear in different ones. The first one coming up for our consideration is Joseph, a unique type of Christ, whose history affords us help as to what should mark ourselves as the Spirit of Christ is made room for amongst us. And what we should keep in mind in these two passages is Joseph's personal attractiveness, and how the love side is stressed immediately Joseph comes into our view. Nothing more is said either, after that, as to the others. Time elapses before they are brought into view in the genealogy, in the generations of Jacob. The moral history that ensues is covered before we get the generations again. Then we should see the way Joseph's service takes form, and the sufferings that it entailed for him, as the chapter unfolds. Then in chapter 41 we see that the winter is past, the time of suffering for Joseph is over; he is in the exalted place in glory. And we see how the subject again touches Paul's ministry in the way that the administrative service works out; cities coming onto our view, and the assembly formally in type in Asnath. The meanings of the names of the sons bring before us what the type in Asnath is meant to convey, specially the thought of what there is for Christ as a result of all His toil and suffering, and also the matter of forgetfulness, as we have often dwelt on it and been taught in regard to it, the ability to
{175}
eliminate certain circumstances from our minds as in Manasseh. Ephraim represents the great result for God from the great administrative power that is linked with Joseph, his commandment regulating everything; for it was according to Joseph's commandment that all the people were to regulate themselves, the working out of it involving great blessing for the saints in the type.
We should keep before us in chapter 37 how Joseph comes into our view; the first thing said about him is, "Joseph, being seventeen years old, fed the flock with his brethren." What a great personality Joseph is! We are going to hear much about him in the succeeding chapters according to the holy record, but the first and prime thing that is said about him is that he fed the flock with his brethren. Even before we get a reference to Israel's love for him, and to the vest of many colours, we get this reference to what Joseph was constitutionally in his care for the saints. I suppose in the type the Lord Jesus would come into our view as having the saints at heart immediately, as if they have such a prime place in His mind and in His heart.
G.W.B. Would Peter standing up with the eleven be akin to what is in your mind as to feeding the flock with his brethren?
S.McC. I think that there it is the preaching, public testimony in the preaching, not quite the feeding of the flock. Peter standing up with the eleven, of course, would carry the principle that comes into all ministry.
O.V.R. Is Paul's word to the elders of Ephesus on this line of shepherding the flock?
S.McC. Yes it is. The whole of @Acts 20 is filled with this thought.
W.J.B. Would you say that it should be on the heart of every brother, and sister too, that the flock should be fed?
S.McC. The Spirit of Christ operating among the
{176}
brethren would be marked by that feature: care for the saints, how they are getting on.
F.B. And the flock is fed, over against the prevailing conditions of chapter 36. It says at the end of chapter 35: "And Isaac expired and died, and was gathered to his peoples, old and full of days. And his sons Esau and Jacob buried him." Then we have the generations of Esau, that is Edom, and the fathers, and the sons, and the daughters, and the chiefs, and the kings, all coming in in relation to Esau; and it is with these conditions around that Joseph fed the flock with his brethren.
S.McC. So that you get a great range of human administrative glory in chapter 36, but the wrong kind of administrative glory. And one of the remarkable things about it is the many times that it is mentioned that they died, certain ones died; as if that shadow lies across that administrative system, the chiefs of Edom, a counter administrative system you might say, in which the glory of man is exploited. When we come to chapter 37, we get a different side: "And Jacob dwelt in the land where his father sojourned, in the land of Canaan." We get the great line of the testimony coming into view, "where his father sojourned, in the land of Canaan." Verse 1 would represent well-known ground to faith, well-known territory to faith. Then we get the generations of Jacob, and they finish with Joseph, as if the prime matter on hand is now Joseph.
J.G.H. The first mention as to David is feeding the sheep.
S.McC. Yes, we shall come to that. It marks all these great men of God. That is, linked with administrative ability in the Old Testament, is an underlying love and respect for the saints. It is invariable in the Old Testament, right from Abraham onwards, that linked with every feature of administrative ability in the persons
{177}
who are brought into view in the testimony, is this great matter of love and care for the flock.
R.C.McC. Is it worthy of note that he is doing service with the sons of Bilhah and with the sons of Zilpah, you might say the least of the brethren?
S.McC. Yes, it is interesting, in relation to that, that he fed the flock with *his brethren*. That is the first underlying thought: his brethren, the family idea. John's ministry would help us as to the family idea which underlies everything. But then the different mothers come up; I mean what has been produced as the result of the different mothers would come into our view: "and he was doing service with the sons of Bilhah, and with the sons of Zilpah, his father's wives. And Joseph brought to his father an evil report of them." That is, 'their evil discourse,' showing that coupled with this care for the flock is this discernment of evil, and the recoiling from it, with Joseph.
J.C. Joseph was the son of Jacob and Rachel, a, shepherd and shepherdess. Would that suggest that these features amongst the saints would produce seed of this character, if the features of a shepherd are in expression amongst the brethren?
S.McC. So "the Jerusalem above is free, which is our mother." @Galatians 4: 26. If we are formed by that mother, what holy liberty we shall be in! If we are under the influence of that mother, we shall never be in bondage. If we are in bondage, it is because we have come under the influence of Hagar.
J.D. Would there be some help afforded in the fact that Joseph is doing something here? But in regard to the evil report he speaks of to his father, he is not trying to correct the brethren, is he?
S.McC. Well it is a very interesting thing. It was not his prime matter. It is an awful thing if looking out evil becomes our prime matter. The prime matter is
{178}
feeding the flock. We are not here to search out evil. The evil comes to light and Joseph takes account of it; but he is not searching it out. He is feeding the flock, and it comes to light.
J.D. And are there deep feelings underlying this? I was thinking of Paul speaking of Timothy's tears; and he could also speak of one who cared with genuine feelings how the saints get on.
S.M.C. How important it is! We deal with evil of course when it comes out, but it is not the prime matter with us to search out evil. Joseph was not doing that, he was feeding the flock, and what comes to light he takes account of. Every one of us should have a moral judgment as to evil. It is important that the young people be faithful in regard to evil and eschew it.
P.B. Though Paul saw the evil that was connected with the Galatians, he was prepared to be a mother to them until Christ be formed again in them. Is that the idea?
S.McC. Think of the sufferings of Paul in view of the saints coming into the truth! It was not only that Paul gave addresses and took readings; he could do that as no one else could, great minister as he was. But think of the pressure and the sufferings behind his ministry, that the saints might come into the liberty of the truth!
A.T.G. Does the brotherly feature shine out in Joseph, that he is prepared to tell his brethren of his dreams in confidence, despite his judgment of them; that it does not hinder his liberty with them in that way?
S.McC. Well it is remarkable, it hinders their liberty with him. It says they "could not greet him with friendliness." But what was in Joseph's heart was towards all; he was representing his father, he represents God. Think of the Lord Jesus among the Jews; how He waited upon them in His teaching! "He came to his
{179}
own, and his own received him not; but as many as received him, to them gave he the right" (the right to take that place) "to be children of God," @John 1: 11, 12. Think of His patient service and toil among the Jews in John's gospel!
J.H.H. You would say that it was not in the favour of his brethren that he could not find where they were feeding the flock? He seemed to have difficulty in finding where they were feeding the flock.
S.McC. Why should we be difficult to locate? I mean in meetings like this, why should we be difficult to locate, if we are all on the line of feeding the flock? Saul hid behind the baggage, he was difficult to locate; but if we are with God and have the flock at heart, we shall not be difficult to locate.
J.C. Is the spirit of mutuality a qualification for service in the way of feeding, he was *with* his brethren?
S.McC. Yes exactly, *with* his brethren, not over them. Although what comes in in the dreams shows what divine sovereignty would bring about; but the first thing that is said of him is that he was *with* his brethren. I think that is an important feature in our local gatherings; when persons assume to be above their brethren, they always get into trouble, it always ends in disaster.
C.W. Moses, in his petitioning God for the people, desired that his name should be blotted out. I was wondering whether that would help us in relation to what you are saying, the spirit of it?
S.McC. What a spirit of Christ was there! What a man Moses was! Amongst men, outside of Jesus, he had no equal, as far as greatness goes. He was prepared to lay down his life for the saints. I think we want, in our local gatherings, to look out with holy regard upon the brethren, especially those who serve or have anything to do with activities among the brethren; that they should never allow for a moment anything that service
{180}
puts upon them to give them any thought that they are above their brethren.
J.H.H. Would Paul speaking to the Galatians help? "Be as *I* am, for *I* also am as *ye*, brethren," @Galatians 4: 12.
S.McC. Very good. It is remarkable how he can say that. And he says in @1 Corinthians 15, "But by God's grace *I am what I am*." Why should we try to make ourselves what we are not? Why not make room for the work of God to express itself, and whatever we have acquired with God in the way of personality, let *that* express itself, not try to be something that we are not.
C.T.McC. In @Acts 9 the first verse says, "But Saul still breathing out threatenings and slaughter *against* the disciples of the Lord," then he comes in touch with the Lord Himself and in verse 19 it says, "And he was *with* the disciples who were in Damascus certain days." Is that the kind of conversion we all need?
S.McC. Yes. Paul gets a peculiar impression at the beginning, of the greatness of the brethren. The Lord said, "But rise up and enter into the city, and it shall be told thee what thou must do." Not that *he* was to tell the brethren what to do, but he was to be told what he *must* do. I think we should be careful of taking the position of telling the brethren what they have to do; I mean in the sense in which we are referring to it.
C.E.J. Would the word in @Mark 10 help in regard of what we are saying? The Lord says, "but it is not thus among you; but whosoever would be great among you, shall be your minister; and whosoever would be first of you shall be bondman of all. For also the Son of man did not come to be ministered to, but to minister, and give his life a ransom for many." Verses 43 -- 45.
S.McC. Very good, showing the great Model the Lord has left us. There is plenty of room on that line amongst the brethren, to serve them in the spirit of lowliness that marked the Son of Man. So that Christ
{181}
comes into our view in a choice and peculiar way here. We want to make room for the Spirit to bring Christ into the view of our souls. It says, "And Israel loved Joseph more than all his sons, because he was son of his old age; and he made him a vest of many colours." We are reminded thus of the closing phases of the testimony in Genesis, and what marks the closing phases of the testimony in Genesis and Jacob's old age are these peculiar references to spiritual attractiveness in Jacob and Joseph and Benjamin, the love side being stressed, corresponding with John's ministry.
E.H. It says in verse 2 that Joseph fed the flock. What was it about the flock that made him feed them?
S.McC. Why the possibilities and potentialities, and what they were as belonging to Jacob, what the saints are. Think of how the Lord Jesus speaks to God the Father in @John 17 about the saints in the light of what they had been to the Father, and what the Father had given to Him, and how He says that He had guarded them. He had lost none of them, save the son of perdition.
E.M.W. So that the note to the word 'fed' here is "was tending." It goes further than merely feeding.
S.McC. It involves caring, tending, standing by.
W.H.F. In @John 6, the feeding of the large crowd, the Lord knew what He was going to do, but at the end of that chapter there is reference to Judas who was to betray Him. Does the Lord take account of the saints as to their tremendous possibilities for God, notwithstanding what may be amongst us?
S.McC. So that all through John's gospel our eye is kept on that, on what the saints are in the divine mind; so that whole chapters are devoted to the service which the Son of God expended on *one* such as @John 4, @John 9, @John 21, all reminding us of the greatness of the personnel of the assembly in the type.
{182}
P.R.P. Would this bring out the characteristic family features manifested in a young person?
S.McC. It would, and it is important that the family side should be understood, because the basis of confidence is in the family side. There is nothing worse than a lack of confidence amongst us. If we do not have confidence in one another, how can we go on and work out the truth together? And the basis for confidence lies in the family side.
E.N.J. There is beautiful harmony in @Acts 13 in the opening verses, where you have Niger and the foster brother of Herod, and other brethren who naturally would be difficult perhaps to synchronise with; but beautiful harmony was there under the Holy Spirit's guiding. Is that a healthy lesson for us? The harmony with which the assembly is functioning there is over against the difficulties in our section here, that there were several mothers, and all the difficulties that Joseph had to meet.
S.McC. Yes, and especially over against the principle of Herod in chapter 36, the great principle of the Edomite that comes to light.
G.W.B. Would you say something further as to having things right on the family side?
S.McC. What I was saying was that the family side is the basis of confidence amongst us; and if we do not have confidence based on love in relation to the family side, we shall never be able to work out the truth rightly, because the administrative side and the family side run together; they are collateral lines, and we must not divorce them. If we are helped to complete soundness as the man in @Acts 3, we shall hold *both* Peter and John.
G.W.B. In your reference to the family side, have you in mind the recognition of what is involved in that,
{183}
that the dignity that attaches to it, no matter what comes up, must be held in our minds?
S.McC. Yes. The chapter opens with reference to the family side, and then it proceeds to the great realm of administrative glory, because the dreams deal with the administrative side. It involves the family side in the working out of it, but it is a great projected realm of administrative glory. It is brought into our view. The sun and the moon and the stars all speak of a great realm of ruling, and administrative glory.
W.J.B. Would Abraham be referring to the family side when he says to Lot, "I pray thee let there be no contention between me and thee ... for we are brethren"?
S.McC. That is an important thing too, that in all conflict we should hold to the family side; not in the way of ignoring the truth, the truth must be held to, but we must see the importance of going on together. In this city in 1947 J.T. referred to Peter and Paul and the way that they were brought into agreement, and the way they went on together, so that Peter could refer to "our beloved brother Paul." The importance of that underlies good local conditions.
P.B. Does Paul represent what you are saying in @1 Thessalonians 1: "Paul and Silvanus and Timotheus to the assembly of Thessalonians in God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. Grace to you and peace." Does that help?
S.McC. It certainly does, and we should emulate these features in working out the truth in our local gatherings. So we come to the matter of Joseph's dreams. The love side brings out the hatred of his brethren in verse 4. What brought out the awful enmity of the Jews in John's gospel was the Lord's links with the Father. The more the Lord stressed His links with the Father, the greater it aggravated them, the
{184}
more it brought out their antagonism and enmity, until finally they succeed in His being slain.
J.C.S. Would the administration here flowing out from the father's love for Joseph link on with the end of @John 3, "The Father loves the Son, and has given all things to be in his hand." The great realm of administration?
S.McC. So that we should keep Christ in our view in this matter: what He had to go through, what He was to the Father, and what He had to face with the Jews. His enemies, with men. We are reminded of all this in Joseph's history.
J.D. "And lo, my sheaf rose up, and remained standing." The reference is back to @Genesis 18: 2 where Abraham saw three men standing near him.
S.McC. Yes, the word means stationed. It is a stable position. He says, "Hear, I pray you, this dream, which I have dreamt: Behold we were binding sheaves in the fields." Now this is an interesting thing because unity is the great thought in this matter, in the working out of the truth. You will notice all through John's gospel how the Lord stresses the strain of unity, oneness; and Joseph said, "and lo, my sheaf rose up, and remained standing." That is, attention is now drawn in the type to life inherently in Christ in all its intrinsic value.
J.McN. Have you anything to say as to why the dreams are in the land of Canaan, but the working out of them in the land of Egypt?
S.McC. No, I do not know why it is. Perhaps you have some thought as to it. Tell us.
J.McN. I wondered if the dreams would be a suggestion of purpose, and the working out of them, as here in Egypt. Would that be right?
S.McC. Well it might be to a certain extent, although I think "Behold, we were binding sheaves in the fields, and lo, my sheaf rose up," is specially to stress life
{185}
inherently in Christ in the midst of the conditions that obtain. The sun and the moon and the stars represent the fixed order of things on the heavenly side.
W.L.J. Would @Ephesians 4 "the unity of the Spirit in the uniting bond of peace" be set out in Joseph here?
S.McC. Yes I think it would. @Ephesians 4 is interesting because the fixity of the moral universe is alluded to there also. Along with the unity of the Spirit, the apostle proceeds to outline the principles of the fixity of the moral universe.
J.D. Does the thought of what is heavenly in regard to administration come in here?
S.McC. I have no doubt it would. It is a wonderful thing that the Lord has gone into heaven, "whom heaven indeed must receive till the times of the restoring of all things," @Acts 3: 21. Heaven *must* receive Him. It is a must; stressing the wonderful session at the present time, that as having entered heaven He has set up and established an administration, and is functioning as Man in relation to that administration. And it works out in different ways; the first feature of it was the gift of the Spirit.
C.T.McC. So that all administration now must be in perfect accord with that Man as received in heaven?
S.McC. Well exactly, and the position down here in the presence of the Spirit in the assembly is commensurate with the position up there, so that we have the administration working out in a subservient way down here corresponding to what is up there.
C.T.McC. Is not that a great test to our consciences, as to whether we are really in line with that? It would affect us, would it not?
S.McC. So that the first dream would bear on the principle of this kind of life; that is, it is the kind of life that you could say could hardly be interfered with,
{186}
I am alluding to the anti-type of course, what comes out in Christ as rising from among the dead. It is what cannot be interfered with.
S.L. Would it be right to say that the glory of administration according to God is really, on the part of the saints, secured through suffering?
S.McC. Well it is. Suffering, we can see, is what will give lustre and radiance to the holy city in her great administrative part as sharing with Christ in the millennial day.
S.L. Before Joseph comes into the glory of his position in Egypt, it spelt for him a pathway of great suffering, did it not?
S.McC. We are to see the sufferings of Christ entering into this matter; and Paul says, "I fill up that which is behind of the tribulations of Christ in my flesh, for his body, which is the assembly." @Colossians 1: 24. We are to see this prime matter of the sufferings of Christ, and our hearts have to be searched as to whether we have a right part in them in view of the assembly, Christ's body.
N.B.S. Is there a link with @Hebrews 2: 10, "in bringing many sons to glory, to make perfect the leader of their salvation through sufferings"?
S.McC. The Lord is now in that condition and state of manhood that is according to the eternal purpose of God, reaching it via the line of suffering, via death, tasting death for every thing too, as it says there.
C.T.McC. Would you say a little more about this life that cannot be interfered with? Would you enlarge on that a little, please?
S.McC. Well, we are to be reminded of this in Christ, the kind of life that we see in the type here coming out in the anti-type. My sheaf rose up, and *remained standing*. That is, we are to take account of Christ, how He rose from among the dead, and how He remains standing, and what is suggested in that
{187}
positioning, the importance of that position. And it says, "and behold, your sheaves came round about and bowed down to my sheaf." That is, it points to the pre-eminence of Christ among the many brethren on this principle.
G.W.B. Sheaves were never known to move in this way before, setting forth what you have said. It is a delightful picture of the result of the life being in Him, and transmitted to others that they recognise His supremacy.
S.McC. You say transmitted to others; what are you referring to?
G.W.B. What I have in mind is that His sheaf stood up. There was life inherent there, but the other sheaves came round. Is that not the result of what is imparted to us, that we see the place that Christ has and we gather to Him as the supreme centre?
S.McC. Yes, only that one would like to keep the distinctiveness of the thought in regard to Christ. It is *my* sheaf rose up, not the other sheaves rose up; "my sheaf rose up ... your sheaves came round about ... " the uniqueness of what is seen in Christ.
J.N.G. Does it link on with the word in @John 10: 18, "I have authority to take it again"?
S.McC. That is the force of it. He took His life again in new conditions.
J.M. Does the position of the sheaf standing up become a test as to whether they will receive Joseph, receive Christ really? It is the same word as in @Genesis 18: 2.
S.McC. So that all around us we have religions established on imitating Christ as Man here; but Christianity stands linked with Christ as risen from the dead and ascended up into heaven.
W.H.F. Is it really @Colossians 1: 18, "firstborn from
{188}
among the dead, that *he* might have the first place in all things"?
S.McC. That is it exactly. That comes before the great projected sphere of administrative glory, Christ among the Gentiles. What we have here precedes Joseph on the throne with the whole extended realm of Egypt before him.
J.N.H. Is not that the testimony of Stephen, "Lo, I behold the heavens opened, and the Son of man *standing* ...," as having risen from the dead?
S.McC. Very good. It is the final word, you might say, to the Jews.
C.E.J. I was wondering if @Colossians 1 fitted in with chapter 37 and @Colossians 2 with chapter 41. "For in him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily; and ye are complete in him, who is the head of all principality and authority." @Colossians 2: 9, 10.
S.McC. You mean that the saints and the assembly come into view in Asnath?
C.E.J. Yes, and I was thinking of Christ personally, @Colossians 1 distinguishing Him in that way peculiarly. In chapter 2 He is the One from whom administration flows and the assembly is complete in Him.
S.McC. Yes that would be right.
J.G.H. Would the scripture in @Romans 1: 4 apply? "Marked out Son of God in power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by resurrection of the dead."
S.McC. Very good. The anti-type would set that out in its perfection. Joseph was marked by the eschewing of evil. The spirit of holiness was seen with Joseph. You will understand what I am referring to, though of course it was unique in the Lord Jesus Christ. But Joseph brought to his father an evil report; that is he is bearing testimony as to evil; and in Potiphar's house he fled from evil; that is, the principle of the spirit of holiness is with Joseph as coming out in
{189}
life and testimony here. "My sheaf rose up, and remained standing."
F.W. In ministry, it is clear from what has been said that the only sheaf that must stand erect, and remain standing, is Christ. All the other sheaves bow down to Him. Will you say something too as to the sun and the moon and the eleven stars bowing down to this other one?
S.McC. Well, we have more the side of heavenly influence brought into our view here. "And he dreamed yet another dream, and told it to his brethren, and said, Behold, I have dreamt another dream, and behold, the sun and the moon and eleven stars bowed down to me. And he told it to his father and to his brethren. And his father rebuked him, and said to him, What is this dream which thou hast dreamt? Shall we indeed come, I and thy mother and thy brethren, to bow down ourselves to thee to the earth? And his brethren envied him; but his father kept the saying." I think this would bring into our view the supremacy of Christ in relation to *every* family, not only in relation to the one family, as in *your* sheaves coming round about. But we have a great sphere of glory indicated in the sun and the moon and eleven stars, and they all bow down to Christ.
F.W. Would God, in giving these dreams to Joseph, indicate the supremacy of Christ not only upon earth in the sphere of testimony, but also in heaven, so that He is supreme over all?
S.McC. Well that is the point. In the first it is the testimony to life in resurrection, resurrection being linked with the earth, "*my* sheaf rose up." John stresses that word "up". "Thus must the Son of man be lifted up," @John 3: 14. "When ye shall have lifted up the Son of man," @John 8: 28.
P.B. Is this a touch of @Ephesians 1 from verse 20 to 23? "And he set him down at his right hand in the
{190}
heavenlies, above every principality, and authority, and power, and dominion, and every name named, not only in this age, but also in that to come; and has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be head over all things to the assembly, which is his body, the fulness of him who fills all in all." Does that come in here?
S.McC. The principle of Colossians bears on the first dream as to life in resurrection power and to the testimony conveyed in it, because resurrection is the great public witness and testimony to God's power, the divine power, and it comes to light in the first dream. But the second dream brings before us a great realm of administrative glory involving principalities and powers, but all subjected to Christ. But the assembly is with Him. The assembly is not amongst the dominions and powers and authorities that are subjected. "And gave him to be head over all things to the assembly." "And he set him down at his right hand in the heavenlies, above every principality, and authority, and power, and dominion, and every name named, not only in this age, but also in that to come." It brings before us the supremacy of Christ in that relation.
J.D. It says, "And behold, your sheaves came round about and bowed down to my sheaf." I was thinking of "round about." Is it the thought of nearness?
S.McC. Yes, it would be the thought of Christ as the centre.
J.D. There were those in the gospel who sat in a circle round Him.
S.McC. The Lord looked around in a circuit upon them too.
J.D. I wondered whether the spirit of this would really help in our localities; Christ as having the supreme place, and our nearness to Him, and round about Him.
S.McC. That is the point; because all the trouble in our localities revolves around some other man wanting to get the distinction instead of Christ.
{191}
J.D. And would you say a word as to this bowing down, "bowed down to my sheaf." And then again, "the sun and the moon and eleven stars bowed down to me."
S.McC. Well, it is the whole truth of the gospel. The ministry and teaching and truth of the gospel is to bring about this state of subjection to Christ, in which Christ is supreme.
N.B.S. Was his father quickly adjusted here? He questioned the matter first of all, the divine communication, but he kept the saying. Of the brethren it does not record their saying anything, but they envied him.
S.McC. It is very interesting in that way to see how the truth begins to assert itself; that is, while his father rebuked him in verse 10, at the end of verse 11 it says that his father kept the saying. It is just a suggestion, an inkling, that the truth is beginning to find a way and to assert itself. It will come out eventually. It involves a process, but there is the light of it here. It is the light of a thing that tests us.
G.J.G. Is the family side brought before us here? It is that which they were slow to arrive at. Did not his brethren have to come to that side before they got the full light as to what was put into the hands of Joseph?
S.McC. So that the process is a difficult one for them, but they come to it; and the work of God answers to all the service of Christ administratively towards them, towards his brethren. The work of God eventually asserts itself, the truth asserts itself, and we get the disclosure of Joseph.
P.B. What would you say with regard to Reuben? He had right desires, did he not? Yet he has not moral power with his brethren to carry them out in a proper way. Is there some suggestion in that for us?
S.McC. Yes there is, so far as it goes. He says something, and we can be thankful he does say something, but it does not go far enough. He is weak in his
{192}
intervention, but nevertheless he has some concern about the matter, and we can be thankful for that.
J.H.H. I wondered whether the father keeping these sayings was akin to the end of @Luke 2, "And his mother kept all these things in her heart." -- the truth of the Person asserting itself, as you have been stressing.
S.McC. So that the time will eventually come when what has been kept will come out; that is, we want to make way for the truth in our souls; even supposing we do not see it fully at the moment, let us make way for it, and the time will come when there will be the full answer to it.
G.J.G. Jacob eventually says, "Joseph my son is yet alive; I will go and see him before I die." @Genesis 45: 28. Is that the arrival at it?
S.McC. He is prepared now for the transition to this great position where Joseph's administrative glory is known. We should think of verse 14 here; it says, "Go, I pray thee, see after the *welfare* of thy brethren, and after the *welfare* of the flock; and bring me word again. And he sent him out of the vale of Hebron." This is a great matter, seeking the welfare of the brethren and the welfare of the flock and bringing word again; that is, there is interest in this matter of how the brethren and the flock are getting on.
R.C.McC. Do we get the two sides you are speaking of here, the family side and the administrative side, in the brethren and the flock?
S.McC. Very good; showing how they are held together. And that is where the enemy gets a wedge in, when we divorce the administrative side from the family side; so that family feelings are disrupted, distances come in between brother and brother, and sister and brother, and sister and sister, and these things should not be so, because the whole point in the administration is that the brethren should be brought together. It is confidence in one another, not looking on one
{193}
another as Joseph's brethren did, but as loving one another and having confidence in one another in the light of the work of God.
R.C.McC. Does the welfare of the brethren come first?
S.McC. That is it, the welfare of the brethren, the family side is on Jacob's mind.
W.H.F Would @Philippians 4: 1 come into it? "So that, my brethren, beloved and longed for."
S.McC. We want a little bit of Philippians in the gatherings, I think; a little bit of the heavenly refinement that belongs to that choice letter written from the prison, from the circumstances of pressure and limitations and difficulties, yet written by a man who is so filled with choice thoughts as to the brethren.
C.T.McC. I was wondering if in @Matthew 18 the family side is in mind, one going after a brother. "But if thy brother sin against thee."
S.McC. The family side and the administrative side run together in Matthew. We must not, of course, weaken the administrative side. The assembly is glorious in her judicial capacity, and we must allow the full weight of it in our minds; but we must not divorce the family side which underlies our contact and relations with one another, and especially the matter of confidence; that is what is needed among the brethren. The Lord is serving administratively to bring it about in a greater way than it has ever been present before.
S.McG. "And let us consider one another for provoking to love and good works"; @Hebrews 10: 24.
S.McC. Very good; "provoking to love." How often we provoke to hatred, as we allow the flesh to express itself. I may think that I am expressing the truth, but am I provoking to love and to good works?
G.J.G. "So then let us pursue the things which tend to peace, and things whereby one shall build up another." @Romans 14: 19. That would fit in?
{194}
S.McC. It would. You will notice that the word "welfare" literally is "peace" here, as Mr. Darby points out.
F.W. Is that why there is this very brief reference to what is maternal in verse 10? "Shall we indeed come, I and *thy mother* and thy brethren." Rachel was really the maternal element in that great family; the others are not specified here, but "I and thy mother," Joseph's mother, as if the maternal feelings were to be present in this matter.
S.McC. I think that is a very interesting touch. "Shall we indeed come, I and thy mother." You remember how Jacob touchingly alluded to Rachel his wife later, telling Joseph, how she died by him, as if there is something very significant in this matter, "I and thy mother," coming in at this juncture.
F.W. And then his own exercise, verse 11: "And his brethren envied him"; (much had to be done with them) "but his father kept the saying." He was in exercise, and his exercises bore fruit, would you say?
S.McC. So that in principle what Jacob *is* goes through intact, despite all the difficulties. Jacob is basically right. Some of the details may be wrong, but Jacob is basically right all the way through, and eventually he really rises above Joseph in the matter of spirituality.
F.W. You mean in regard to the crossing of the hands?
S.McC. Exactly; in regard to Ephraim and Manasseh, showing that the administrative side is not everything. Now the brethren will notice how we are saying that. We are not minimising the administrative side, but the administrative side is not everything. There comes a time when the administrative side fails. Sometimes we hear it said that there is no failure in Joseph or Daniel, but there *is* failure with Joseph, as a type of ourselves, on the administrative line; not as a type of Christ of
{195}
course; and spirituality in Jacob holds the day, holds the ground.
J.D. Is there not a beautiful touch in regard to Joseph's availability and readiness to serve in spite of being hated by this brethren?
S.McC. Exactly. And so why should we sink into the background? Why should we say, Well we won't do anything more. Is that what Paul did at Corinth? Although the more abundantly he loved the less he was loved, he was prepared to spend and be utterly spent for the brethren. Sometimes you feel that we are looking for a little bit of recompense.
G.B. Following on that, we get that beautiful touch that Joseph went after his brethren and found them.
S.McC. Very good. That is the kind of man who can find them. Saul could not find the asses, but David found a tremendous lot, as we go through the books of Samuel. And Joseph found his brethren. That is, the two administrative lines in Joseph will find the brethren.
J.C. What is in our hearts will come out in our footsteps. The hearts of his brethren were full of hatred to him, for they left Shechem where they should have been and went to Dothan. But what was in Joseph's heart found the brethren and the flocks.
S.McC. Exactly.
W.J.B. Solomon in his administration brought to light the true mother. She said, "Ah, my lord! give her the living child, and in no wise put it to death." @1 Kings 3: 26. The protective, maternal feelings were necessary that the administration should be right.
S.McC. And that is what is behind all the skill of Joseph's administration. He is insisting on the link with the right mother; that is, he is insisting on Benjamin, who comes of the true mother.
Now just a reference to the way the full result of administrative service works out in the supremacy of
{196}
Joseph, the supremacy of his commandment, and we must make room for the commandments of Christ. John's ministry insists on the commandments of Christ, loving Christ and keeping His commandments; and that makes way for this great range of administrative service linked with cities, which brings us to the link with Paul's ministry, for Paul deals with the economy of local assemblies, and Joseph's wisdom shines out here in administrative skill.
W.J.B. He put the food in cities.
S.McC. That is, you do not separate the food from the administrative idea, for it is linked with it, the administrative centre, the cities; showing that administration, if it is rightly operating is linked with the food supply, always so in the case of the leaders we have in the Old Testament.
C.T.McC. Is it so that the person who has to do with administration would basically be concerned about the food supply? We would not get a person not really concerned about the food supply, at certain times coming in in a vigorous way administratively, would we?
It would not be normal for a person who does not appear, and is not concerned about the food supply, to come in at certain times vigorously in administration. I am speaking of persons. Joseph here was concerned about the food supply. It would work out the same way with us in persons concerned about the food supply, whom the Lord may take on administratively.
S.McC. You can hardly understand persons taking a lot of part in the care meeting who do not attend to the needs of the brethren, or have to do with God in priestly exercises in the prayer meeting and elsewhere. They just do not go together.
P.A.H. Gideon would express that as threshing wheat in the winepress in his day, and then used of God in regard of what is administrative.
S.McC. Yes. Now we could finish with a word as
{197}
to these two sons as bringing into our minds this great thought, that after all that has transpired, all that has gone before in Joseph's history, and the end that has been reached with the brethren, "Joseph called the name of the firstborn Manasseh -- For *God* has made me forget all my toil." Notice how he says that. Not Pharaoh. Pharaoh had a big place in this chapter, and he had a lot to do with Joseph, but he says, "For *God* has made me forget all my toil, and all my father's house. And the name of the second he called Ephraim -- For *God* has caused me to be fruitful in the land of my affliction." That is, God is in these matters to bring about what is right and what is proper, especially enlargement and fruitfulness.
P.B. It is noticeable that after the food has been brought into the cities, we have the thought of sonship and priesthood and the father's house, representing the present moment.
S.McC. The service of God would come into mind; that is, all administrative exercises would lead us rightly to the assembly, to understand the assembly and what the assembly is to Christ, especially in relation to the service of God, the way that He employs the assembly in relation to God. He is thinking of God here -- *God* has done this, and *God* has done that.
W.J.B. Do you think that inability to forget, sometimes causes a lot of trouble in our local companies?
S.McC. It certainly does. I think we could seek help on this line in regard to what we have been considering, the welfare of the brethren and the welfare of the flock.
W.J.B. It involves an enlargement of outlook that the Spirit will help us in, is that so?
S.McC. I am sure that is right.
F.W. Does it mean that we are not only to be morally right, but spiritually right?
S.McC. That is a good way to put it. We might
{198}
have the moral adjustment and be right in that regard, but we want this positive side of spiritual enlargement which results in Ephraim *after* Manasseh, that is, God making to forget.
C.E.J. In all our exercises there may be much that would be distressing. Are you suggesting that we would not go over these matters, but be capable of forgetting, and seek to get the gain of matters, for, "the second he called Ephraim -- For God has caused me to be fruitful in the land of my affliction."
S.McC. It was after they had completed their moral exercises in regard to their links with Joseph. The injustice, and what had marked them, their hardness in regard to Joseph, had all been fully judged in chapter 44, so that in chapter 45 Joseph is free to disclose himself fully.
F.W. And does this work out in the spiritual eventually taking precedence of the moral?
S.McC. Well I think so, so that chapter 41, Asnath and the two sons, are prophetic in that way. There is moral history to be covered in chapters 42, 43 and 44; but like many other things, such as Mary anointing the Lord in @John 11, the end is given us at the beginning.
N.B.S. Is there an answer on the part of the assembly to this in @Psalm 45, "and forget thine own people and thy father's house: And the king will desire thy beauty"?
S.McC. How important it is that the natural side should be forgotten, that natural relations and natural links should not be allowed to interfere with spirituality in our souls and making room for the Spirit, which would produce spirituality with us.
{199}
THE SERVICE OF CHRIST IN LEADERSHIP (3)
@Isaiah 63: 11 -- 14; @Exodus 2: 15 -- 25; @Exodus 3: 1 -- 6; @Exodus 15: 13 -- 17; @Deuteronomy 33: 1 -- 5
S.McC. The service of Christ in leadership, and also the spirit of it working out amongst the saints in administrative service, care for them is before us. We come now to Moses -- an outstanding type of Christ, and an outstanding example of leadership amongst the people of God. When we come to Moses, I suppose we come to what is really unique in a man like ourselves, because as J.N.D. says of Moses in the Synopsis on Deuteronomy, he was a man who scarce had his equal, Him excepted Who had none, that is Jesus. But amongst men there was scarcely the equal of Moses, because there are certain things said of Moses that are never said of any other man in the scriptures. Great as David was, the things that were said of Moses were never said of David. So that Moses in a sense is unique. It is said that the form of Jehovah doth he behold. That is a unique expression in regard to Moses, that we do not find, said of anybody else. And another expression that we get in regard to Moses that is not said of anybody else is, "See, I have made thee God to Pharaoh." Not made thee *as* God, or made thee *for* God, but "I have made thee God to Pharaoh." It points to Christ in the mediatorial position. So that we should see that there is a certain uniqueness entering into leadership as we have it in Moses, yet principles set out in it which are to be of great gain in the working out of this great administrative service linked with the flock, the people of God. It is remarkable how the passage comes into Isaiah. We should see in Isaiah the way that God seems to have pleasure in bringing up this matter of Moses¬ ministry
{200}
and Moses¬ service, and the great ends that were in mind in it, that is, God making Himself an everlasting Name -- a distinctive feature entering into Moses¬ leadership of the people. And in fact in Isaiah, Moses¬ leadership is merged in God's leadership. And then in Exodus we should see how the service of God is in mind, both in chapter 3 and in chapter 15 in the song. And then in @Deuteronomy 33, the finishing touch in Moses¬ service, the glory of the saints, the work of God in the saints. @Numbers 21 having been passed, the brazen serpent and the springing well having been arrived at, the people in the land of Moab about to cross over, we get a wonderful review of the work of God by Moses, which again serves to set out the greatness of the man Moses, who was meek above all those on the earth.
J.H.H. Do you see in God's ways with Moses at the very outset, the training for a leader?
S.McC. You do. It starts very early with him. The parental care, his baptism, the way he was trained by his mother, all would enter into what the man was constitutionally; showing the great part that parental care and early training has in our part for the testimony.
P.B. Is there a link between this in @Isaiah 63, "But he remembered the days of old, Moses and his people," with what Paul says to Timothy, "Remember Jesus Christ raised from among the dead, of the seed of David, according to my glad tidings, in which I suffer even unto bonds as an evil-doer: but the word of God is not bound. For this cause I endure all things for the sake of the elect, that *they* also may obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory"? Would that fit in there?
S.McC. Well it would. We are to allow divine Persons to bring into our minds the glory of leadership in that way.
P.R.P. Is there some significance in the fact that
{201}
Moses is linked with the people? It says, "Moses and his people," and then, "with the shepherds of his flock."
S.McC. Yes, showing how the flock was cared for. "Where is he that brought them up out of the sea with the shepherds of his flock? Where is he that put his holy Spirit within him," -- a remarkable allusion to Moses. "His glorious arm." What a reference to God! "His glorious arm leading them by the right hand of Moses, dividing the waters before them, to make himself an everlasting name." Showing the greatness of this leadership in Moses, that glory enters into it.
J.C. Does not Stephen elaborate on that in his address in @Acts 7? He distinguishes Moses.
S.McC. Yes, whereas in @Acts 13 David seems to stand out. But Stephen makes a good deal of Moses, especially it being the final word to Israel, as it were. They made a good deal of Moses, and Stephen makes a good deal of Moses.
N.B.S. Would you say a word as to the prominence of the Holy Spirit in this passage in Isaiah, and in Exodus typically?
S.McC. It is important that we should see in the type this matter of the Spirit, because it is a remarkable expression, almost a mysterious expression, in @Isaiah 63: 11. I think it is to intensify in our minds this thought of spiritual leadership. "Where is he that put his holy Spirit within him." And Moses sat by the well in @Exodus 2. I think it is to cast us back upon the importance of the Spirit in the matter of leadership, and especially when we come to the service of God, because we worship God by the Spirit, and have no confidence in the flesh. "We ... boast in Christ Jesus, and do not trust in flesh."
E.N.J. Moses really had to be brought to that. When he first went out in his own strength, Stephen says of that occasion, "he thought that his brethren would understand." But now as you say, he is under the
{202}
control of the Holy Spirit, and it almost synchronises with what God does Himself.
S.McC. That is a lesson every one of us has to learn; that is, to rely on the Spirit constantly in all that we do, and in all that we say. However keen our minds may be, and retentive our memories, and absorbing our minds in ability to gather up the ministry, we must always remember the necessity of making room for the Spirit.
E.N.J. Was it somewhat the same in Elihu's case, who could speak of the Spirit, and he spoke in a spiritual way, and then it is difficult to tell when God takes the matter up?
S.McC. Just so. And we see the results of this kind of administrative service in verse 13, "who led them through the depths, like a horse in the wilderness, and they stumbled not? As cattle go down into the valley, the Spirit of Jehovah gave them rest; so didst thou lead thy people, to make thyself a glorious name." When you think of the history of the wilderness, and all that entered into their coming up out of Egypt and through the sea, through the wilderness, this imparts a wonderful impression to us in regard to the position there. We might say that many of the details would show the contrary, but here it is.
G.J.G. The thought of the cattle going down into the valley, suggests a restful scene, does it not? It is restful. Would that enter into leadership even in the sea and in the wilderness, as it is said?
S.McC. That would be the point, that right leadership would involve this matter of the people of God entering into rest. We see that in the great service of the Lord Jesus, how it has in mind to lead us into rest. That is, He is the Lord of the sabbath. When He was taken up by those that criticised Him. He emphasises this fact that He is the Lord of the sabbath. "The Son of man is Lord of the sabbath," @Matthew 12: 8. That is that He
{203}
is the administrator of rest. In His administrative service He brings souls into rest.
J.C. Would all leading be from God; and the leader, whoever he may be, instrumental to that?
S.McC. Yes. All right leadership is of God, and God is represented in it. And it is touching to think that it says here, "he remembered the days of old, Moses and his people." Not just His people, but "Moses and his people." I think perhaps God would bring into our minds this kind of thing, what has gone before us in the way of spiritual leadership and ministry, along with the people.
J.H.H. I have often wondered why Paul discoursed till midnight in @Acts 20? I was wondering if there was a danger of them stumbling. He discoursed at length before they broke bread. Was that spiritual leadership in Paul?
S.McC. Yes, a kind of leadership that enters into the whole dispensation. That is, the breaking of bread is regulated in the light of Paul's ministry, that is, it enters into and imparts a touch to the whole dispensation.
F.W. Is your thought to identify for us the true spiritual leadership with Christ personally?
S.McC. Yes, and how the spirit of it works out amongst the saints.
F.W. And in the end of verse 11, it says, "Where is he that put his holy Spirit within him." Is that God putting His Holy Spirit in Moses? "His glorious arm." That is, God's glorious arm, is it? "Leading them by the right hand of Moses." So that God and the Holy Spirit and Moses are all identified there with the position.
S.McC. It helps us to see the authority that enters into ministry, the distinctive ministry that we are all the products of. The authority, divine authority, entering into it. Ministry is not infallible. Ministry is not the scriptures. The scriptures stand alone as the divinely
{204}
inspired word of God. Ministry is not divinely inspired, but ministry carries the weight and stamp of divine authority; as it says here, "His glorious arm leading them by the right hand of Moses." That is, God is in the matter.
F.W. So do you mean that we are to look for that element in connection with leadership, so that we get a spiritual consciousness that it is Christ and not a certain leader?
S.McC. Well, that would be the point in all true ministry and in all true ministers, that they leave an impression upon your soul of Christ. Christ, of course, is the ascended Man in heaven. The gifts come from Him, and His own stamp is on all the ministry.
F.W. And is that how it becomes authoritative amongst the saints? Not just the ability of the servant, but the spiritual impression that is brought in by spiritual power?
S.McC. That is where the authority lies, in what the servant has from Christ as the ascended Head. The authority lies in the commission; although there is another side, for there are two words for authority in the Acts, one entering into the idea of a commission; but the other, "dunamis," referring to the power linked with the ministry, that is the ability to set the truth out, dynamic power, as we see it in the Acts. "Peter, standing up with the eleven." He had his commission, but then as having the Spirit he had the ability to set out the truth in a remarkable way, divinely given.
P.B. So it says of the Holy Spirit, "He shall not speak from himself; ... he shall receive of mine and shall announce it to you." Does that come in where it says, "Dividing the waters before them, to make himself and everlasting name," and then, "so didst thou lead thy people, to make thyself a glorious name." Is that what you have in mind in regard to ministry, that the name
{205}
of Christ, and the glory of Christ, might be prominent in ministry in the power of the Spirit?
S.McC. It is not to make ourselves a name, it is to make a name for God. God is making Himself a name, as it says, "to make himself an everlasting name." Ministry is not to make anything of us. It is to make everything of Christ and of God.
G.W.B. David went to meet Goliath. He says, "I come to thee in the name of Jehovah of hosts."
S.McC. Take the ministry of J.T. that was given in this city in 1947. What was in it? Paul's militant ministry, dealing with what had arisen in Corinth -- leaders in Corinth that were making themselves a name to distinguish themselves. That is the point. The ministry has in mind that God is making Himself an everlasting name, not that men should make a name for themselves.
W.H.F. And is this typically a suggestion of the absence of the Lord Jesus? Chapter 61 would be the Lord personally. Would this be the glorious Name, as a result of the leadership of the Holy Spirit now making much of Christ during his absence?
S.McC. That is, whether God or Christ, the whole point is that an everlasting Name is made for divine Persons in this kind of leadership. And we should all be concerned in our local gatherings that, as the Spirit of Christ is working out amongst the brethren, and administrative service is operating in care for the flock, the whole point in view is what is said here, that God might make Himself an everlasting Name.
W.J.B. And as a result of that leadership, the saints do not stumble, and they enter into rest. Is that so?
S.McC. That is the point. There is no stumbling. "They stumbled not." And "as cattle go down into the valley, the Spirit of Jehovah gave them rest; so didst thou lead thy people, to make thyself a glorious name." The
{206}
adverb "so" is to be noted. This is the way it was done.
F.W. Is that why the matter is unique? That if the ministry and administration is seen to be identified with Christ Himself, there can be no rival ministry and no rival leadership?
S.McC. No, exactly. And it is important that the spirit of rivalry should be eliminated, because there is plenty of room for what there is among the saints, for every impression of Christ; and it is important that we should see what the Lord may be doing in a distinctive way at any time; always keeping in mind what is said here, "He remembered the days of old, Moses and his people." I suppose it would enter into all the ministry that has gone before, J.N.D. and F.E.R., and J.T., into the great principles of leadership where the Spirit of Christ has been expressed in leading the saints forward in this day of recovery and revival that Isaiah is contemplating.
J.D. Would the word in the end of Hebrews help as to this? "Remember your leaders who have spoken to you the word of God; and considering the issue of their conversation, imitate their faith." And then again, "Obey your leaders, and be submissive; for *they* watch over your souls as those that shall give account."
S.McC. That is a salutary word, that we should remember those that have gone before, that have spoken to us the word of God, and value all that has come to us, as they have represented God in their service. Now we come over to Exodus. We see how this is all working out practically in the initial position in Moses, where the matter of the well comes up, and the watering of the flock; and then Zipporah coming into view, the assembly coming into view, as the assembly will come rightly into view in all right leadership according to God, and in all true administrative service. And then in the opening of the third chapter, how the service of God is in mind.
{207}
C.E.J. I was wondering if what we get here in this section, is seen peculiarly in the way Paul moves in relation to the Corinthian saints as in the spirit of Christ; and he was amongst false shepherds, was he not? But he helped the saints, and watered them. And what was in his mind was the assembly, as in the second epistle, "I have espoused you unto one man."
S.McC. What a model Paul is for us in his service to the Corinthians. What a spirit of Christ shines in his service in the way that he cared for them, the care of the flock that was on his heart. It is an important thing to see this, that linked with every administrator in the Old Testament is this matter of care for the flock. It is an integral part, you might say, of administrative ability and leadership in the Old Testament.
G.M. Was Moses concerned about leadership in @Numbers 27?
S.McC. Yes, that they be "not as sheep that have no shepherd." That is, what is in his soul comes out in what he says. That was what marked the man constitutionally. There were two things outstanding in Moses¬ administrative service; they were the great impression he had of God, and the great impression that he had of the saints.
P.B. So Moses has to learn the faithfulness of God in relation to His people under all circumstances; and Paul, in addressing the Corinthians, although there were those who wanted to make a name for themselves, addresses them in the light of what they are as God's assembly -- the thorn-bush burning but not consumed, would you say?
S.McC. Well, what a touching reference that is. We think of the greatness of what is involved in it. Whether we think of it in relation to Christ as in incarnation according to John, the Word tabernacling among us, becoming flesh, or whether we think of it in
{208}
relation to the saints, the marvel of the divine presence in these circumstances.
J.N.G. Does the care for the flock seen in the administrators in the Old Testament you have spoken of, come out before there is any official commission given to them?
S.McC. That is an important thing, that before Moses gets his commission, he is marked by certain administrative features, certain features of leadership, so it is not exactly what is handed over to him like a piece of paper, it is what the man is that comes upon our view in this section, as it says in verse 17, "the shepherds came and drove them away; but Moses rose and helped them, and watered their flock." Notice how that expression "helped" comes in. "Moses rose and helped them." He had been sitting by the well. Well, it is like our readings. The shepherds would represent elements that are abroad in the professing body that hinder the saints getting a spiritual ministry; but Moses rising and helping them shows how spiritual ministry in the type comes to the saints.
W.J.B-n. So that when it says, "Why are ye come so soon today?" would that indicate that this ministry is finding its way into the hearts of the saints? Prosperity in that way?
S.McC. That is a good word. "Why are ye come so soon today?" That would be a good word after our care meetings. I mean if Moses comes in and helps, as having sat by the well, maybe someone would say, "Why are ye come so soon today?" Perhaps we need a little of this to help us on administrative lines; not that the care meeting is administrative, but it has in view what is administrative.
R.C.McC. Is that the result of Moses¬ service, the "so soon"?
S.McC. That is the point. When you get spiritual leadership coming into matters, especially marked by
{209}
sitting by the well, making room for the Spirit, not a question of business ability, business keenness and the like. It is a question of persons who can do things by the Spirit; and so the word is, "Why are ye come so soon today?" That is, matters were dealt with with alacrity.
G.W.B. So is there a touch in the daughters¬ testimony? They say, "An Egyptian delivered us out of the hand of the shepherds, and also drew water abundantly for us, and watered the flock."
S.McC. Yes, I suppose that if Moses had heard that word, he would have felt a little humbled by it. It might have been a good thing, too, because I suppose the way he acted in the beginning of the chapter took on that Egyptian character; but then a great inward change has come about, and we are to recognise this, you see. We might get occupied with Moses in the beginning of the chapter, but we want to get occupied with Moses now, that he is helping on in the truth, and he is doing things that you would say would bring in divine support.
J.D. I was going to ask if it is noticeable that first of all it is what Moses does.
S.McC. Well it is, and we who are here are to be on the line of helping, are we not. We are helping one another.
J.D. I was thinking of what you are saying in regard to doing things by the Spirit.
S.McC. An important thing, that if we are to help rightly, we should learn to do things by the Spirit. That enters into the care meeting as well as anywhere else.
J.H.H. Is the care meeting a place where there is great teaching? Where the young are taught? And if it is not conducted rightly, they are not being taught rightly. Is not that a solemn matter?
S.McC. The care meeting is our education in view of the world to come, because we are going to serve in
{210}
the millennium. Questions will have to be answered in the millennium, and whatever need might be existent in the way of help in regard to the truth and the knowledge of God, the saints of the assembly will serve in that capacity; and the care meeting is a great learning time in connection with these matters.
P.B. Those shepherds were apparently connected with their own interests, because it says "The hand of the shepherds." But Moses has power, has he not? How wonderful is the power of Moses to be able to deliver them out of the hand of the shepherds.
S.McC. You notice it does not say the *hands* of the shepherds. It is the *hand* of the shepherds. They were all together in the matter of keeping the flock from getting the water.
K.A.W. It was taken account of that Moses had been drawing on the Spirit, you may say; and is that the kind of leadership that is going to help us?
S.McC. It is. It is what helps us in every circumstance, and it is well that the young men and young women should take it on too, this matter of sitting by the well. So that whatever we do or whatever we say, it is done and said as by the Spirit.
W.J.B. The man himself becomes characterised by the Spirit, that is to say spiritual. Is that right?
S.McC. So at the end of Deuteronomy, in chapter 32, he says, "Give ear, ye heavens, and I will speak," and so on. He appeals to the earth, "My speech flow down as dew." The whole passage there points out that the man is characterised by the Spirit.
P.B. According to this scripture, it would not be right, would it, for certain brothers to arrange beforehand what they are going to take up at a care meeting? Would not Moses be a man who in spiritual power would deliver the brethren out of the hand of such considerations by persons?
S.McC. Moses is remarkable in the way he comes
{211}
into the matter and takes care of what is needed, what needs to be taken care of, as being a man of resource, having sat by the well.
J.C. Is not Reuel's second question as important as the first? "Where is he? why then have ye left the man behind?"
S.McC. It is important that we bring him in, that we do not leave him out. Remember how in @1 Samuel 16 they left David out. Here too, they received the gain of the administrative service, but left the man outside. That is what is generally done in christendom, that Christ is left outside, but we must bring Him in.
E.N.J. At the end of Hebrews, in relation to what is said about leaders, one of the remarks is, "Salute all your leaders." That was what they neglected here, to salute Moses.
S.McC. Well, it is interesting to see that the assembly comes into view in Zipporah along this line, where things are being done. It is not just a matter of talk with Moses, things are being done, and the assembly comes into view on that line.
P.R.P. Does this also lead up to the mountain of God and the service of God?
S.McC. That is what is in mind in a prime way; as it says, "And Moses tended the flock of Jethro his father-in-law, the priest of Midian. And he led the flock behind the wilderness, and came to the mountain of God -- to Horeb." Now we have brought to our minds here the whole scope and range of Moses¬ administrative service. The unfolding of the law, all the light as to the tabernacle system, the whole idea of the service of God, is suggested in what is done here. "He led the flock behind the wilderness, and came to the mountain of God -- to Horeb."
J.D. Is it suggestive that Zipporah, involving what
{212}
you are saying in regard to the assembly, is brought in prior to that?
S.McC. Yes, light comes in as to her in the end of chapter 2, before the mountain of God comes into view -- not that we can say too much about it. And then again in chapter 18, before the service is formally set forward, she again comes into view, preceding chapter 19 and onwards in Exodus.
W.L.W. In @Revelation 15, there is a victorious company who have harps of God, and "They sing the song of Moses bondman of God, and the song of the Lamb, saying, Great and wonderful are thy works, Lord God Almighty," and so on, ending up with the thought, "O Lord, and glorify thy name."
S.McC. Yes, what have you in mind linking that with what we have here?
W.L.W. The thought of the service of God, in the harps of God and the company praising.
S.McC. So that this matter of the service of God is a prime matter in the working out of administrative service of this kind. Tending the flock -- not now only specific care, although that is entering into it -- but the matter of the service of God, the mountain of God, Horeb. And then the revelation of God connected with it. We come to something new now, what is revealed, the revelation of this wondrous name that comes into this chapter. It is linked with Moses in this service as to the mountain of God.
J.H.H. I was wondering too, if we could see in some sense a similarity with the touch Moses is getting now as to the greatness of the people of God, the thorn-bush not consumed. God in the midst of His people, and being called, "Moses, Moses!" and Saul of Tarsus getting that touch, "Why dost thou persecute me?" It was "Saul, Saul." Would there be a similarity there?
S.McC. So you look upon the saints in relation to the disciplinary ways of God; you see their sufferings
{213}
and their trials and their afflictions; you see as it were the thorn-bush burned with fire, and yet it is not consumed; they are not consumed because God is there, and not there just in an arbitrary way, but there in relation to His good pleasure. "The good will of him that dwelt in the bush." A wonderful expression.
J.C. Have we not been defective in this land in our thoughts as to administration? We have limited it to what is corrective, whereas what is in mind is the emergence of assembly features and the consequent service of God.
S.McC. So that it is most interesting to notice, that one of the distinctive features of the authoritative ministry that we are all the products of, has been the place that administration in the local assembly has. The local assembly, and administration linked with it, has been an outstanding feature of the ministry of the last fifty years.
P.B. Do you think that God takes account of what we are seeing? Firstly it says, "And Moses said, Let me now turn aside and see this great sight, why the thorn-bush is not burnt," and then it says, "Jehovah saw that he turned aside to see, and God called to him out of the midst of the thorn-bush and said, Moses, Moses!" Is there something in that, as to what God takes account of, as to those that would have the spirit of shepherding His people?
S.McC. I think that is a word for all of us, as to whether we are turning aside, whether this sight impresses us; all the difficulties and the sorrows of the saints, but God amongst them. And they are not consumed, the position is maintained. It is a great sight and worthy of turning aside to see.
C.E.J. Would you say why the thorn-bush was not being consumed? Moses in verse 3 said, "Let me now turn aside and see this great sight, why the thorn-bush
{214}
is not burnt." He wanted to know why it was not burnt. Would you say a word as to that?
S.McC. Because God is there. That is the whole point, that God is there. For it says, "God called to him, out of the midst of the thorn-bush and said, Moses, Moses!"
J.M. Is that like Malachi, where we read, "I Jehovah change not, and ye, sons of Jacob, are not consumed?" And later He says, "Return unto me, and I will return unto you, saith Jehovah of Hosts." Is that an indication of the feelings of God in relation to His people, He never gives them up?
P.B. I wonder if you would help us as to your remark as to the thorn-bush applying to Christ? How does it apply to Christ?
S.McC. Well, from another angle, the lowly circumstances into which He came, "the Word became flesh, and dwelt among us;" tabernacled among us. The lowly external circumstances in which Christ was here, God was there in the position.
C.W. I was wondering as to the end of Luke, where the Lord comes to the disciples and opens up their understanding, so that they might understand the scriptures; and they were to wait in Jerusalem until they were clothed with power from on high.
S.McC. Yes, they are getting help. We shall always get help when there is an interest, and we come under the Lord's hand.
G.H.W-n. Does this emphasise the need for the recognition of the Spirit, in order that we might be maintained on the elevation of the mountain of God?
S.McC. It is mentioned before Horeb, notice. They did not come to Horeb first, but to the mountain of God, as if the writer Moses, would take into account, faith would understand, the importance of this remark; "came to the mountain of God." It is where God discloses Himself, unfolds His heart to the people. And
{215}
entering into this particular section is the peculiar feature of revelation. That is, Elohim is not revelation, it is what someone arrives at in their souls in the apprehension of God; but what enters into this commissioning of Moses is not just that, but revelation.
J.D. And He says later, "ye shall serve God upon this mountain."
L.P.J. Would you say a word more as to what you had in your mind when you spoke of God dwelling amongst His people according to the good pleasure of His own will?
S.McC. Well, I think it is God there in the saints -- the mystery of it. It is a great mystery. The gospels in that way are a great mystery, how God was there in Christ, in Jesus. We certainly turn aside to see the gospels, the great sight, to look over the gospels more, with the help of the Spirit; and then how wonderful is the position, God amongst His people.
G.G.B. Would you say a little with regard to leadership? Moses, in Isaiah, leads them through the depths; and here now he is leading them to the elevated thoughts of God.
S.McC. Well, I think the one underlies the other. The Psalms are the great Song book of Israel. They give us both sides, the side of the depths and the mountain of God too. Both sides run collaterally through the Psalms. What the mountain of God is in all its blessedness, and what the depths are.
J.E.H. Thinking of God's great pleasure in His people, would we see it in Numbers, even though it comes out of the lips of a man like Balaam?
S.McC. Well, it does. That is really what comes out in what Moses had to say in Deuteronomy. He sees the people according to what they are in God's sight.
F.W. Is the matter of the thorn-bush primarily incarnation?
S.McC. I think it is. I think that is the great suggestion in it.
{216}
F.W. There has been the thought before us, of its bearing upon the saints, but I suppose primarily it is Christ in incarnation?
S.McC. Well, exactly. So that the gospels, as we were saying, is what we should turn aside to see. The prime thought is God coming down into these circumstances in Christ. Wonderful sight!
W.J.B. It says that they contemplated His glory. Would that have an analogy with Moses contemplating this sight?
S.McC. That corresponds. It is a great sight. And then as it goes on to say in verse 7, "Jehovah said, I have seen assuredly the affliction of my people who are in Egypt, and their cry have I heard on account of their taskmasters; for I know their sorrows. And I am come down to deliver them out of the hand of the Egyptians, and to bring them up out of that land unto a good and spacious land, unto a land flowing with milk and honey." Showing what was in mind, as it were, coming in in Christ. The mystery of the incarnation. It is a marvellous thing, when we take account of it. A Divine Person here, in these lowly conditions.
J.C. Did not Moses act intelligently, to bring this in as one of the blessings on Joseph. "The good will of him that dwelt in the bush"?
S.McC. Yes. Now when we come to chapter 15, we get this remarkable song, and we can see the exalted objectives that are in mind, and brought into the view of the people so early; as in verse 13, referring to God, Moses says, "Thou by thy mercy hast led forth the people that thou hast redeemed; Thou hast guided them by thy strength unto the abode of thy holiness. The peoples heard it, they were afraid." Then verse 17, "Thou shalt bring them in, and plant them in the mountain of thine inheritance, The place that thou, Jehovah, hast made thy dwelling, The Sanctuary, Lord, that thy hands have prepared." The full thought in David's ministry and Solomon's ministry is looked on
{217}
to, showing how right leadership would keep in the minds of the saints, before the hearts of the saints, these great objectives in the truth.
J.D. We read in chapter 3, "The place whereon thou standest is holy ground." Here it says, "Thou has guided them by thy strength unto the abode of thy holiness." Would you say a word as to that?
S.McC. Well, I suppose an allusion is made to the tabernacle, "the abode of thy holiness."
J.D. I was wondering about that, the cloud covering it and the glory filling it?
S.McC. When we come on to verse 17, it is the ministry of David that would be in mind. We have the ministry of Moses in "the abode of thy holiness," pitching the tabernacle. Moses pitched the tabernacle; but then verse 17, "in the mountain of thine inheritance," would involve the Davidic and Solomonic side, showing how all the truth is in mind. The Spirit is come to guide us into all the truth, and it is brought into their view so early.
J.C. Does that come into prominence in Nehemiah's time, "Moses the servant of God," and "David the Man of God"?
S.McC. Yes, you find that in all the revivals, the light is cumulative. You get the ministry of Moses, in one revival, and in the next revival the ministry of David; then in the next revival, the ministry of Moses, David and Solomon; showing how cumulative light is.
P.B. In relation to the song, it is noted that Moses is linked with the children of Israel, in the singular, why is that? "I will sing unto Jehovah ... My strength and song is Jah." He says "my God," and, "I will glorify him."
S.McC. Yes. It says, "Then sang Moses and the children of Israel this song." Moses is leading in this great matter. It could be rightly called the song of Moses. The refrain is taken up by Miriam; but Moses
{218}
is, as it were, leading in this great matter as to the truth.
P.B. And all the saints are one in it, the singular; is that the idea?
S.McC. Yes. It shows how far we can be carried in light, even while we may not be in it actually as to state. Under this kind of leadership, the saints may be carried a long way in light.
J.H.H. Is the power seen in the next chapter where Moses instructs Aaron what to say? It says in verse 10, "that they turned toward the wilderness." That is the power in leadership, is it not, turning them toward the wilderness -- even though at the point they may be murmuring a little -- and the glory appeared?
S.McC. And they see the glory. This song is something like that, it is on that principle.
E.N.J. You were speaking of the distance to which leadership might take us, beyond where we have actually reached subjectively. Would that help us in relation to some of the hymns which are not readily understood by the brethren, that we should continue to sing them?
S.McC. The song of Moses is a channel or vehicle of light; responsive movement, in which the people move with the help of Moses; but their state, of course, is not equal to it.
J.D. Is there not a beautiful touch in Revelation in where it says that "they sing the song of Moses bondman of God, and the song of the Lamb saying, Great and wonderful are thy works, Lord God Almighty; Righteous and true are thy ways, O King of nations," then, "Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name?"
S.McC. It is remarkable that it should come in there, where it does.
J.N.G. Do you think that leadership would mean that we would always be left with the impression, in ministry, that there is something greater left to come?
{219}
S.McC. Yes. A great thing that we should be reminded of, that in regard to the truth, there is always something beyond us. Now when we come to @Deuteronomy 33, it says, "this is the blessing, wherewith Moses the man of God blessed the children of Israel before his death. And he said, Jehovah came from Sinai, And rose up from Seir unto them; He shone forth from mount Paran, And he came from the myriads of the sanctuary; From his right hand went forth a law of fire for them. Yea, he loveth the peoples, All his saints are in thy hand, And they sit down at thy feet; Each receiveth of thy words." This section brings before us and leaves with us an impression of Moses¬ regard for the people. What, in type, the work of God would mean to him. He had been with them all through the wilderness, all through the various trials and vicissitudes of the wilderness, the desert; but look at the way he can speak now about the saints. What a man he was! What princely spiritual power is there in type?
G.J.G. And along with that, he is speaking about God, is he not? He is attributing all the leadership to God himself.
S.McC. And it says in verse 5, that "he was king in Jeshurun. When the heads of the people and the tribes of Israel were gathered together." What a reference to Moses, the place that he acquires amongst an upright people. How the affections of the saints surrounded him, reminding us of the great place Christ has amongst His people, on the lines of headship.
J.McN. And then the fact of his writing a song at the end of the wilderness, as at the beginning of @Exodus 15 would indicate the spirit of triumph in which he went through the wilderness.
S.McC. Yes. Making much of God. And then his eulogy of the saints here. Not what the flesh was, what mere nature was; but what the saints are as the result
{220}
of the work of God, for that is what the type would mean. And the result of all true leadership, the spirit of Christ in leadership, and in administrative service amongst the saints, would leave an impression like this. That is, the greatness of the saints.
J.McN. I have been wondering why Aaron and Miriam are included in leadership in @Micah 6: 42?
S.McC. Well, I think it is to stress the great features of it that were seen in all three. Moses and Aaron are referred to in @Psalm 77, but when you come to @Micah 6 it is Moses, Aaron, and Miriam, stressing the full thought of what the people were under in the wilderness.
G.G.B. A little earlier you mentioned the thought of meekness as connecting with Moses, in leadership. Perhaps you had something further in mind?
S.McC. Well, you remember that when they spoke against him in @Numbers 12, the Spirit of God gives us that reference. Moses does not say anything, but God comes in Himself to defend Moses. What marks him is meekness. That is, he was not seeking to defend himself. No one who is with God would seek to defend himself. God can come into any matter, as He does in Numbers.
E.J. The thought of the commonwealth, our commonwealth is in heaven and we are blessed with every spiritual blessing in the heavenlies in Christ?
S.McC. I do not think that is the side of the truth so much. I think the side of the truth here is what the saints are in Moab, not in heavenly places; but what they are in Moab, as a result of the teaching of the brazen serpent and the springing well. It is what they are according to the work of God in them, even in these surroundings.
J.D. And these are the people that are going in?
S.McC. That is the kind of people that is going in.
{221}
E.N.J. Does it connect with what the Lord Jesus says to his disciples, "*ye* are they who have persevered with in my temptations"? He is giving them great credit?
S.McC. Yes. So that we should all be on the lines of making the most of the saints, speaking the best of them and about them, because they are God's chosen.
{222}
THE SERVICE OF CHRIST IN LEADERSHIP (4)
@1 Samuel 16: 11 -- 13; @1 Samuel 17: 37; @1 Samuel 25: 14 -- 17; @2 Samuel 24: 10 -- 17
S.McC. In considering further the feature of the service of Christ in leadership, we come to David. David is both a type of Christ and a type of the Spirit of Christ among the saints. We have been noting all through the enquiries that linked with this thought of leadership is the administrative service that is linked with the care of the flock; as we have seen, every man that God seems to use is marked by this feature, having peculiar care for the flock. These passages have been read because they bring David before us, as we might say, in a singular way. What he is behind the scenes. Perhaps we need to know more about this side of the truth, because there is such a tendency with us to like what may be taken account of in a spectacular way in public. But these passages ought to be a great encouragement to us, especially the younger men and women, and to all of us, as to how David is marked from the earliest by this great feature of care for the sheep, for the flock. It seems to be something that is in David's constitution; and whatever position he is in, it comes out, what he thinks and feels on this line, as having the sheep at heart. Another thing that is to be noted is that David represents a side in the truth that peculiarly promotes unity among the saints. He becomes a great rallying point in the testimony. His name means "beloved". We get the love side running through David. We get the service of God coming into view in David. But underlying all is this great thought of care for the flock. As it says in the first passage that we read, "And Samuel said to Jesse, Are these all the young men? And he said, There is yet the youngest remaining, and behold, he is feeding
{223}
the sheep." That is a feature that comes into view in David and goes right through in his history, and it is a feature that we might emulate. The Lord Jesus, as we noted in the prophet the other night, coming into the position, speaks of, "The poor of the flock"; He fed them; so that we should be encouraged in view of what is before us in the subject of David, to take account of this important feature.
E.N.J. Is that seen in New Testament setting in Stephen and others who were occupied in caring for the saints, and who received quick advancement?
S.McC. Yes. God would take us on as we are prepared to put our hand to do what is to be done, whatever it might be.
J.H.H. The first recorded victory of David, I suppose, is where he slew the lion and the bear. Did that mark him all the way through? I think I have heard it said, that he never lost a battle, especially in the unifying of the saints in meeting the enemy.
S.McC. These passages that we have read deal with what is basic in David. He never departs, we might say, at least in principle, from this feature which runs through all the way; and it underlies the great principle of the throne, of rule and administration.
G.J.G. It is said of David in @Psalm 78, "he fed them according to the integrity of his heart, and led them by the skilfulness of his hands." I was wondering if integrity of heart bears upon the inward side that you were speaking of?
S.McC. Integrity is a great thing, a very important thing; integrity of heart; especially when it comes to the saints. Of course, we should be marked by integrity of heart in business; it is a poor thing if there is not integrity of heart in our business. It is a great thing that there should be uprightness in our business, in our houses; uprightness in all our dealings; integrity of heart before God. It is a prime feature; but with
{224}
David, it is peculiarly marked in his relation to the sheep.
S.L. This matter took place in private; no one saw, as it were; but heaven took account of the fact, how he slew the lion and bear, and ventured his own life to save the flock.
S.McC. The one that slew Goliath in public was the one that dealt with the lion and the bear in secret. Many of us, perhaps, are much more concerned about how we appear in public than we are about what we do in private, our links with God, and our trust in God secretly, behind the scenes.
P.B. So that when Jehovah speaks to Samuel in regard to Eliab he says, "Look not on his countenance, or on the height of his stature; because I have rejected him." And Samuel said to Jesse, "Are these all the young men? And he said, There is yet the youngest remaining, and behold, he is feeding the sheep." And then Samuel immediately says, "Send and fetch him; for we will not sit at table till he come hither." Samuel gets an impress of the kind of man that is acceptable to Jehovah?
S.McC. And there is only one man that will do for God, that is Christ; and we want to make room for Christ, and the spirit of Christ amongst us. It is a remarkable thing that in relation to Eliab God says, "I have rejected him." He says the very same thing about him as He says about Saul, saying, "I have rejected him." God says the same about this elder brother of David. The one that would set David aside, make out that David was proud and naughty in heart, when David was really instrumental in the liberation of the people of God.
J.H.H. You spoke in your opening remark about what would be spectacular publicly. Would it be too strong to say that perhaps Samuel himself had to be delivered from this? Perhaps it might be that we
{225}
ourselves have to be delivered from what might be spectacular in public?
S.McC. We all know the flesh, and what our hearts naturally are prone to; but God is helping us to see in this chapter what is of value in His sight, what He is making way for. It is a new vista opening up here, a new administration is coming into our view, a new character of things that involves the bringing together of Israel and Judah in unity. There is a good deal of weakening process that has to be gone through, as the history will show, but God is indicating to us here what is in His mind to make much of.
J.D. Would what Paul says in @Acts 13 correspond? "I have found David, the son of Jesse, a man after my heart, who shall do all my will."
S.McC. And that is a great thing for the young men and young women to see, because David is a young man here; what God is taking account of; not exactly the amount we absorb in the way of mental knowledge and capacity with regard to the truth, which has its place, but whether with it there is this care for the sheep behind the scenes.
G.W.B. Is that why the heart comes so prominently into it? God looking upon the heart.
S.McC. Yes. "Jehovah looketh upon the heart."
E.N.J. It is often humbling in our own localities that the Lord has to pass by so many of us before He comes to one who is able to carry out what He has in mind. It says here that Jesse made seven of his sons pass before Samuel.
S.McC. I think we all have to learn, in that way, that what supports rule and administration according to God, lies basically in what we have been considering in these men that have been before us. It is a basic feature.
J.C. There is a grouping of gifts in Ephesians, "shepherds and teachers," do you think we are more
{226}
fond of teaching than we are of shepherding? Do we need help on that feature?
S.McC. Well, the teaching is important, because we need teaching, the brethren need teaching; it is an important element; but we need shepherding, we need the shepherds; and the coupling of them together in Ephesians is important, because it involves the care for souls.
W.J.B. Would you say that if a brother does not love the brethren actively and practically, he has not received the truth rightly, and therefore he is not qualified to teach?
S.McC. Well that would be the point, that the whole thing lies in our regard of the saints, and what we are unofficially, we might say, behind the scenes. Not exactly what we are before others, but what we are behind the scenes, what we are basically, that God can take account of in care for His interests here.
G.B. Would a word in @Genesis 46 fit in with what you have in mind? Joseph instructs his brethren what to tell Pharaoh, when Pharaoh shall say, "What is your occupation?" They had been occupied with cattle from their youth until now. The thought is, as to what our occupation is.
S.McC. It marked Joseph's brethren. It runs right through the scriptures, this matter of what we might call an inherent desire to care for the saints. It seems to mark all whom God takes up in His ways, in sovereignty.
C.W. I was wondering if the reference in John's epistle would apply, "I have written to you, young men, because ye are strong, and the word of God abides in you, and ye have overcome the wicked one"?
S.McC. Well, that would enter into it. The word of God abides in them. They are strong. So that we want to make room, as it were, for what there is in the young men, in that light.
{227}
N.B.S. There was this evidence of life and attractive appearance with David; does that spring from what is healthy within, spiritually speaking?
S.McC. It is a question here of what is constitutional, what is working out from within. The care of the sheep seems to run right through David's life; even in the Psalms. You cannot help but feel in reading @Psalm 68 and other Psalms of David, that only one that had the link with the sheep and the flock that he had, could write in that way.
J.C. The shepherd holds the flock together as one. Is the matter of unity necessary, before there can be either feeding or progress?
S.McC. Well, the first thing that is said about David is that he is feeding the sheep. That is the first thing that is said about him here. He is feeding the sheep. Not that he is leading them, exactly; that comes into view later; but he is feeding the sheep. That is, that he is maintaining this line of administrative service, service much needed amongst us; feeding the sheep.
E.N.J. The word to Samuel, that he was feeding the sheep, seemed to be sufficient; he says, "Send and fetch him; for we will not sit at table till he come hither."
S.McC. As if Samuel would say, "if that is the feature that is marking him, we want him in." "Send and fetch him; for we will not sit at table till he come hither."
J.N.G. Does the development of spiritual personality lie rather in our relations in caring for the saints, than public service?
S.McC. Well, of course, it enters into public service too; and the importance of this side is to be noted, because David was remarkable in public service. We are to take full account of that. We are not decrying that side, or minimising it in any shape or form, but stressing the importance of this basic side, underlying all rule, government, and administration.
{228}
P.R.P. Did this feature come to light in a peculiar way in Mr. Darby in his expression, "to serve unnoticed, and work unseen"?
S.McC. He was marked by peculiar care for the saints. Think of the journeys he took to these parts when as yet there was nothing much apparent; and to America when there was nothing at all, no meetings, he took the journey that pioneered the way in relation to the truth.
J.D. Would not what underlies all this be our knowledge of God and our secret history with God? I was thinking of what David says later to Goliath; he speaks of Jehovah of hosts, the God of the armies of Israel.
S.McC. So that God operates here as in verse 12; Jehovah says, "Arise, anoint him; for this is he." God is bringing to our attention what He is committing Himself to, as it says, "And Samuel took the horn of oil, and anointed him in the midst of his brethren." A great view to faith as to what comes in subsequently, and David becomes the great rallying point.
J.D. Would what is said of Christ in Hebrews help as to this, "Thou hast loved righteousness and hast hated lawlessness; therefore God, thy God, has anointed thee with oil of gladness above thy companions."?
S.McC. David is a great type of Christ in that relation.
J.D. I was thinking of the supreme place that God gives Him. Here He is anointed, is He not, in the midst of his brethren? Samuel had been previously told to anoint "him whom I name unto thee."
S.McC. So Samuel is brought into line with God, in now committing himself to what God is bringing into his view, a new character of things, a new phase of things in God's way, that God is honouring. The horn of oil would suggest what is marked by the presence of the Spirit.
{229}
F.W. Is it really a question of the character of the person upon whom the Spirit can come? There is an inward work of the Spirit first, before the Spirit can come upon him in power as verses 11 and 12 indicate?
S.McC. So that the Spirit is not just coming upon him arbitrarily. It is the personality that is there, that has been developed along this unofficial line, secret care for the flock. It is a basis as it were, for the Spirit coming upon him.
F.W. Is it to draw our attention to that, that we have verse 14, "And the Spirit of Jehovah departed from Saul"?
S.McC. Yes. To throw into relief the striking contrast; the Spirit of Jehovah came upon David, and then it says that He departed from Saul. It is rather significant that that follows immediately after His coming upon David.
C.E.J. In @Psalm 89, the word says, "I have laid help upon a mighty one; I have exalted one chosen out of the people. I have found David my servant; with my holy oil have I anointed him." But "I have laid help upon a mighty one." He was already a mighty one before he was taken up. Would that be right?
S.McC. Very good. We are reminded of that too in Gideon -- "Thou mighty man of valour." There was a basis in the man although outwardly timid; you would not think, perhaps, that there was much to Gideon externally, because of his timidity; yet God addresses him as a mighty man of valour. And so David is alluded to as one that is mighty here. It helps us to see where mightiness lies. It does not lie in ability to convince the brethren by external prowess merely, it lies in what we are constitutionally and basically in our links with God.
J.D. Would you say that what comes out here is the moral excellence that is seen in David? It speaks of him as being ruddy and of a lovely countenance, and
{230}
beautiful appearance, before anything is said about his exploits.
S.McC. So how important it is in care meetings and the like in matters of administration, that room should be made for David, what David represents. We are so inclined to make room for the principle of Saul in every one of our hearts. He has to be judged in every one of our hearts. But God is signifying that what He is committing Himself to is the principle of David; Christ and the spirit of Christ among the saints.
J.H.H. Would you say that perhaps from verse 6 to verse 10 might suggest a local company, with David not getting his place?
S.McC. That is, he is not of enough account to be brought in, according to their way of reckoning; he does not mean much in this matter. These other ones seem to be the whole thing; while the man that is doing the work in secret, he is outside of the picture, you might say, until God brings him in.
P.B. Would you say that if the spirit and power of the anointing comes upon us, we shall readily see that God has rejected this legal and official system that has been connected with Saul?
S.McC. Yes, I think so, I think we have to see in that way, what God commits Himself to amongst us; for every one of us to see in our own hearts what He is setting aside; and to see what is marked by the anointing, the presence of the Spirit, in this way.
C.T.McC. I was wondering if @Isaiah 42: 1 -- 4 bears much on what you are saying? "Behold, my servant whom I uphold, mine elect in whom my soul delighteth! I will put my spirit upon him," and so on.
S.McC. So that the Lord is helping us at the present time, when we no longer have the active service of one who has helped us so much, as to where we are substantially; where we are in relation to all we have been the product of; where we are in regard to the truth
{231}
substantially? That is the side of things that is coming out in David.
E.M.W. Would you say something as to the exercise with us that we correspond to what Samuel says, "We will not sit at table till he come hither"?
S.McC. It is interesting, the matter of table, because the table is a great administrative thought in the word of God.
F.E. Would you say a word as to lovability, as set forth in David? His name means "beloved."
S.McC. All the ones we have been looking at, Joseph, and Moses, and David, were loved among the people. There were features of lovability with them, and it is important that we should be marked by that, because it was seen pre-eminently in the Lord Jesus. How lovable He was to the Father! And what a place He gained in the affections of the disciples!
L.P.J. Having in mind the passage we looked at yesterday, would you say that we need to have spiritual discernment? It was the priest who said, "Why then have ye left the man behind?" Do we need to have priestly discernment to discern these features?
S.McC. The priest would discern them. The remarkable thing is that it is the prophet here that has to be helped in the recognising of David. You might say, those that are serving on the prophetic line, as Samuel, they are the ones that have to be helped on this matter as to recognising David. God helps the prophet to come to it. And it says, "Samuel rose up, and went to Ramah," as if that completed the exercise for him, immediately David was anointed, and the Spirit came upon him.
J.G.H. Things do not really go forward until David comes in, do they?
S.McC. They do not. And when David comes in, we find as the history develops in 1 Samuel that everything converges on David; the prophet, the priest, every
{232}
vital element, seems to pass over to David, while Saul, unjudged in his heart, goes on till we get the full result of degeneracy with him.
J.H.H. Do we see where David is very early appreciated in verse 18 by this young man who could describe him the way he does?
S.McC. It shows that David must have been known. He was known by someone. Someone had observed him. It is a great thing that we should understand that we are under observation, just like Timothy was under observation; he had a good report of the brethren. It is a great thing that we should have a good report of the brethren.
B.J.G. Why is his name mentioned in verse 13, when it says the Spirit of Jehovah came upon him? He is referred to as a young man until then, but when the Spirit of Jehovah comes upon him his name is mentioned?
S.McC. I think it is to intensify the thought of the beloved. And it points to maturity and youthfulness with David, as the Spirit of Jehovah comes upon him.
J.H.H. Had you anything else in mind to speak of as to what we say about the brethren?
S.McC. Well, it is an important thing, I think it runs all through David's history, his right regard for the brethren, his confidence in the brethren. Every man or woman that is with God will always have confidence in the brethren, in the people of God. Even supposing conditions concretely may seem to deny the justness of that, every man or woman who is with God will be marked by confidence in the brethren from the standpoint of the work of God.
A.T.G. Does he take account, in that regard, even of the work of God in Saul, in speaking of him as the Lord's anointed?
S.McC. Well, it is remarkable how David would not lift his hand against Saul. Saul is a type of the flesh;
{233}
he never seems to improve, he never seems to get help, whatever the circumstances he may be in, he remains basically the same; but David, recognising the anointing upon him, never would move against him, never would take an unfair advantage, showing what a great man David was.
P.B. Do you think that the women who came out of all the cities and said that Saul had slain his thousands, but David his tens of thousands, would represent the subjective work of God in all the cities, in recognising what is substantial in leadership in persons?
S.McC. It would stress the subjective side, would it not? You do not find the women ever coming out in relation to Saul, but they do come out in relation to David.
K.A.W. You have referred to confidence again. Could you help us as to what would promote and maintain confidence?
S.McC. The work of God. The more you are with God, the more confidence you have in the work of God. And even supposing persons may go awry, you have confidence in the work of God. That is what comes out in chapter 17: 34, "And David said to Saul, Thy servant fed his father's sheep, and there came a lion, and also a bear, and took a lamb out of the flock. And I went after him, and smote him, and delivered it out of his mouth; and when he arose against me, I seized him by his beard, and smote him, and slew him. Thy servant smote both the lion and the bear; and this uncircumcised Philistine shall be as one of them, because he has defied the armies of the living God." That is, the whole of @1 Samuel 17 breathes of confidence, the confidence of David in God. That He would bring His people through.
J.H.H. And then, just another word on the thought of confidence. When we see what the Lord is doing in our city, should we not have confidence without reserve?
{234}
Not the "whereas," "nevertheless," and so on, that is sometimes heard? Should it not be complete confidence that the Lord is among His people, and He is going to bring us through?
S.McC. In @John 21, the Lord takes up Peter, goes into matters with him, and leaves the sheep with him, puts them in his care, having the confidence that Peter would tend them well, as he did tend them well, in the Acts.
W.J.B. So that we know that basically the brethren are right, and the Lord is with them. If there be a temporary deflection, they will surely come round to the truth. Is that right?
S.McC. That is it. And that is the ground that we should see the importance of taking, in relation to any matter. That is the ground that Paul took with the Corinthians. Look through the second letter, and count the times he mentioned that word confidence. He was confident in them. It is remarkable to see that it underlay all his movements toward them.
G.J.G. Would a sense of the mercy of the Lord in taking up any one of us, help us there? Paul says that God counted him faithful. Would that help us, so to speak, to have confidence in our brethren? The Lord has had confidence in us.
S.McC. So that when we come to chapter 17, we get added thoughts to the matter of the feeding. David said, "Thy servant fed his father's sheep"; and then he goes on to describe what was operating in relation to the lion and the bear. But David says, "I went after him." David did not say, "I waited for God to come in and deliver," David said, "And I went after him." What a field of service there is on this line, where the work of God, as it were, may be attacked by the enemy, souls may be attacked by the enemy, and the practical need of administrative service in this way in delivering such.
G.W.B. So would this stand in contrast to the
{235}
hireling feature referred to in @John 10, as set out against what the Good Shepherd did?
S.McC. Yes.
P.B. It is interesting that in verse 35 he speaks of delivering the lamb out of the mouth of the lion and the bear, but in verse 37 he says, "Jehovah who delivered me out of the paw of the lion and out of the paw of the bear, he will deliver me out of the hand of this Philistine." Does it suggest that David had really put himself in the place of the lamb. Is that not a great mark of confidence in relation to leadership and the people of God?
S.McC. It is, and it is interesting how the lion and the bear seem to merge, because it says, "there came a lion, and also a bear, and took a lamb out of the flock." That is, they both are together apparently in this matter, and David says, "And I went after him," (not after them) "I went after him, and smote him, and delivered it out of his mouth; and when he arose against me, I seized him by his beard, and smote him, and slew him. Thy servant smote both the lion and the bear." But he is dealing with the thing in concentrated form. They are both the same thing apparently, and operating as to this matter of the flock, and a lamb out of the flock.
E.H. What do you see in the expression, "And I went after him." We might think he had done very well, to have delivered the rest of the flock, but he is not satisfied with that?
S.McC. Well, it shows what a valued man David was. He did not take into account the smallness of his own strength, he took into account God, "Jehovah who delivered me out of the paw of the lion and out of the paw of the bear, he will deliver me out of the hand of this Philistine." That underlies this great administrator, the history of this great administrator, one of the greatest administrators of the Old Testament. It underlies his whole history.
{236}
G.G.B. Have you anything for us in that it was a lamb that was taken, not a sheep? And David was concerned about the lamb?
S.McC. Because it represents the potential side of things in relation to the flock, because if the lambs do not come, where will the flock be?
R.C.McC. So is David thinking both of the lamb and of the flock?
S.McC. That is the point. It is out of the flock. He specifically mentions that. It is the flock that is being attacked, but it is a lamb out of the flock that is seized.
J.H.H. Is it not wonderful to see how David knows when to attack and take the offensive?
S.McC. I am sure that we will be more efficient administrators, more efficient in the way of rule and influence among the people of God, if this thing enters into our history. You hear about care meetings, where unnecessary time is spent in settling matters, in different parts of the world, and you wonder about it. If we were more with God in these matters, we should be more efficient in the way of working out the truth in relation to rule and administration.
E.H. Does it mean that David rose up in moral dignity against this power that had seized this defenceless lamb?
S.McC. He did not rise up and go after Eliab, when Eliab said, "thou art naughty, I know thy pride and the naughtiness of thy heart," David did not rise up and go after him. He rose up and went after the enemy that was endangering the wealth linked with the flock. David was with God in all these matters; he says, "Jehovah who delivered me out of the paw of the lion and out of the paw of the bear, he will deliver me out of the hand of this Philistine." I think we want to see the importance of this practical confidence in God, so that it affects every department of our lives.
{237}
J.C. Is that the source of the confidence; consciously moving with God?
S.McC. Yes. How important it is in our earliest days that we should know how to spend time with God, so that our confidence increases with God. How important it is that the young ones coming on should have to do with God in secret, have to do with God in prayer. F.E.R. said that if he had his time to live over again, he would spend more time in prayer.
P.B. In regard to what you said as to the lamb taken out of the flock, and the lion and the bear, how would that apply practically today? How would those who have a care of the flock recognise that kind of feature that would carry away the young amongst us?
S.McC. Well, I would think that the principles of the world, or whatever might be suggested in the lion and the bear, are operating against the flock, against what the saints are locally, in their local position. It may be a young person, as suggested in the lamb, some tender feature of the work of God; but the attack is against the flock. That is what is involved in all these matters. David sees the necessity for going after it, in this way.
C.T.McC. Does David's alertness in this show us God's way in making the flock a safe place?
S.McC. Now that will bring us on to our next passage, to see how safety lies within the realm of David's administration. Not yet official, it is still the moral side in @1 Samuel 25, because David is not on the throne. And so it says, "one of Nabal's young men told Abigail, Nabal's wife, saying, Behold, David sent messengers out in the wilderness to bless our master; and he has insulted them. And the men were very good to us, and we were not hurt, neither missed we anything, as long as we companied with them, when we were in the fields." Notice this, "neither missed we anything." Then it says, "They were a wall to us both by night and day, all the while we were with them
{238}
feeding the sheep." Now this is a remarkable thing, because it shows that what David was constitutionally, is operating in the position that he is in here, in the matter of protection and care, as if his very regime, unofficially, is operating on this line, in the protecting of things.
J.D. I would like to ask in regard to the previous scripture; it says, "thy servant" twice. Is this the feature that would really preserve, taking on the spirit of Jesus in bondmanship, serving by love?
S.McC. Paul says to the Corinthians, "and ourselves your bondmen for Jesus¬ sake." We need to take on that spirit. A great thing for any who serve, to remember the greatness of these that they serve.
E.N.J. You are thinking now in this section that there are many coming out in David's features, "*they* were a wall to us"?
S.McC. Yes. While Saul is on the throne, the kingdom, you might say, is Saul's. He is on the throne. But morally the kingdom is with David. Officially it is with Saul, but morally it is with David; and the principles of the kingdom are operating in David's presence and those that were with him, in the way of protection.
J.D. So that those who were with him, were those who had been attracted to David, because of the moral features that are seen in David? I was thinking of chapter 22.
S.McC. What is to be noted is that as soon as Abigail comes into view, we get all this brought up. As soon as the assembly in type comes into view, we get this remarkable allusion to the power of the kingdom, operating morally in David and those that are with him in the protection of property.
P.B. So that no one is hurt, and nothing is missed in David's administration here?
S.McC. What we are to learn is to see how the principle of the kingdom is working out through the
{239}
assembly in our day. That is, as soon as the assembly comes into view, as in Matthew, the great operations of the kingdom are stressed, especially on the line of preservation and protection." Neither missed we anything," it says. "And the men were very good to us, and we were not hurt, neither missed we anything, as long as we companied with them, when we were in the fields. They were a wall to us both by night and day, all the while we were with them feeding the sheep." It is the practical power of the kingdom, unofficially, operating in protection here.
P.B. And Abigail is the moral complement of what David is administratively here?
S.McC. Well, what she represents to faith is the assembly. She brings the assembly to mind; just as Abigail was necessary to David at this point, so the assembly is necessary to Christ at this point.
E.H. Is this one of the principles of practical righteousness?
S.McC. Yes, that would enter into it. Romans, while developing the truth of the kingdom, and how it operates morally, specially towards the hortatory section at the end, makes reference to business; reference is made to practical uprightness. It is a great thing that there should be righteousness in all our dealings. The Gospel would promote that. It is really the kingdom working morally. If you get persons that are not right in their business, the question is as to whether the kingdom has its proper way with them morally.
F.W. So you have joy in the Holy Spirit then.
S.McC. The kingdom of God is not eating and drinking, but righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Spirit.
P.R.P. In @Acts 5, it is a secret and a hidden matter in the main.
S.McC. Exactly. While we have a crisis here, where the truth is in danger, where things are at a critical
{240}
juncture, the power of the kingdom is operating unofficially in the protection of certain things.
R.C.McC. The things that are protected are both the sheep and those feeding the sheep; is that the point?
S.McC. Well, exactly. Of course it is alluding to Nabal, but abstractly you see we are thinking of the principle of what is there.
J.H.H. In Corinthians, it says, "Railed at, we bless; persecuted, we suffer it; insulted, we entreat: we are become as the offscouring of the world."
S.McC. Very good. That shows the moral basis of all power in the testimony. It is a question of what we are; what we say enters into it, but then what we are as formed in the features of the kingdom. David and his men express the whole idea of the kingdom morally, in what they were and how they acted.
N.B.S. This young man has an appreciation of that, has he? He says, "David sent ... to bless our master." He learned this as having to do with David.
S.McC. Exactly, and it is this thing that moves Abigail to haste, as if the assembly would understand what is involved in this kind of regime, and the necessity for it being preserved. So she acts to hold up David, just as the assembly in principle is holding up Christ at the present time in relation to the saving and protecting power of the kingdom now. Soon He is going to resume the sword again.
J.H.H. I notice that from verse 25 to verse 31 Abigail calls David "My Lord," twelve times. Is that remarkable?
S.McC. It is very remarkable. It shows that not only do we have what is basically right in David, but we have what is basically right in Abigail. She is a woman of worth; a woman of quality.
Now we must refer to @2 Samuel 24. We see how what is basic in David comes into view in relation to this great crisis, and how the sheep are in his mind. That is, it is the shepherd heart of David that is wrought upon.
{241}
David is not a type of Christ exactly here. He is a type of any one of us, and especially a type of failure in leadership, at this juncture. But what it says in verse 10 is that "David's heart smote him after he had numbered the people. And David said to Jehovah, I have sinned greatly in what I have done; and now, I beseech thee, Jehovah, put away the iniquity of thy servant; for I have done very foolishly. And when David arose in the morning the word of Jehovah came to the prophet Gad, David's seer, saying, Go and say to David, Thus saith Jehovah: I impose on thee three things; choose one of them that I may do it unto thee." And then lower down in verse 17, when David accepts coming into the hand of Jehovah, he says, "David spoke to Jehovah when he saw the angel that smote among the people, and said, Behold, it is I that have sinned, and it is I that have committed iniquity; but these sheep, what have they done? Let thy hand, I pray thee, be on me, and on my father's house.". All this brings out what David is substantially and basically, and I think that is what the Lord would help every one of us in regard to.
C.K. I was going to ask, David has had a long history here, has he not? He is not too great to listen to the prophet, to accept what the prophet says to him.
S.McC. I think it is a feature of David that he was always ready for the prophetic word. You love to see that among the saints. What an evidence we have had of it. The readiness of the saints to hear the truth; David was marked by that and we are all to be marked by it.
J.H.H. I was wondering if perhaps you had in your mind, that if we have substance we are adjusted more quickly. David has gone on in his soul's history. Perhaps this is one of his quickest adjustments, quicker than before, quicker than the two previous adjustments.
S.McC. The more we are with God in our histories basically and foundationally, the greater will be the readiness to accept adjustment.
{242}
J.C. The difficulty ofttimes is that we manoeuvre to save our wretched reputation, instead of considering for the flock.
S.McC. Well, it shows here how that David, in all the anguish of soul that he was passing through, never forgot the saints; he did not forget the sheep. They were, as it were, an integral part of him in his thoughts and outlook.
E.N.J. Would you say a word as to iniquity here, "put away the iniquity of thy servant." He says, "I have sinned," but then he asks that his iniquity be put away. Would you say something as to that, please?
S.McC. Well, he says, "It is I that have committed iniquity." That is, he shows how his will had really operated in the matter.
E.N.J. Is that the cause of a good deal of trouble? We have the scriptures, and we have the ministry as to things, and yet with the knowledge of that and having it in our possession, we still do things that are not right, which really amounts to iniquity, does it not?
S.McC. Yes. So that the sheep come before us as characteristically leadable persons. They are not exactly persons that are marked by will. They represent the saints from the aspect of the work of God in them.
P.B. It is very touching what you say in regard to David. Saul had on different occasions said that he had sinned, but basically he only had his own self-preservation in mind; but David has the sheep in mind, and his words are touching, are they not? "Behold, it is I that have sinned" and so on; "Let thy hand, I pray thee, be on me, and on my father's house." He even brings his father's house into this, matter.
S.McC. And immediately we read, "And Gad came *that* day" -- *that* day, not a year after, or six months, or two years, or ten years. "Gad came that day to David, and said to him, Go up, rear an altar to Jehovah in the threshing-floor of Araunah the Jebusite. And David,
{243}
according to the saying of Gad, went up as Jehovah had commanded." You can see the greatness of David in these matters, and how the threshing-floor is secured, and the service of God is promoted through this.
F.W. Does this show the basic quality of David's leadership, in there being true love in his heart for the flock?
S.McC. It comes out in his deepest distress, just as in Ziklag, so here it comes out in his deepest distress. If I have got myself before me, however carefully I guard it, if I am thinking of preserving myself and my reputation however carefully I guard it -- it may be five years, or ten years that I may carefully guard it -- it will come out in some way or another; but if I am going on with God, as David went on with God in secret history, having his links with God on a moral basis, well, what is basic will come out. This love for the sheep.
F.W. Does J.B.S.¬s remark as to the quality of a horse illustrate it?
S.McC. Tell us something more about that. He had some remarkable illustrations.
F.W. I think J.B.S. said that the quality of a horse is seen in the way that it gets up after it has fallen.
S.McC. Very good indeed. That is David all the way through.
J.D. Would not this help us as to having matters quickly settled, as we are with God about them?
S.McC. Yes, and to go forward with the service of God, to go forward with the truth. It is not that David is to be down there all the time, but that the service of God has to go forward.
J.D. Is not that a great encouragement, that God is going on, and He would have us go on in spite of all the failures that may come in, as we are with God in self-judgment? We should be quickly recovered?
S.McC. Just so.
{244}
THE SERVICE OF CHRIST IN LEADERSHIP (5)
@Ezekiel 34: 11 -- 16, 23 -- 31; @Revelation 7: 13 -- 17
S.McC. It is thought fitting that we should conclude the enquiry that we have pursued together in relation to the thought of leadership, especially the side of administrative service in relation to the flock as linked with it, with these remarkable passages which speak of God and Christ in a distinctive way, and the flock. Ezekiel and John go together, and the brethren will perhaps see the link as we pursue this enquiry together now. While @Revelation 7 is dealing dispensationally with another period of time and another class of people, nevertheless the principles that are involved in the teaching apply to us as believers; and it will be noted that the great result of divine leadership in these passages has in mind eternal conditions. As we come into these passages with the help of the Spirit, with the knowledge that we have in our dispensation, we can see that what is in mind is eternal conditions. And in the passage that we have read in @Ezekiel 34, indeed in both passages, just the literal reading of the passages in themselves without any expatiation on them, is affecting to the soul; how God comes into the position, linking on with His sheep in the cloudy day, the cloudy and the dark day, and, reverently speaking, takes over Himself with a view to our being brought on to the high level of His own thoughts in the truth regarding us. And se the brethren will note in @Ezekiel 34, the references to the mountains of Israel, "Their own land," "the mountains of Israel," "the water-courses," "the habitable places of the country," "a good pasture," "the high mountains of Israel." All that is to bring into our minds the elevated objective in the administrative service that we have been
{245}
considering together in leadership in relation to the flock.
J.C. Has this resulted from the great revival of the last century, the saints brought back to the height of the truth?
S.McC. Yes, undoubtedly it would enter into that. How God has come into the position. The chapter is dealing with the shepherds that feed themselves; that is, God has a word for the hierarchy around us that has stood in the way, the whole clerical principle standing in the way of the flock arriving at divine thoughts -- what is the mind of God for us. After the word to the leaders of the hierarchy, God begins with this word, "Behold I, even I, will both search for my sheep, and tend them. As a shepherd tendeth his flock in the day that he is among his scattered sheep, so will I tend my sheep, and will deliver them out of all places whither they have been scattered in the cloudy and dark day."
H.S.D. Do these words imply that God is not limited to instruments of leadership? Is there a sense in which He leads His people in a direct way?
S.McC. Well, it throws into relief His own shepherd feelings in the matter; but of course it would be mediate in our time. He would use others, but it is to bring into our souls that it is God Who is in this matter, God Who is searching for His sheep and tending them, not so much the instrumentality.
P.R.P. So that @Revelation 21 says, "God Himself shall be with them." Is that the great ultimate thought?
S.McC. Yes, that is the end of all things, in eternal conditions.
E.N.J. The apostle Paul recognised the Lord's shepherd care for him in the end of his writings in 2 Timothy, "I was delivered out of the lion's mouth."
S.McC. Yes, a remarkable thing the way he was delivered; the Lord came in for him when everybody else had forsaken him. The Lord stood by him, and He
{246}
delivered him in order that by him the preaching might be fully known.
C.E.J. Is it beautiful to see that in verse 12 it says of the shepherd that, "he is among his scattered sheep, so will I tend my sheep"; indicating that the Lord never gives up His thoughts? Though the sheep may be scattered, yet He would take His place as among His scattered sheep.
S.McC. That should be a great encouragement to us, as we think of the circumstances in which we are publicly, where all around us, we might say, it is the cloudy and dark day; but yet God has come into the position, effecting deliverance for us, so that we know His own personal care and interest in bringing us to His own thoughts.
P.B. In @Ezekiel 1, we have the brightness round about the appearance of a man, "As the appearance of the bow that is in the cloud in the day of rain." Does that suggest that God in His government, even though He has to exercise His governmental power, will be faithful to His love to Israel and to His people?
S.McC. Faithful to the promises; a great thing to get into our souls. "If our heart condemn us, God is greater than our heart." It has been said the horizon of the believer is bounded by God.
D.H.B. Would you say something as to verse 11? "Behold I, even I, will both search for my sheep, and tend them." Would you say something as to the searching?
S.McC. Well, I suppose that enters into the principle of all ministry and administrative service on this line, for God is searching for His sheep. He says in verse 7, "Therefore, ye shepherds, hear the word of Jehovah: As I live, saith the Lord Jehovah, verily because my sheep have been a prey, and my sheep have been meat to every beast of the field, because there was no shepherd, and my shepherds searched not for my flock, but the shepherds
{247}
fed themselves, and fed not my flock -- therefore, ye shepherds, hear the word of Jehovah. Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Behold, I am against the shepherds; and I will require my sheep at their hand, and cause them to cease from feeding the flock; that the shepherds may feed themselves no more; and I will deliver my sheep from their mouth, that they may not be food for them." That is, God is intervening in this condition the sheep have not been cared for, as we see around us on every hand in the public position.
J.H.H. It says that the Lord must needs go through Samaria. I suppose you would say, seeking a sheep. Is it sobering, too, in view of what you are reading, that all the disciples had gone to buy bread?
S.McC. Very good. It is very interesting that, because in John the Lord's service takes on peculiarly this side of the truth, searching for His sheep. The same with the man in @John 9, the Lord *found* him. He heard that he was cast out, and He sought him out, and found him. Remember the prophetic allusion of Caiaphas in @John 11, when he prophesied as to the death of the Lord Jesus, that one man should die that the whole nation perish not, the comment that is made by the Spirit in John the evangelist, is that the Lord was to die to gather together the children of God scattered abroad; showing how much it is in mind in John's gospel.
W.J.B-n. Would Nathaniel's reference, "Whence knowest thou me?" be in line with that? The Lord could say, "Before that Phillip called thee, when thou wast under the fig-tree, I saw thee"; as though he was known before he came to the Lord. The Lord was seeking him, had His eye on him.
S.McC. Yes, and I think God would bring these exalted thoughts into our mind, because this does not come in at the end of the book of Ezekiel; it comes in an interesting section. The teaching of @Ezekiel 33
{248}
bears on our individual responsibility. You will notice in chapter 33: 13, "When I say to the righteous that he shall certainly live, and he trusteth to his righteousness and doeth what is wrong, none of his righteous acts shall be remembered; but in his unrighteousness which he hath done, in it shall he die. And when I say unto the wicked, Thou shalt certainly die, and he turneth from his sin, and doeth judgment and justice; if the wicked restore the pledge, give again that he had taken by robbery, walk in the statutes of life, doing nothing that is wrong; he shall certainly live, he shall not die. None of his sins which he hath committed shall be remembered against him." Now these are striking statements, bearing on our individual responsibility. In regard to the first, verse 13, the righteous acts not being remembered, "but in his unrighteousness which he hath done, in it shall he die" -- it shows the seriousness of godly persons doing what is wrong. Sometimes we mitigate the wrongness by drawing attention to their godliness, but it is important to remember what J.N.D. said in regard to Barnabas and his defection, that all the weight of a man's godliness adds to his sin when he falls.
P.B. This was expressed in the Lord's words to Zacchaeus was it? Was this carried out?
S.McC. You mean how the Lord commenting on it says, "Today salvation is come to this house, inasmuch as he also is a son of Abraham." That is, the lineage of faith in Zacchaeus was expressed in what he did, the practical way he acted. Well that is chapter 33, it is our individual responsibility before God. In chapter 35, God deals with Edom, the inveterate hatred, the perpetual hatred of Edom. In chapter 36, Israel comes up again, the principle of new birth, the restoration and renewal of Israel on the principle of the new birth. In chapter 37, we have resurrection. And then in chapter 38 and 39, the great enemy of God is
{249}
dealt with unsparingly, the terribleness of the carnage being referred to. Then from chapter 40 onwards we get the glory of the city and the house. But this chapter comes in at this juncture, as showing how God is entering into matters surrounded by His government and judgments and tending His sheep.
J.D. The great thought of recovery enters into this. Would you link on Luke's ministry in connection with this? I was thinking of the Lord's new service after His resurrection. They had all been scattered had they not? He appears to Peter, and the two going to Emmaus, and others.
S.McC. Yes. As we read this, it would impregnate our minds and hearts and our souls with the great thought of recovery, that God is operating on the principle of recovery, and we are to be in full accord with Him on that line.
N.B.S. You spoke of our having in view eternal conditions. Did you mean that they are to be entered into now?
S.McC. Yes, because in the Spirit, the Spirit being here, there is the power in which we can enter by faith upon eternal conditions. Not that we go to heaven, but the Spirit being here, we can enter upon eternal conditions by faith now anticipatively.
P.B. So that it says, "I ... will bring them to their own land."
S.McC. A very precious thought. Our own land. That would be the truth in Ephesians, the heavenly light in Paul's ministry in Ephesians shows us what our own land is. Heaven is our home.
C.W. Would you say, "where two or three are gathered together unto my name, there am I in the midst of them" shows that God moves first? Is that in line with what we have here in the sheep scattered, and in the thought of the shepherd?
S.McC. Well, on the administrative side, Matthew
{250}
would enter into it. "Behold *I* am with you all the days, until the completion of the age." From that side the Lord is among His people all the way.
G.W.B. Would you say a word as to the latter part of verse 13? "I will feed them upon the mountains of Israel by the water-courses."
S.McC. Well, the allusion is to the elevated side in the mountains of Israel; but the water-courses suggest the channels freely flowing, where the Spirit is unhindered, liberty in His services is known. It is a great matter that there should be the apprehension of this, and appreciation of it in our local gatherings.
G.W.B. Would that be what is in mind in the habitable places?
S.McC. Yes, "the habitable places of the country." That is, it is a question of what is peopled, a question of population. "The habitable places of the country."
E.N.J. Is the recovery here in Ezekiel really back to all the wealth that is set out in Deuteronomy -- the good land?
S.McC. Yes. For us it is Ephesians -- sonship, recovery to God's supreme thought for men -- sonship. And that is what is conveyed here, that all His service and operations in recovery are in view as in @Luke 15, that man might be brought into sonship.
J.D. Do we see God operating in grace? I was thinking of @Ephesians 2. It says that, "ye are saved by grace," and then that He is going to show in the ages to come the exceeding riches of His grace.
S.McC. The world to come will be a wonderful display of that. "The surpassing riches of his grace in kindness towards us in Christ Jesus."
F.W. Is @Luke 15 in a sense a working out of this, especially the second part -- the woman sweeping, bringing to light, and bringing in recovery and restoration?
S.McC. @Luke 15 is a remarkable unfolding of what we
{251}
have here. In the sheep in the first passage, the seeking; and the woman searching; and then the Father, the great thought of the best robe, and the shoes, the ring, and the fatted calf. It all brings into our minds what we have here, that God would have us recovered to the best. He does not want us to stop short of anything else than the best.
F.W. And in giving us the over-all kind of thought of @Luke 15, is the point that you are especially aiming at this afternoon, the second part of that chapter -- the present activity of the Holy Spirit to bring to light, and into the proper position, and into the recovered state?
S.McC. And that we might be brought out, as it says in verse 13, "I will bring them out from the peoples, and gather them from the countries, and will bring them to their own land; and I will feed them upon the mountains of Israel by the water-courses." I think we are to be impressed with divine activities, in the presence of the Spirit here, in relation to this great work of recovery.
J.D. So that we should have the best and the choicest thoughts before us in cases of recovery in our localities.
S.McC. The more we read @Luke 15 the more we will be impressed, along with what we have here in @Ezekiel 34, with the great work of recovery. Think of what is done here in verse 16, "I will seek the lost, and bring again that which was driven away, and will bind up the broken, and will strengthen that which was sick; but I will destroy the fat and the strong: I will feed them with judgment." What a contrast, as we take account of that.
P.B. I was going to ask, what does Jehovah mean when He says, "And as for you, my flock, thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Behold, I judge between sheep and sheep, between the rams and the he-goats," and "between the fat
{252}
sheep and the lean sheep"? What has Jehovah in mind there? He is addressing the flock and *His* flock.
S.McC. You are alluding to verses 17 and 20. It is most important to see that side of the truth from verse 17 to verse 22, which we did not read, because it represents what would put our feet into other paths, especially the rams and the he-goats. That is the male side, the side of responsibility. It says, in verse 18, "Is it too small a thing unto you to have eaten up the good pastures, but ye must tread down with your feet the best of your pastures; and to have drunk of the settled waters, but ye must foul the rest with your feet? And my sheep have to eat that which ye have trodden down with your feet, and to drink that which ye have fouled with your feet. Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah unto them: Behold, it is I, and I will judge between the fat sheep and the lean sheep. Because ye thrust with side and with shoulder, and push all the weak ones with your horns, till ye have scattered them abroad -- I will save my flock, that they may no more be a prey; and I will judge between sheep and sheep." That is, God is reserving the right to come in in these matters to take care of His own sheep.
G.W.B. Did you have in mind to say something further as to, "I will seek the lost"?
S.McC. Just the great work of recovery that Luke would bring into our minds, the great administrative service, in relation to healing, seeking, and bringing, and binding up the broken, and strengthening. All these are the proper principles of the kingdom operating in relation to the work of recovery.
G.W.B. You have said in other parts that the matter of going after those who have been withdrawn from, that are not available to us for the moment, was a matter of great importance.
S.McC. Well, what was said, which we must keep clear, is that the priest has a service to render. That is,
{253}
that the priest would be concerned about such; just as the Lord went out to the cross, and linked on with the dying thief, dying for his sin; the Lord linked on with him in the position without the camp, outside the gate -- a lesson for us to learn, the great thought of the priest, and the Lord links on with the thief in that way.
J.C. Would you exhort us to be more on the look-out for persons in whom there is a work of God, those not with us? Is there not a tendency with us to be more self-contained in our outlook?
S.McC. Well, the more we are like God the broader our outlook will be, the more enlargement of heart there will be with us. Jeremiah says, "Let them return unto thee; but return not thou unto them." But we should always be available to serve the lost, to serve what has been driven away, the broken, and to strengthen that which is sick. Think of the sick ones, how they need to be strengthened; young people that get spiritually sick. We need to get alongside of them in the spirit of the Lord Jesus Himself, and serve them.
J.D. So there are the compassions of God, the feelings that come out as He speaks of "my sheep," would that not help us, in the sense in which we have been recovered in mercy?
S.McC. So that the last thing we would seek to do is to withdraw from persons; the last resort that would be in our minds; the most extreme thing that we would think of. Our outlook is to save persons, save them by any possible means without sacrificing the truth.
J.D. And learning something of the value of what we are to God in that way as the result of redemption, do you think?
S.McC. That is what they are -- the sheep -- purchased at such infinite cost. And therefore we are like God, we would go a long way to save a sheep. We must not use the assembly too readily to withdraw from persons; we must be concerned in this great administrative
{254}
service as to how we can save persons. We *may* have to withdraw from them, as their sin may attach to them, and they go on in wilfulness, but it is a last resort; and even then it has in view their restoration and recovery.
J.H.H. I was struck with your speaking about the Lord identifying Himself with a repentant thief at the end of His pathway here; but He began His public service that way did He not? He identified Himself with a repentant people in baptism.
S.McC. It is touching how the Lord links on with different cases in Luke's gospel. And we have to learn to think specially of young people who have drifted into the world, how can we serve them; how can we bring them back, without, of course, sacrificing the truth; but like God Himself, seeking the lost and bringing again that which has been driven away, and binding up the broken, and strengthening that which was sick.
P.B. Do you think that we have oftentimes failed in this principle of seeking the lost, because of disturbing conditions amongst ourselves? And is it not noticeable that it says, "I will myself feed my flock, and I will cause them to lie down, saith the Lord Jehovah." That is, that He would have His saints in restful complacent conditions in relation to His love and His service; and would not the seeking the lost flow from such conditions in power?
S.McC. Yes.
N.B.S. Is this house-to-house work?
S.McC. Well, it would involve that, as Paul says to the Ephesians in regard to the way that he had served them for the three years he was among them, and it is important that there should be this care. Not that we palliate evil or unrighteousness; if persons are unrighteous and we have to withdraw from them, we *have* to withdraw from them. What is uppermost in our minds is the salvation of persons, especially the
{255}
young people where the world is making such a bid for them; and where there may be many that are sick, and the enemy is gaining an advantage over their souls; and we should know how to seek them out, and to strengthen that which is sick.
K.A.W. Would not the alertness of David in relation to the lamb of which we were speaking this morning help much in this very matter?
S.McC. Well, it would, even to the combating with the enemy himself over the matter. We might say, "Oh, well, they have gone too far," but look how far that lamb had got; right in the mouth of the lion; and David rescued it out of the mouth of the lion. So that we can go a long way, as it were, to rescue even a piece of an ear, as Jehovah says in Amos, "Like as the shepherd rescueth ... a piece of an ear." If we can only get a piece of an ear, it is something to work on.
J.H.H. Just to be practical, do you think we should go round to visit occasionally one who has been withdrawn from, as a priest I am speaking now?
S.McC. We must keep that clear, that it is a question of the priest in Leviticus acting in the matter; it is not a question of whether it would be nice, or it would be good to have a social contact, a visit. It is the priest as thinking for God, and acting for God, and concerned to find out what is transpiring.
N.B.S. So we need to be concerned more to visit them before they are withdrawn from, if anyone is getting away.
S.McC. Well that enters into it too; there is great need of this kind of administrative service in shepherd care, God giving us a lead in regard to it.
J.G.H. I wondered if the Lord's word in @John 17 as to "those thou hast given me I have guarded," would come into it?
S.McC. Well, it does. It represents the Lord's care. The Lord was the Comforter and the Paraclete to His
{256}
disciples. He took care of all their matters; He stood by them. When they went through the cornfields, and the legal element challenged them as to what they were doing, who took care of them? The Lord took care of them.
P.B. Do we see the Lord's shepherd care over the two going to the village of Emmaus, how He gained their ear, how they said, "Did not our heart burn within us," and when He is made known to them, they immediately go back to the flock.
S.McC. His service leads them back to the assembly, leads them back to Jerusalem. Such should be in our prayers all the time for their recovery.
G.W.B. And did you not say that we can pray for them in a right way?
S.McC. Yes, we should think of them in our different localities. Take the young people that we have lost, we should think of them and pray for them that they might be brought back, that God might bring them back.
B.J.G. In @James 5: 19 we read, "If anyone among you err from the truth, and one bring him back." Is that the line?
S.McC. The ability to convert persons. What a wonderful thing it is to be able to convert a person from the error of his ways. And then in verse 23 He says, "I will set up one shepherd over them," now this is an important thing to notice, "and he shall feed them, even my servant, David: he shall feed them and he shall be their shepherd. And I, Jehovah, will be their God, and my servant David a prince in their midst: I Jehovah have spoken it." We are to be impressed with this matter as to God and Christ in the type, in the position that They occupy amongst the flock.
F.E. Would that be borne out in the end of John's Gospel, the Lord appearing to Mary, she saying, "Rabboni" -- my teacher -- and then He saying to her,
{257}
"my Father, and your Father," "my God, and your God"?
S.McC. That would be what the teaching is leading on to, in eternal conditions enjoyed by the flock in the light of John's ministry. Then it says, "I will make with them a covenant of peace, and will cause evil beasts to cease out of the land; and they shall dwell in safety" -- notice the recurrence of the word "safety" in this closing passage -- "they shall dwell in safety in the wilderness, and sleep in the woods." You will remember how in 2 Samuel the forest, the wood devoured more than the battle; but now here there is safety in the wilderness and they shall sleep in the woods. "And I will make them and the places round about my hill" -- my hill would be the assembly -- "a blessing; and I will cause the shower to come down in its season; there shall be showers of blessing." All these things, as the fruit of all this leadership and administrative service, are to impress us with the wealth and abundance of what is in the divine mind.
P.B. Is this a little touch of @John 10: 28 -- 29? "And *I* give them life eternal; and they shall never perish, and no one shall seize them out of my hand. My Father who has given them to me is greater than all, and no one can seize out of the hand of my Father." Is this a little touch of that, do you think?
S.McC. It is the conditions, the sphere of eternal life. That is what would be in mind in, "I will make them and the places round about my hill a blessing, and I will cause the shower to come down in its season; there shall be showers of blessing." There is no stint in this matter.
G.B. I was wondering whether the thought of the enjoyment of eternal things could be linked with this matter of lying down, and in the fat pasture. David could speak of it, could he not? "He makes me to lie down in green pastures." Is that going too far?
{258}
S.McC. The good fold and a fat pasture. And "they shall feed upon the mountains of Israel." While for Israel it would be millennial, for us it is eternal conditions entered upon, and that is what Ephesians has in mind. We are brought, in the teaching in Ephesians, to the very fringe of eternity, in the enjoyment in the power of the Spirit of eternal conditions.
W.J.B-n. We would keep before us what is collective in this setting, verse 23 refers to the collective position especially.
S.McC. That is the whole point in the chapter; the whole teaching of the chapter relates to the collective position.
L.P.J. Does it link in that way with @John 10: 4 that we had in the first reading? "When he has put forth all his own" -- the word "all" -- "all his own, he goes before them." The Lord would have everyone in mind.
S.McC. And notice the reference to security in these passages: "They shall dwell in safety," at the end of verse 25; and then verse 27, "And they shall be in safety in their land"; and then again in verse 28, "but they shall dwell in safety, and none shall make them afraid." We are to be reminded of these proper conditions in the assembly, where we are in the enjoyment and the power of the Spirit in eternal conditions, that if there is any place that is secure, it is in this realm.
P.B. So the assembly here is likened to the tree of the field. "The tree," not "trees." "But the tree of the field shall yield its fruit." Is that the fruitfulness of divine grace in the assembly?
S.McC. As we would look at it now, that is how it would stand.
J.C. Did you have in mind holding on to this promise? It speaks of deliverance from our enemies, out of the hand of all who hate us, and He goes on to speak about being saved out of the hand of our enemies,
{259}
that we should serve Him without fear, and in piety and righteousness all our days.
S.McC. Well, that is it. We are reminded of that here. It says, "And shall know that I am Jehovah when I have broken the bands of their yoke and delivered them out of the hand of those that kept them in servitude." Christianity involves liberty, and we know how God in the great work of recovery and revival in our time has brought His people out from under this kind of thing, "broken the bands of their yoke and delivered them out of the hand of those that kept them in servitude." What a real matter it has been in these days of recovery, as God has moved to bring us to eternal conditions.
J.D. So that this matter of safety is an important one. Is not the position set out in such an attractive way? I was thinking of what you were saying in the earlier readings in regard to what was seen in Moses, and Joseph, and David, substantially. I was thinking of the features, how attractive they are and would not that help us in our localities, that we are attractive?
S.McC. We should have a sense of security in this realm, the assembly being the great realm where God is known at the present time, and where we find our present home.
J.D. I was thinking, too, of the way the Lord answers the scribes and Pharisees because they murmured. He sets the thing out in a most attractive way, does He not? He says, "What man of you," in reference to the sheep that went astray.
S.McC. He is appealing to them; He is appealing to their commonsense, as we heard the other day, as to the matter in regard to man, the sheep.
Now we should have a word to close with on this passage in the Revelation. As we know, the chapter deals dispensationally with a day yet to come, and a class that is yet to come into view, coming out in the
{260}
great tribulation, but the principles apply to ourselves in this time and day. It says, "One of the elders answered, saying to me, These who are clothed with white robes, who are they, and whence came they? And I said to him, My lord, *thou* knowest. And he said to me, These are they who came out of the great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and have made them white in the blood of the Lamb. Therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his temple." Now we are to notice that what leads into the eternal conditions that are suggested here in the closing verses, is this practical matter of washing our robes in the blood of the Lamb.
C.E.J. Open that up, please.
S.McC. Well, washing has a great place in the book of the Revelation. We get those that wash their robes in chapter 22 to establish their right to go in by the gates into the city. That would be the water side, but it is not water here, it is blood. It is, "These are they who have come out of the great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb." As we have been taught, the water has to do with state and the blood has to do with guilt. The blood stands related to acts, to sins; the rudiments of the teaching of the gospel bring that before us. The blood in @Romans 3 has to do with sins, acts.
P.R.P. It is, "and have washed" here, whereas it is "wash" in chapter 22. What would you say as to that?
S.McC. It is continuous in chapter 22, but it is historical here. It says, "And have washed their robes, and have made them white in the blood of the Lamb." It is the judicial side; the severe side; what it cost Christ, the shedding of His blood, that guilty acts, acts of sin, acts of lawlessness, might be met. That is the side here in washing our robes in the blood of the Lamb.
H.S.D. In chapter 1, the Lord has done it, "To him
{261}
who loves us, and has washed us from our sins"; but in this chapter, we have done it. Would you comment on that?
S.McC. Well, it is more severe here. It is the gracious act of the Lord in chapter 1 in His service towards us, washing us from our sins; but here it is persons coming out of the pressure, out of the difficulties, the awfulness of what the tribulation suggests, coming out of it, washing their robes, "and have made them white in the blood of the Lamb." It is the judicial side, the severe side; the water side is not the severe side; the blood side is.
W.J.B. What is the difference between washing their robes in the blood of the Lamb, and washing their robes with water?
S.McC. The water has to do with our state, the actions that flow out of our state.
W.J.B. So that the whole past history has been atoned for; it has been covered through the efficacy of the blood of Christ, is that the thought?
S.McC. That is it. It is historical, not like @Revelation 22, where the water side is mentioned where it is continuous; it is historical here, "and have made them white in the blood of the Lamb." It is the great efficacious power linked with the blood of Christ as meeting every act of sin, every act of lawlessness, unrighteousness, giving complete clearance.
W.J.B. So that Paul in reviewing his past history says in @1 Timothy 1, "Who before was an insolent overbearing man" that would cover his course in regard to the persecution of the saints; but he also says, "mercy was shown me"; that is to say the mercy would involve that his robes were washed in the blood of the Lamb, would it?
S.McC. What a sense Paul had of complete clearance of the guilty acts he had perpetrated in persecuting the saints.
{262}
F.W. And is administration to be in the light of redemption's work?
S.McC. That is what is in the mind in the blood of the Lamb. It is our side. It is not God's side in the matter, it is our side, what we come into on the judicial side, having a sense of a complete clearance in regard to the matters that have affected us.
F.W. They come out of the tribulation. Does it indicate that they come out of the tribulation having washed their robes in the blood of the Lamb -- all is now clear?
S.McC. That is the point. So it says, "Therefore are they before the throne of God." Now the throne of God is a great thought. It involves what is eternal. And this is to show us the line on which we are before the throne, in the sense of "not a cloud above, and not a spot within," so that it leads right into eternal conditions in principle here.
F.W. So the position becomes then unchallengeable; and Israel's restoration in a day to come will be as unchallengeable as our position. Is that right?
S.McC. Yes. Not only as to their state, which the new birth will meet, and the sprinkling of the water in @Ezekiel 36, but also the matter of their guilty acts in the slaying of their Messiah. It will be covered by the efficacy on the judicial side in connection with the blood of Christ. The blood of Christ meets every guilty act.
J.D. Would not this give us an increased appreciation of the One Who is spoken of as the Lamb -- "the blood of the Lamb"?
S.McC. The Sufferer. The Lamb is the great Sufferer.
J.D. And would it not show too what God will secure as the result of that? It is a great crowd which no one could number.
S.McC. "Therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his temple." That is, there is absolute freedom with God, with divine
{263}
Persons; not a cloud to mar the enjoyment, before the throne there. We know what the throne represents, we know what it stands for; and there is perfect liberty before it, serving day and night in His temple. And then it says, "And he that sits upon the throne shall spread his tabernacle over them. They shall not hunger any more, neither shall they thirst any more, nor shall the sun at all fall on them, nor any burning heat; because the Lamb which is in the midst of the throne shall shepherd them, and shall lead them to fountains of waters of life, and God shall wipe away every tear from their eyes." It is the effectiveness of this administrative service that gives a complete clearance, so that we enter upon and enjoy eternal conditions with God Himself and with Christ.
W.H.F. "Ye shall be to me for sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty." @2 Corinthians 6: 18.
S.McC. We have an allusion to God spreading His tabernacle over them. Of course, this goes far beyond @2 Corinthians 6, which is dealing with the wilderness side. This leads into eternal conditions. "He ... shall spread his tabernacle over them." It is not a question of man spreading his tabernacle over them, but God. What an influence to be under, God's influence in this regard, so that we are delivered from man, as it were.
O.V.P. Is verse 16 the sufferings which the saints go through? "They shall not hunger any more, neither shall they thirst any more, nor shall the sun at all fall on them, nor any burning heat; because the Lamb which is in the midst of the throne shall shepherd them."
S.McC. It refers to the conditions that they passed through, the sufferings and the trials, the tribulations; and it says, "the Lamb which is in the midst of the throne shall shepherd them." Remarkable touch, "the Lamb which is in the midst of the throne shall shepherd them, and shall lead them to fountains of waters of life." You feel that the Fulness is here, all the Persons
{264}
of the Godhead in the matter, whether directly or indirectly.
F.W. And is that what you were saying earlier as to discipline, that even if it has to be carried out, the discipline has in view the eventual recovery; and here in connection with Israel, all that they passed through eventually drives them, as it were, to see that their whole hope is in Christ and His work.
S.McC. That is it.
{265}
THE TEMPLE AND THE BODY
@1 Corinthians 3: 16 -- 23; @1 Corinthians 12: 12 -- 27
S.McC. The letters to the Corinthians are often referred to. These passages are well-known, but they, never fail to yield fresh help for us in the settings in which we are found in our local gatherings. In suggesting these passages, one has in mind particularly the importance of the temple in the first: "Do ye not know that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you?" and then the importance of the body in the second, and the Spirit's relation to the body as it comes out in that chapter. The thought of the temple particularly draws our attention to the great feature of light, what the saints are as convened and the Spirit of God among them, and the sure and certain way of getting help in regard to the truth in the recognition of this, and the thought of the refusal of all that is linked with man's mind and human wisdom, as Paul alludes to it in verse 18, "Let no one deceive himself if any one thinks himself to be wise among you in this world, let him become foolish, that he may be wise."
Then the thought of the body, the great vessel that is under the hand of the Spirit in relation to the setting forth of the testimony in a given locality, and what the saints are to one another in the light of the body. Both of these thoughts were brought in to act perhaps as a corrective to conditions in Corinth, and both serve as a great means of balance in relation to the truth as to the local position. What great advantages we have in the light of being temple of God, the assembly being the temple of God in any given city, because the Spirit of God dwells in it. What great advantages there are in the light of the body of Christ, the peculiar advantages that lie in that vehicle of holy sensitive feeling as room
{266}
is made for all that might be latent in the work of God in the saints. Our relations to one another in a feeling way are stressed -- what we mean to one another and the importance of recognising how we are linked together in the light of the body, so that there is no moral distance, as it were, allowed or countenanced between us. The importance of each member to the workability of the thought of the body should be seen, and especially the predominance of the Spirit in it.
J.H.H. Would you open up a little how we could corrupt the temple? "If any one corrupt the temple of God."
S.McC. Well, of course, Paul is using an extreme statement here as to the possibility of the natural mind of the man after the flesh encroaching in this realm, "If any one corrupt the temple of God, him shall God destroy." That could hardly be true of a believer in the full sense of it.
G.J.G. Will you say a word as to the relationship of gifts and leadership to this great thought? We need balance as to the two sides, do we not?
S.McC. I am sure if there is gift in any locality, the brethren will be glad to make room for what is there. Gift, as has often been said, is like a precious stone. It enhances the diffusion of the light; it helps in the diffusing of light in a greater way. The temple is a sphere where light is diffused from God as to the truth.
W.J.B. So that the functioning of the temple in no way shuts out the operation of gift?
S.McC. No, indeed it does not; neither does the thought of the body. The gifts are not set in the body; they are set in the assembly. But neither of these thoughts, the temple nor the body, militate against the presence and operation of gift amongst us. Indeed, gift is largely dependent on the latent wealth that is resident in the body in relation to the development of the truth.
{267}
W.J.H. On the other hand, would you say that the working out of the temple and the body is not dependent on gift in a locality?
S.McC. No, it is not dependent on gift, but gift is a great advantage in a locality in regard to the operation of the temple. But what Paul is stressing here is what the saints in Corinth *were* themselves. "Do ye not know that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you?" He is anxious, it would seem in the letter, to keep before them the dignity of what they were as set together in the locality.
L.G.S. Is he in that way reminding them of what he had said in the opening verses of the epistle?
S.McC. What are you referring to?
L.G.S. I was thinking of the passage reading from verse 4 of the first chapter where he thanks God for them and speaks of them being enriched in Christ Jesus, "in all word of doctrine, and all knowledge," and that they came short in no gift, and so on.
S.McC. Yes, he speaks of them as richly furnished at the outset. But he comes back to this matter of what they were as the temple of God. That is, he is not exactly bringing in that gift was essential here. He is stressing what they were as set together in the locality, especially concerned, as he is, that none of them should be making their boast in men; as he says in verse 21, "So that let no one boast in men."
L.F. I was wondering in that way whether the balance does not come in in verse 16, "the Spirit of God dwells in you." Does that balance us?
S.McC. Yes, because it would seem as if at Corinth they were making a good deal of their gift, to the extent that schools of thought and opinion were established among them; and the apostle is seeking to stress what the saints were collectively as offsetting that.
C.E.J. Do you think that, as set together temple-wise, we would make enquiry together; and do you think that
{268}
in our meetings such as these, the great matter of enquiry is important, the Holy Spirit being present to give the answer, as it were, though He may use a vessel?
S.McC. Quite so. That is, our reliance is on the presence of the Spirit as to help in the truth in regard to what we might be considering. It is important that we should see that. As has often been said, Paul does not bring forward the overseers or the thought of bishops in this letter. He is seeking to stress what the saints are as *set together*.
Ques. Is the Lord Himself an example in that way when He was in the temple hearing them and asking them questions?
S.McC. The Lord is a model to us in all things. He is a great model to us of subjection, in that chapter. We are to learn from Him in all things. It is a good thing if we are ready to ask questions. The Lord, I suppose, could not only ask the questions, but He could answer them.
P.B. "For the temple of God is holy, and such are ye," must always be kept before us in our localities.
S.McC. Yes, exactly. One feels that in a country like this where you have in different cities so many gatherings, it must be a real practical test as to the working out of these great thoughts of the temple and the body; just how to make room for the thought in its fulness, so that the position is not overshadowed by mere personality, important as personality is in certain respects in the local position.
J.P. As touching the matter of temple and gift, it seems emphasised that the temple idea is local, "do ye not know that ye are the temple of God." Gifts set in the assembly, whilst helpful in the locality, as you have said, are universal in their bearing.
S.McC. Yes. They are never said to be set in the
{269}
local assembly. They are always linked with the general catholic position.
F.W. Is it here what they are collectively, characteristically?
S.McC. Yes, so that the definite article "the" need not be there. "Do ye not know that ye are [the] temple, of God." It is what the saints were characteristically.
F.W. It is not a question here of gift, but what they are in the divine mind constitutionally, as you might almost say.
S.McC. Yes; because we might say there were certain conditions at Corinth which might becloud this great thought, and there *were* conditions that would becloud the thought, but Paul is insisting on it in their minds in the teaching here, "Do ye not know that ye are [the] temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you?"
W.J.B. Has he not particularly in mind the excluding of the mind of man?
S.McC. Just so. Just as in chapter 12 he has in mind their being preserved from independency, here he is concerned about the exclusion of human wisdom and the mind of man operating in this realm.
F.W. Does the expression, "Do ye not know," suggest that while he is going to insist upon a certain truth, he is conscious that they are not properly aware of it?
S.McC. Yes, he is recalling their minds to what they are in this light. "Do ye not know that ye are [the] temple of God." It is an absolute statement as to them in their setting in Corinth.
N.B.S. Do these words, "all things are yours," bring home to us how fully furnished the saints are in the light of the temple; independent of what is of man; in the power of the Spirit turning all things to account?
S.McC. Yes. So that you may have localities where
{270}
there may not be gift present, and this is just as true of such places as it is of other places where there may be plenty of gift, what the saints are as set together in a given locality and the Spirit of God dwelling in them.
Ques. Would they diffuse light in that way?
S.McC. That is the thought in the temple of God. It is the place where light is diffused in relation to the truth.
Ques. Would you say the mind of man leaves God out, and simple faith takes Him in?
S.McC. Faith is a great factor in the divine realm. All the way through faith is an important feature in Christianity -- faith and the Spirit. Here, the stress is on the Spirit, that "the Spirit of God dwells in you."
W.J.H. Do you think in @John 2 that the Lord shows these two thoughts are somewhat interlocked? He said, "Destroy this temple," verse 19. This He spoke of His body; but we need both thoughts for them to be both operative.
S.McC. Well, the body underlies the great thought of the temple in that it gives us the inner relations of the saints and their links with one another. It is an important thing to see that if "body" conditions are not right then we find much difficulty in working things out together.
G.A. Would it be right to ask whether the functioning which you have in mind was really forecast in @Psalm 133, "Behold, how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity! Like the precious oil upon the head," and so on? Would the anointed vessel be possessed of that feature of dwelling in unity, so that the feelings of the body might function normally in spite of the absence of gift?
S.McC. Yes, the thought of gift is not exactly linked with the body; it is linked with the assembly. Gifts are set in the assembly. The body is a complete entity in
{271}
itself in @1 Corinthians 12, and is to stress the feeling side, the love side, underlying everything. It is like the works behind the face of the clock, as has often been said.
G.J.G. The working of the temple being dependent upon the Holy Spirit being free among us, we must not grieve Him. Is that the thought, that He might be, as it were, at home amongst us, with right feelings current amongst the brethren?
S.McC. Well, it is an important thing to see that the temple of God is true of the saints whatever their conditions may be. That is, we do not exactly *make* the idea of the temple of God by certain conditions amongst us. We *are* that in our localities, and if two or three are moving in the faith of it and seeking that light might be brought in on that principle, you will find that light *will* come in.
G.J.G. I understood what you said earlier as to that, but I was thinking of what you were referring to as to body feelings being necessary for the functioning of this. Is that not so?
S.McC. Well, it underlies it. It underlies the thought of the temple. You *may* have the temple operating even when perhaps there may be conditions that are exercising among the saints.
J.D. Has Paul in mind what he said earlier, that, "ye all say the same thing ... that ye be perfectly united in the same mind and in the same opinion"? @1 Corinthians 1: 10.
S.McC. Yes, exactly. He is wanting to stress among them the way that things come to them authoritatively in regard to the truth; that as set together in the light of what we have here, there needs to be no room for human speculation; the Spirit of God dwelling among them, there is a positive means of arriving at what is the mind of God in regard to any given matter.
{272}
J.P. Is this one of the examples of the necessity for holding before us the abstract truth?
S.McC. That is, that whatever may obtain, it is important that we should cling to the abstract side, because our salvation lies in that.
Ques. Does the word employed for the temple imply that we are to have some sense of the presence of God in the Spirit?
S.McC. Yes, exactly. It is the "naos"; that is, it is the inner side of things; and the thought of holiness is intensified in this passage, as it says, "the temple of God is holy, and such are *ye*" -- a remarkable thing that Paul can say this when we think of the concrete conditions that were there among them.
Ques. Would it be right to say that, if we cling to the abstract side as to the temple, it would work out as suggested in chapter 2: 12? We would ever bear that in mind, would we not? "But we have received, not the spirit of the world, but the Spirit which is of God, that we may know the things which have been freely given to us of God: which also we speak, not in words taught by human wisdom, but in those taught by the Spirit, communicating spiritual things by spiritual means." Would that be right?
S.McC. Yes, exactly; the temple would intensify that thought, that spiritual things are communicated by spiritual means. You would find that operating in the temple, the way the truth comes to us, the way that spiritual things come to us. It comes to us on that principle; therefore the reference to the Spirit of God at this juncture.
J.H.H. Speaking of the local settings, and then mentioning two or three holding on to what is right, would you say that the Lord would credit every local company with the best that is there?
S.McC. He always does, and none of us should be behind the Lord in that matter, or behind Paul. We
{273}
should always credit the local brethren with the best thoughts that we can credit them with. Even though there may be conditions that may have to be dealt with, as at Corinth, let us hold to this side and the Lord will bring the position round.
P.W. Does the understanding of the abstract position help us in connection with the practical side of it?
S.McC. It always does. It is when we lose sight of the abstract position in our localities that we get into difficulties in the working out of the truth, and Paul is insisting on it in these chapters in 1 Corinthians.
C.E.J. So that in verse 21 he says, "So that let no one boast in men." The saints are in danger, are they not, if they give up this thought, of having a man before them other than Christ, and the Lord is displeased with that?
S.McC. Exactly, and so the importance, as we sit together in our localities in the light of the temple of God and the Spirit of God dwelling in us, of recognising this; so that we are not operating apart from it.
F.W. Does that involve that any part we might take when there, must be according to standard, otherwise, if according to a different standard, if it is a different standard at all, it would be corrupting in principle.
S.McC. Yes, in *principle* it would be, especially if there is the introduction of the human mind. Paul uses a strong statement here, "If any one corrupt the temple of God, *him* shall God destroy," which would hardly apply in the extreme sense to a true believer, but we have to judge the *principle* of it in our hearts and minds and it shows the seriousness of what is in mind in regard to the temple. It is to throw into relief the holiness of the realm.
G.J.G. Does the word, "Let no one deceive himself," bear upon us in the light of what you are saying? It is a very solemn matter.
S.McC. Well, it is. It is so easy to deceive ourselves.
{274}
Paul would help us as to that. As to the word for "deceive" here, you will notice there is a reference to @1 Timothy 2: 14 in relation to it as to Eve, "and Adam was not deceived; but the woman, having been deceived, was in transgression," 'a strong form of the word' as it says in the footnote, which is important to notice. It is a strong form of the word, "Let no one deceive himself." It is so easy to deceive ourselves.
F.W. Would you make any allowance in connection with this matter of corrupting, "If any one corrupt the temple of God, *him* shall God destroy," that it is the same word? He brings upon himself something of that character of things from God; one who might be a believer but acting so wrongly that he suffers some result from it from God?
S.McC. You were linking the word "corrupting" with "deceiving"?
F.W. No. "If any one corrupt the temple of God, *him* shall God destroy." The words "corrupt" and "destroy" are exactly the same word, as the note shows. So that if I bring defilement into that, I am myself thus defiled. God has to say to that; He cannot allow anything that is not holiness in the temple.
S.McC. Well, exactly. It is important to see how things operate in this epistle from the divine side, how divine Persons take things in hand, and so it says that God does it here. We have in regard to moral conditions among them in @1 Corinthians 11, "On this account many among you are weak and infirm," and the Lord is referred to as taking a hand in certain matters; showing how divine Persons come into these matters where divine thoughts may be entrenched upon and done despite to. But I think it is an important thing that we should see the way that the human mind is regarded in the light of the temple, the need for the absolute rejection of the mind of the flesh in this realm.
L.F. That is why it is called attention to in the few
{275}
quotations, "The Lord knows the reasonings of the wise that they are vain," and "He who takes the wise in their craftiness." The mind of man is totally excluded.
S.McC. Exactly. We see how divine Persons are coming into matters where divine thoughts are entrenched upon by what may mark us, as it says, "If any one thinks himself to be wise among you in this world, let him become foolish, that he may be wise. For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God; for it is written, *He* who takes the wise in their craftiness. And again, The Lord knows the reasonings of the wise that they are in vain. So that let no one boast in men," verses 19 -- 21. The temple is a delivering thought, from the influence of man and the mind of man, so that they should not exert undue influence over us. Stress is laid in these passages as to God operating against it.
Rem. So He has hid these things from the wise and prudent.
S.McC. Yes, exactly, but has revealed them to babes.
G.H.W-n. Would you connect this temple with the temple of Jehovah in @1 Samuel 3?
S.McC. Well, the principle of it in the type would be there; the temple of God is alluded to. The temple of God is the place of light, where we get light from God as to the truth.
Ques. Are we to learn to recognise a spiritual lead on any particular occasion through whoever it may come?
S.McC. As together in the light of the temple, the Spirit of God is among us, and the Spirit of God would take full cognizance of what is there, and make the *most* of what is there, and *we* would be helped too to make the most of what is there. But the stress here is on what the saints are, "*ye* are [the] temple of God"; not certain, or some, but all the saints in Corinth. "Do ye not know that *ye* are [the] temple of God."
W.J.B. Is that why the fullest expression of the temple
{276}
in a city is when all the saints are together as in the city readings?
S.McC. That is where you get the full expression of it. It may operate in principle in other ways, but the full expression of it is when the saints are together in relation to the whole city.
J.C. Would it be suggested that in the temple we are coming into the good of some of the things that God has prepared for them that love Him, in chapter 2?
S.McC. Well, the truth would open up to us, the truth would unfold, as we are together recognising what the saints are as temple of God.
L.F. In that way does the appreciation of the temple really protect the saints from everything that is around us, every sectarian idea? Would all that kind of thing be met by an appreciation of what is involved in the temple?
S.McC. Therefore it is incumbent upon all of us in the cities in which we are, as we assemble, to have this thought prominently in our minds. We may be afraid perhaps of too much coming forward on one line, but if the temple of God is uppermost in our minds and the Spirit of God amongst us is uppermost in our minds, we shall be helped; the truth will develop, light will come in in regard to the Scriptures.
J.P. Does the word "all things are yours," emphasise the greatness of the saints, greater than the apostles, and indeed is everything the saints¬ in that way because of their greatness?
S.McC. Well exactly. So Paul says in verse 21, "So that let no one boast in men; for all things are yours. Whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things coming, all are yours; and ye are Christ's, and Christ is God's." What he says to begin with is important, "So that let no one boast in men." That is, we are to be absolutely delivered from the snare and fear of man; the temple of
{277}
God is in the ascendancy in our minds as we sit down together. The fear of man brings a snare. That is what often hinders us in getting the gain of things as we are set together.
Rem. The fear of God is the beginning of wisdom, not the fear of man.
S.McC. It is a great thing that we should be delivered from the fear of man and it operates in many ways. The thing is to allow this thought of what the saints are in any given city in this light to be in the ascendancy in our minds, and especially to make room for the Spirit.
L.G.S. So that this would encourage every one, even the very youngest amongst us, to come together in the recognition of this and to be exercised that the Spirit may be free in his own soul?
S.McC. Yes, the temple is standing related to the whole position including all the saints in the locality, young or old. They all, as it were, are adding to the position; they are essential to it.
P.B. Will you say a little more as to "all things are yours. Whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world," and then it says, "or life, or death, or things present, or things coming, all are yours," and so on. Why is that brought in there?
S.McC. I think it is to show the saints their superiority in this realm that Paul is enlarging on in his ministry here; that the saints are contemplated as superior to anything, as viewed in the light of Paul's saints.
W.J.B. How could the world be said to be ours?
S.McC. I suppose in the abstract way in which it is employed, it is to impress the saints that they are superior to anything as viewed in the light of Paul's teaching here. The world is the saints¬ in the sense that they are superior to it.
N.B.S. So that it embraces not only things that might
{278}
appear favourable but things that might appear opposed to the saints: the world and death.
S.McC. "Whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death ... " whatever they may be. Whether they are operating negatively against us or positively for us, they all belong to the saints. It is to throw into relief the ascendancy of things among the saints.
J.D. Had they not been dropping down to a low level, and is Paul bringing this forward to elevate these great thoughts in the minds of the saints?
S.McC. Yes exactly.
J.D. The "ye" is emphatic is it not? "such are *ye*," and "*ye* are Christ's, and Christ is God's."
S.McC. So that the world in this light is subserving the saints; it is not the saints subserving the world, but the world is subserving the saints, because it belongs to the saints in this light.
Now we come over to chapter 12. The great truth of the body as a vehicle in which the Spirit seems to have particular unhindered liberty, is important in regard to the local position, because it is essential that we should see our links with one another, not only in the way of light in our minds but from the subjective side, as it says in verse 13, "For also in the power of one Spirit *we* have all been baptised into one body, whether Jews or Greeks, whether bondmen or free, and have all been given to drink of one Spirit." The teaching is to help us *inwardly* in regard to this great matter as to how we are set together in the light of the body.
J.H.H. Would the scripture help, "Bear one another's burdens, and thus fulfil the law of the Christ," @Galatians 6: 2. Is that body feelings?
S.McC. Well, it would work out that way in our care for one another, an interesting reference in that way to the law of Christ as regulating.
{279}
F.W. Does this help us in regard to the personnel of the saints as united together, that, while @1 Corinthians 3 would be what is collective, this would be also that which is *livingly* together?
S.McC. Exactly, that is the point in what is stressed here, "For also in the power of one Spirit we have all been baptised into one body, whether Jews or Greeks, whether bondmen or free, and have all been given to drink of one Spirit." It involves the vital side in the position.
F.W. That is, that all the members are recognised as several individuals united; but in @1 Corinthians 3 it is an entity, the temple?
S.McC. Yes exactly, and it is an entity here. While the members are viewed individually, as set together they comprise this great entity called the body of Christ; but in the temple of God the members are not so much in view. In @1 Corinthians 12 it is what the saints are in the aggregate, but the aggregate composed of the individual members, each member adding a certain quota to the wealth of the whole.
J.H.H. Well, from all that you have said, do you think it is rather a serious thing to leave one's locality to go to another locality if one is not sure that it would be the Lord's mind?
S.McC. Well, of course it would be! Why are you referring to that?
J.H.H. I was thinking of what you were saying as to the way we are set together, and the way, I suppose, we work it out in each locality; but I think I have to recognise too that the Lord in His wisdom has set me in my locality.
S.McC. It is very important that we should understand where the Lord has set us. Certain things may come in to move us but it would always be a matter for sober and serious consideration if it did come about.
P.B. What is the difference between verses 18 and
{280}
24, "But now God has set the members, each one of, them in the body, according as it has pleased him," and "But God has tempered the body together, having given more abundant honour to the part that lacked."
S.McC. I think we have to understand the way that balance comes into the thought of the body. The great need of balance is set out in the thought of the body, so that no one part overshadows another. The great point in the working out of things in this light involves our relations sympathetically with one another. The temple involves what is authoritative; light coming to us in an authoritative way as together in that collective manner and way; so it is not a question just of speculation or conjecture. Light is coming to us authoritatively as we make room for the Spirit in the light of the temple. But in @1 Corinthians 12 it is not exactly what is working out authoritatively, but sympathetically between us in our links together in the light of the body.
W.J.H. Do not the two sections show that in general, conditions where man's mind has been allowed or where the relations of the brethren are not right, are met by ministry, while in chapter 5 an outstanding case of wickedness has to be dealt with?
S.McC. You mean that in @1 Corinthians 5 it is met by the assembly in discipline, but in these matters Paul is correcting things through the principle of ministry to help the saints to come to what they are in divine thoughts.
W.J.B. Would you say that it is most important to recognise that distinction as to what needs excision and what is to be corrected by way of ministry?
S.McC. Well it is, because Paul is very clear in his ministry in this letter as to that particular matter, and especially is he helpful in regard to certain matters in
{281}
bringing the saints to positive thoughts as to what they were abstractly in the mind of God.
W.J.B. Take for instance, such a matter as domination. Normally if a brother was dominating in his locality, brothers would go to him and appeal to him in a brotherly way and bring him to see the danger which he is falling into, perhaps unconsciously, and there would also be this question of ministry coming in in the Spirit's power to adjust the matter. Would that be right?
S.McC. Well exactly, and where there is that kind of thing operating, the right way to offset it and to throw it into relief is by making room for the idea of the temple and what is coming forward in the power of the Spirit, because if you get things on wrong lines and persons assuming to places which they may not be capacitated for, the right way to offset it is by showing the positive features of the truth in what we say and what we do.
W.J.B. Bringing in the positive is a very important principle, is it not?
S.McC. Yes, so that if ministry is dry and heavy, what will offset it more than the recognition of the temple and the Spirit of God amongst us, so that freshness comes in and power in regard to the truth.
J.P. It would be something that necessarily would be viewed seriously if the use of the temple were not allowed in seeking to get help in any particular matter.
S.McC. Well it would. We must make room for the great thought of the temple of God because it characterises the local position and we must make room, along with that, for this thought of the body of Christ, what we are as set together in the light of the body, so that there is no moral distance between us in our settings in our localities. The figure of the body implies intensity of sympathetic feelings in the way we are set together.
{282}
W.J.B. So that as the principles of the body operate amongst us, what is spoken of in regard to ministry in chapter 14 is made practicable, is it not? What I mean is that we know one another and we know what one another is capable of, so that we would be sensitive to understand if anything is revealed to another.
S.McC. Well exactly, because sensitiveness marks the body. It is seen illustrated in the figure in the early chapters of Luke, the holy sensitiveness that marked Elizabeth in relation to Mary. That should be present in our local gatherings, as room is made for the thought of the body to operate, the Spirit of God, as it were, in prominence in the matter.
L.G.S. So that these two thoughts of the temple and the body are reciprocal thoughts, are they not? If the truth of the one body is maintained, then what is of the temple has a greater place amongst us.
S.McC. Exactly, the temple is to save us from the human mind, the conjectures of the human mind, and the resources of human wisdom; and the body is to save us from clericalism and independency. These are two great positive thoughts in this epistle to save us from these features.
P.B. Saving us also from envy and jealousy. It is remarkable how it is put, "And if one member suffer, all the members suffer with it; and if one member be glorified, all the members rejoice with it." Not all the members are glorified, but "all the members rejoice with it." There is no envy or jealousy or feelings, it is a sympathetic system in which everything re-acts according to the moment.
S.McC. How important it is that we should see our links with one another in this light. I believe that one thing that the enemy has been disrupting and challenging is these two thoughts, the temple and the body, in our localities, as if he would challenge their
{283}
workability. Whereas Paul is insisting on the truth as to these two great matters in this locality in Corinth.
C.E.J. Are we not to see too in that way that we are necessary to one another? Verse 22 says, "But much rather, the members of the body which seem to be weak are necessary."
S.McC. It is an important thing that we should see in the light of the body, how necessary to the whole thought is everyone in the locality.
G.J.G. How would the clothing with more abundant honour work out practically among us?
S.McC. Well, in our regard for one another, and especially those who may not be taken account of as some other members might be. It says, "But much rather, the members of the body which seem to be weaker are necessary." Now we want to see that because our tendency is all the time to set certain aside, to dispose of weaker elements, or elements that we do not think can measure up to others; whereas we are to see that the members of the body which seem to be weaker are *necessary*, "and those parts of the body which we esteem to be the more void of honour, these we clothe with more abundant honour; and our uncomely parts have more abundant comeliness." What a view we would have of the saints if we were working this out practically in our different localities.
Rem. The apostle uses the expression, "those ... who are little esteemed in the assembly," @1 Corinthians 6: 4. He does not say that they are not esteemed.
S.McC. Exactly. It is interesting how he refers to the greatness of *one* member of the assembly in this letter.
J.H.H. Do we see it working out in the natural body? We have millions of cells in our bodies. If there is an infection in one part, the body begins to function to word it off. Would you say that we work it out this way?
S.McC. Well, exactly. So that it would be a serious
{284}
matter if I were to discountenance a weaker member of the body, because I am interfering with divine balance in the matter of the body. It says, "But God has tempered the body together, having given more abundant honour to the part that lacked; that there might be no division in the body, but that the members might have the same concern one for another." We can see the effectual balance in the divine mind in the matter of the body; and that is what the enemy would seek to disrupt, because it is the hidden and underlying side of the position in our localities.
F.W. Will you say a word as to verse 27, "Now *ye* are Christ's body," not "ye are the body of Christ"?
S.McC. What have you in mind? Say something more.
F.W. I was thinking of what we have in chapter 3 that "ye are the temple of God." That is a statement. Does this statement, "*Ye* are Christ's body," mean that this is the public position as in Corinth? It is not the whole general truth of the body, but in a locality that is how the saints are set together and "ye are Christ's body."
S.McC. Yes, exactly, "and members in particular" -- a remarkable thing. Just as in the great idea in the family in sonship, the individuality of the saints is enlarged upon, each having his distinctive impression of God and of Christ, so in the matter of the body. While it is a glorious entity in itself, the members are enlarged upon, as it says, "members in particular," not members in general, but members in particular.
{285}
SPIRITUAL CONDITIONS UNDERLYING UNITY
@2 Samuel 5: 1 -- 10; @2 Samuel 15: 23 -- 29; @2 Samuel 23: 1 -- 5; @Psalm 133: 1 -- 3
S.McC. The thought of unity is in mind in suggesting these passages, having in mind what we have in the song of degrees as to dwelling together in unity, and the fluid conditions among the brethren that are linked with that position, where, as under the influence of Christ in heaven and His gracious influence distilled from that position (the power of the Spirit here corresponding to that), we have the blessing commanded. The climax of the Songs of degrees, the Songs of the ascent, seems to have in mind our general arrival at this great thought of unity, and I thought we might see certain features in the second book of Samuel that are essential in relation to this unity and that make way for it. First of all in @2 Samuel 5 we might see the place that David (wonderful type of Christ), acquires in the hearts of the saints, and, having acquired it, the great thought of the building which goes forward from the Millo and inward; and then in chapter 15, the importance of the ark at that strategic moment being linked with the city; the greatness of David, not now a type of Christ exactly, as we hope to refer to it in chapter 15, but a type of ourselves as intelligently understanding the proper position to which the ark is attached, and cannot be detached from without serious outcome; and David's preparedness for God to do whatsoever He pleased in regard of himself. Then in the last chapter we read in Samuel, the thought of the administration as it is referred to in that chapter in regard to rule; the kind of man that we see in David, and the kind of administration that is abstractly before his mind and soul in what he says, all being essential in regard to this matter of unity in our cities and in a general way among the brethren. In
{286}
the teaching in each of these passages there is contained certain constituent elements that are essential to make way for the great thought of unity that is reached in the climax of the Songs of degrees.
S.E.E. What is the significance in @2 Samuel 5: 2 of their referring to the time when Saul was king?
S.McC. Well, the essential elements of the teaching in the glad tidings are linked with this great matter of the change of man; @Romans 6 specifically dealing with it. We have to come to it in our souls, that there is only one kind of man that will do for God and that man is set forth in type in David.
D.J.M. Is that suggested in "we are thy bone and thy flesh?" Had they arrived at that?
S.McC. It shows, does it not, the way that they arrived at affinity with David. It is a great matter that we should understand our affinity with Christ in this light and relation.
G.H.W-n. Is this thought of change brought in at the beginning of the chapter as linking with the previous chapter -- "then came"?
S.McC. Yes. The first few chapters bring up certain things in the teaching, and "then came" would allude to a certain result that is reached; there is much more to be reached in the book, but I think that written all over the second book of Samuel, we could take account of what we have in the hymn that we sing:
<blockquote>"How by dying Thou hast freed us <br>From the man of sin and shame." (`161:4)</blockquote>
And as delivered from the man of sin and shame, to link us with Christ Who only can be the centre of unity according to God.
W.H.F. You remarked elsewhere that David is introduced as feeding. One notices in this passage that you read, that God says he shall feed the people, before the reference to being prince. Is feeding a feature that is delightful to God and helpful in unifying the saints?
{287}
S.McC. We were geeing in Brisbane how this great feature of administrative service is linked with true leadership according to God. I think we want to see what is entering in in the teaching in the type as having this great thought of unity in mind. The enemy for years has failed to divide the brethren on points of the truth and features of the truth in a universal way, but he is operating insidiously to divide the brethren in the localities. If he cannot succeed universally he will do it in our cities, and in a large city like this, where there are so many brethren, it is important that the tactics of the enemy be discerned and that the saints should not be diverted from what the ministry has in mind, and that is to unite them in one Man, that is Christ.
J.P. It says, "all the elders of Israel came to the king to Hebron; ... and they anointed David king over Israel," *all* the elders of Israel. Would that bear on what you are saying now?
S.McC. That is a feature of advantage to take account of in this passage. There was no concern amongst the elders to rival David in the matter of his enthronement. Experience with God will always make room for Christ in the light of what He is as God's Anointed.
C.E.J. Why do we have the tribes of Israel coming first, and then the elders of Israel in verse 3?
S.McC. I think it is to stress the wealth that there is in the tribal relation; the body of the saints, viewed in this light, come to this point of the supremacy of Christ typified in David.
J.G.C. The tribes acknowledge David as prince, but the elders as King. What is the distinction in that?
S.McC. Not much. The thought is what is royal, whether in the prince or the king. We are in the realm of the supremacy of Christ here in the type, and there may be the allusion in the prince to what David acquired on moral lines in the way of greatness, as the first book of Samuel would set out historically. The king may
{288}
be more the official side, but they are both pointing to the supremacy of Christ.
A.W.G. Is it significant that Jehovah says, "Thou shalt feed *my* people Israel"?
S.McC. Yes. The saints speaking here understand the ministry that has gone before, they understand the prophetic light that has come, that would make much of Christ in the type in David, and they bring it out here. "And Jehovah said to thee, Thou shalt feed my people Israel, and thou shalt be prince over Israel." They are coming to what has really been in mind in the ministry.
N.B.S. Is this a subjective answer to @1 Samuel 16 where Samuel anoints David at God's ordering; but here the elders anoint him?
S.McC. It is to show us the importance of this element at this juncture. It is not exactly here the great power of Samuel's prophetic ministry and influence, as in the first book; it is the saints coming to it in what is suggested in the tribes here and the elders, those who have acquired influence through experience with God amongst the saints, who are making way for this thought of the supremacy of David in the hearts of the people of God.
J.H.H. Would it be right to say that from David's side he had waited patiently for this?
S.McC. Exactly. Surely that reminds us of how the Lord is waiting, as Mr. Darby says, "Thou waitest still" (`411:3). He is waiting yet. Think of the word of Christ's patience. Think of what it means to Him to be waiting.
J.D. Is this an assembly movement towards David, towards Christ, in love and affection? I was thinking of what you were saying in regard to the moral features that are seen in David.
S.McC. I think so. It is the saints uniting in honouring Christ as in the type in David from this
{289}
viewpoint, as having acquired this place on moral and personal lines.
J.D. And has he acquired this place by the way of suffering?
S.McC. Well, he has. The long waiting time that we have, and all that enters into it, is to remind us of how long Christ may have to wait for this place that is rightly His.
H.J.M. Is there a link between the opening of this chapter and the latter part of @1 Chronicles 12 where it is a military movement? They are of one heart to make David king, and the tribes are all in it there, are they not?
S.McC. Chronicles stresses the military side, but Samuel is not stressing so much that side, as the voluntary movement of all the tribes. The body of the people of God in this movement are making way for the *elders*, that is, what the elders suggest among the people of God moving forward in this great current, this great movement, in which Christ is to be distinguished according to the place that rightly belongs to Him and no one else.
W.J.H. Is that why the time of his reign is mentioned, the thing is established even before the period runs out?
S.McC. Yes, it is rather interesting that we should get in verses 4 and 5 the whole scope of the reign referred to, as it says, "David was thirty years old when he began to reign; he reigned forty years. In Hebron he reigned over Judah seven years and six months; and in Jerusalem he reigned thirty-three years over all Israel and Judah." How often we see that principle in the ways of God, that what is to be arrived at in fulness is indicated before it is concretely so.
F.W. Is verse 2 of this chapter a kind of acknowledgment or confession of their failure in not having recognised what was in God's mind all the way through?
S.McC. We all have to come to that in our souls, do
{290}
you not think, in regard to the setting aside of what Saul represents? He represents the flesh, the man according to the flesh, and how painful and long are the experiences linked with the displacement of *that* man in order that room might be made for Christ, the Man after God's heart.
F.W. And that whatever there had been in the past which was according to God had really been represented in David rather than in Saul?
S.McC. Yes, they say, "Even aforetime, when Saul was king over us, thou wast he that leddest out and broughtest in Israel." How true that is in the elements of the teaching of the glad tidings, that along with the struggle linked with the displacement of the man according to the flesh in our hearts, there is the conscious vital support of Christ, all the way through, underlying the position.
J.P. You have just said that what is to be arrived at is indicated before it is concretely so. Divine Persons are working to the end of establishing before the rapture the great truth of Christ and the assembly. Indications have been clearly given as to that, but much has to be passed through in the way of exercise before it is concretely arrived at in the saints.
S.McC. Exactly. It is a very real matter as to this place that rightly belongs to David. It lies at the basis of all unity according to God. On the one hand separation from evil is God's principle of unity, as in the cross; but then Christ is the great centre of the unity, and it is important that we should see what is in mind in all the ministry of the past fifty years, and what now is leading up to the moment of the translation, the place that belongs to Christ. As if heaven is not going to brook the displacement of the place that rightly belongs to Christ in any one of us individually, or in our gatherings.
J.P. So that, whilst there was that word of Mr.
{291}
Darby's that you have mentioned as to separation from evil being the principle of unity, he also said, that grace is the power for unity in gathering, and that would bring in what you are seeking to bring before us now?
S.McC. Separation is the negative side; but we must have the positive side, and Christ is the great centre of the unity that we are referring to.
J.D. Would you say a word as to their coming to David to Hebron? Later on it speaks of moving with David to Jerusalem.
S.McC. It is important to see that when we come to verse 6 it says, "the king and his men went to Jerusalem." We come to another thought, not now the tribes and the elders, but the king and *his men*; as if, when we come to this matter of the hearts of the saints set forth in the stronghold of Zion, we have this great thought of the king and his men, especially stressing the side of manhood, representing the Lord Jesus Christ and what He has under His hand in relation to manhood in the testimony to achieve this great end, that is, the securing of the hearts of the saints in the light of the stronghold of Zion, in order that He might dwell there and that the operations of building might commence inward.
W.J.H. Would Peter be one of His men in making known to Cornelius that He is Lord of all, in bringing the Gentile in to this position?
S.McC. Yes. The book of the Acts would amplify this thought of "the king and his men" -- men like Peter and John, men like Stephen and Paul. We can see how Christ was the centre of all their testimony and so the book of the Acts stresses this great matter of unity among the brethren, that the hearts and souls of the brethren were held together undivided in relation to the supremacy of Christ as set out in their ministry.
E.T. If it is not diverting you, I would like to ask a question as to chapter 4, as to the application there of
{292}
how things work out amongst us; how two men sought to ingratiate themselves with David by doing injustices to a righteous man; and unless we are built up in manhood in the features that you are bringing before us in chapter 5, there may be the danger of our subscribing to something that is not right according to God.
S.McC. Well, the whole book is filled with important teaching as to the judging in every one of our hearts all elements of partisanship, because nothing stands athwart the arrival at dwelling together in unity like the elements of partisanship among the brethren. It is standing athwart Christ's place which should be undisputed in all our localities.
J.D. Would the forty days after the Lord's resurrection have this in mind? He was speaking the things concerning the kingdom of God, and then the unity that is seen in the upper room? I was thinking of Hebron in that way.
S.McC. Yes, the learning time and the testing time. We have to take account of these times, because the seven years and six months over Judah in Hebron is to be noted; but in Jerusalem we have the thought of thirty-three years over *all Israel* and Judah. All these thoughts would bear on the fact that Christ does not come into the full place immediately.
N.A.O. Would you say that "Christ in you" in Colossians is the point of unity?
S.McC. Are you alluding to Christ "among the nations"?
N.A.O. Yes; then he goes on, does he not, "being united together in love"?
S.McC. Colossians presents Christ as a great uniting centre among the brethren, and David is like that; he is the great converging point in Israel, the great centre upon which the affections of the saints are united. David represents Christ in that light, and that comes into Colossians. If we are going to enjoy the unity in the
{293}
climax of the songs of the ascent, it is along this line, in relation to the place that Christ is acquiring in the affections of the saints. This will deliver us and save us from all fleshy aspirations to local leadership in our cities. There is nothing will displace it more amongst us, than what we are considering in regard to the place that Christ rightly should have in the affections of the saints.
J.H.H. As this ministry goes forth in power to bring this about, would verse 10 apply, "and David became continually greater"? Is that the way the thing becomes unified in our hearts?
S.McC. It makes room for the expansion of the greatness of David, and it is along this line the watercourse is reached, and David dwells in the stronghold and calls it the city of David; and then it says, "David built round about from the Millo and inward. And David became continually greater; and Jehovah the God of hosts was with him." It is on this line that we reach these positive features of Christ becoming greater and greater before the affections of the saints.
D.J.M. Would headship come in, as in @Colossians 1: 18? "He is the head of the body, the assembly."
S.McC. Yes. We want, every one of us, to search our hearts as to what would dispute David coming into this position, because there are elements that are disputing it here, the inhabitants of the land, as it says "they spoke to David, saying, Thou shalt not come in hither, but the blind and the lame will drive thee back; as much as to say, David will not come in hither. But David took the stronghold of Zion, which is the city of David." That is, the stronghold of Zion represents to faith that area in the hearts of the saints according to divine purpose, that belongs only to Christ.
G.W.B. Would you say a little more in regard to the question of local leadership?
S.McC. Well, how often that comes up in different
{294}
localities. The great thing we should be concerned about is as to the place that Christ should have in the affections of the saints.
P.B. "Whoever smites the Jebusites and gets up to the watercourse"; that is a great feature of leadership, is it not?
S.McC. Yes. There is nothing tends to divide the saints more than fleshly aspirations to leadership, or any feelings that may be in our hearts as to undue concern for one, or any one, in regard to leadership. If Christ acquires the place amongst us that He should rightly have, leadership will work out as is evidenced in this book.
F.W. And is that preceded by David taking the stronghold of Zion? Would you say a word as to what is the immediate bearing of David taking the stronghold of Zion?
S.McC. It is a question of the Lord's personal prowess in the matter. His own personal operations. He sees the essential need of this, and He is moving against the position with a view to His own distinctive place in it.
A.W.G. Is it interesting that divine power is attached to the place that David is given? "David became continually greater; and Jehovah the God of hosts was with him."
S.McC. Exactly, "the God of hosts," suggesting a great thought, bringing much into our minds in regard to this matter of David's greatness being advanced.
H.S.H. Would you say that what Amasa did, in spite of the conditions of apostasy in figure, drawing the hearts of Israel as one man, is in keeping with what you have in mind?
S.McC. Very good; showing how important it is that influence should be rightly used, in that way, in regard to the place due to Christ as in the type in David.
P.B. Do "The blind and the lame" represent persons who disregard the rights of Christ, as it says, "they shall
{295}
not come into the house"? They were hated of David's soul.
S.McC. It is not only that they are there and passive; they are *not* passive. It says, "the blind and the lame will drive thee back, as much as to say, David will not come in hither." That is, it is a direct strategic operation of the enemy to keep David out: but there is only one can hold the stronghold of Zion (type of the hearts of the saints) rightly, and that is David -- Christ, as we are considering Him in type in David.
M.R. Is it not significant that, although we are told the king and his men went to Jerusalem, not one of the men is mentioned by name. It is all of David, all the way through.
S.McC. That is an important thing to notice in this chapter; it is David's operations that are stressed, what David is doing, and we want to see what the Lord is doing on this line; He has much under His hand. The men would suggest what there is in a matured way amongst the saints in regard to the importance of the securing of the city in this light as the city of David.
W.J.B. There was a time in the history of Judah that the children of Judah were not equal to the Jebusites. @Joshua 15: 63 says, "But as for the Jebusites, the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the children of Judah could not dispossess them; and the Jebusites dwell with the children of Judah at Jerusalem to this day." I was thinking that there comes a time in the history of the saints -- it may be, of a locality -- when there is an increase of spiritual power, so that Christ comes into His place in the hearts of the saints, perhaps in a way He never has before.
S.McC. That is the whole point in the teaching that is in mind and this matter of the watercourse; why should David refer to it here? It is another reference to the fluid side of things among the brethren, where perhaps abstrusely in the type, the Holy Spirit would
{296}
be suggested. The watercourse would represent what is linked with the presence and power of the Spirit in this particular position, and it is important that that should be reached in view of the full place of David in an undisputed way, as we have it here.
N.B.S. So David not only takes the stronghold, but he *dwells* there.
S.McC. *Dwells* there; it is an important thing to notice that the complacent thought enters into that. Power, of course, is in the section, the power linked with David and the power that faith would understand in the watercourse. It is all making way, for this thought of David dwelling, not only overcoming by power, but being there restfully; dwelling there in view of the extensive operations in mind. That is, "the Millo and inward" would look on to the world to come and the operations proceeding with that in mind.
J.B. Are the two thoughts in @2 Corinthians 10, the overthrowing of strongholds, and the meekness and gentleness of the Christ; the Spirit operating?
S.McC. Yes, that would all enter into the matter of the securing of the hearts of the saints rightly in regard to this thought of Christ's supremacy in this particular way. Now as we go on to chapter 15 we come to another side of things. I think that every crisis in the testimony really brings out our thoughts in regard to Christ. You will remember how it was indicated by Simeon what the sword would do in regard to Mary, and how he refers to the thoughts of many hearts being revealed. There is nothing like crises to bring out where our thoughts are, however well covered they may be in different ways through years of participation in matters in the testimony; the crises will bring to light what we really think of Christ, and I think that is what shines here. David is usurped as to his place -- the place of Christ has been usurped -- and then we get, "And behold, Zadok also, and all the Levites with him, bearing
{297}
the ark of the covenant of God; and they set down the ark of God; and Abiathar went up, until all the people had passed completely out of the city. And the king said to Zadok, Carry back the ark of God into the city. If I shall find favour in the eyes of Jehovah, he will bring me again, and shew me it, and its habitation. But if he thus say, I have no delight in thee; behold, Here am I, let him do to me as seemeth good to him." What a picture of self-effacement in a man honoured of God, for few ever were honoured of God as David was! Yet, in the light of the greatness of the ark, he completely goes out, as it were, in his own estimation, ready for whatever the sovereignty of God may will in regard to the determining of his position in the testimony henceforward.
J.H.H. "If I shall find favour in the eyes of Jehovah, he will ... shew me it," -- a fresh living impression of the greatness of Christ now.
S.McC. That is it. David has in mind; not just that God will bring him back to the city, and the throne, but he is thinking of the ark and the house; that is, God's house and God's throne, which is in His house; that is what was uppermost in his mind.
H.J.M. All that was seen in the life of such a one as Mr. Darby, was it not? What governed his whole life, secretly and publicly, were the rights of Christ and the Person of Christ
<blockquote>"And shall we see Thy face, <br>And hear Thy heav'nly voice." (`270:1)</blockquote>
He was treasuring all that in the world in which it is to find its full answer.
S.McC. When the error of Mr. Newton came fully to light and the speciousness of the teaching in Plymouth, and when the brethren were not inclined to listen to Mr. Darby, it is said that he went home and threw himself on the couch in tears. What a man he was!
{298}
What concern he had as to the place that Christ should have in the minds and the affections of the saints, and as to anything that would undermine it.
E.T. Does the ark represent a complete and unvarying type of Christ? There was never any fluctuation there.
S.McC. Yes. The ark is a peculiar type, particularly alluding to Christ's personal greatness. That is. He is "the same yesterday, and today, and to the ages to come." There is an element of mystery about the ark, just as there is about the Person of Christ. There is always that which we really cannot, with our finite minds, compass in regard of the ark; and the ark in that way is a peculiar type of Christ and His greatness personally and it is the centre of unity in Israel.
W.J.H. He "gave his strength into captivity, and his glory into the hand of the oppressor," @Psalm 78: 61. You could never explain how that was attached to the ark, could you?
S.McC. It is one of the things in regard to the mysterious way in which things are linked with the ark; the way that Dagon goes down before the ark, and other things that transpired in relation to it, all stress in our minds the element of mystery that is linked with it. It is peculiarly the Person of Christ, in manhood of course, that is before us in the type in the ark.
F.W. He would not attach the testimony to himself, but he would wait upon God's time to show that he, David, was attached to the testimony?
S.McC. It is important that we learn how to make way for God in regard to His own matters and in relation to His own realm. No doubt, much prestige would have attached to David if the ark had remained with him; it would have given him a point of advantage that would have been unique in regard to the recovery of the position; but he would not have it dissociated from the city, from its habitation.
{299}
S.E.E. Does the priestly element occupy an important place in this crisis? Does David value the priestly feelings and sensitiveness that are proper to it?
S.McC. Zadok and Abiathar are to be noted in the part that they play in regard to the ark, and how subject they are to David in the matter; and Ahimaaz and Jonathan, the two sons, show how young and old are bound up in this matter of the proper place that belongs to the ark.
G.H.W-n. Does affinity to Christ lead up to this unity, "We are thy bone and thy flesh"?
S.McC. Well, we can see how that thought of affinity enters into the position there. Here it is David and the priests and the Levites, as it says, "behold, Zadok also, and all the Levites with him, bearing the ark of the covenant of God." It is more that side here, the importance of what is linked with the priestly and levitical position, seeing the importance of the position of the ark, that it is the centre of unity, and must not be, as it were, removed from its position as in the house of God in Jerusalem.
J.D. Whilst in that day there was public breakdown, yet unity is really preserved by these features?
S.McC. That is the whole point, that the ark in Jerusalem is the centre of unity in Israel; in fact, it is where the throne of God is, and everything works out from it.
W.J.B. That means, does it, that we are always to hold the assembly as a whole in mind?
S.McC. Exactly and never allow the thought of what is sectional in this setting. We might try to link the ark with a certain sectional position, but we are to see the importance of the ark as the centre of the *whole truth*. That is what is in mind -- not the truth in part, but the *whole* truth and the *whole* idea of the unity of the Spirit.
J.D. David is not occupied with what has come in
{300}
here; his great concern is in regard to the ark in Jerusalem.
S.McC. Yes, and the unity of the Spirit can never be linked with what is sectional. The unity of the Spirit relates to the *whole* truth, because it is linked with the presence of the Spirit; and the unity of the Spirit always remains inviolate.
V.T.S. Is that why the apostle refers to that first of all when he commences the practical part of the Ephesian epistle, their walking together in lowliness and the unity of the Spirit coming into evidence first of all?
S.McC. We are to note where it comes in there, and the way in which it comes in. I think it is important in this relation in our cities, especially where there is more than one meeting, that we should see the importance of the *whole* truth governing the assembly in our cities as well as the assembly generally; that sectionalism should be avoided at all costs, any tendency towards it speedily judged in our hearts, that we might see the place that the ark has in relation to the *whole* truth and what it is as the centre of unity among the saints.
J.P. I was wondering whether, in the last scripture we had, that was the significance of David dwelling in the stronghold and calling it "the city of David." Does that thought go right through?
S.McC. Well, it does. That is, the stronghold is never interfered with. Whatever comes into the position, all the difficulties that come into the second book of Samuel, the usurpation of David's place, whatever has come into the public body in the way of defection and failure, the stronghold of Zion in principle goes through. It goes through the book right to the end.
A.W.G. Is David restful in leaving the matter in Jehovah's hands, in that he says, "I will stop in the
{301}
plains of the desert, until there come word from you to inform me"?
S.McC. He is not taking things into his own hands. It is so easy for us to take things into our own hands and to promote certain ends that we may have in our own hearts and in our own minds, and thus be found fighting against God. We want to make way for God, as David does here. It is a question of what *God* is doing in this crisis. What has God in mind? What is God promoting? What is He going to bring in? All these thoughts should be in our minds.
L.G.S. Would the plains of the desert suggest exercise in relation to the matter, and consequently David would be able to receive spiritual direction as it may come from the priest in Jerusalem?
S.McC. The priest is an important element. He represents what is spiritual in our way of speaking, one who makes room for the Spirit. I am sure the brethren will understand what one says in the following remark that, if we are going to avoid officialism, we have to make room for the Spirit. Unless the Spirit is made room for, we shall resort to officialism. We should be dexterous, as Mr. Taylor has said, to avoid officialism. I should think, in a city like this, the brethren should be more and more concerned that they might be preserved from what is merely official, that the Spirit of God might have a right of way in bringing Christ into His proper place in the affections of the saints.
P.B. So it says in verse 30 that, "David went up by the ascent of the Olives, and wept." The thought of the Spirit comes in there, and the acceptance of the suffering position which leads to worship at the ascent. Is that all in view in regard of what you are saying?
S.McC. It all brings out the calibre of manhood in David, that he is entirely above self-consideration, he is entirely above selfish motives, he is thinking for God and thinking for the truth. *The love of the truth is*
{302}
*morally greater than the love of the brethren*. Let us not forget that! We must not allow the truth to become subservient in our concern for the love of the brethren.
The time is gone, and we should just finish with a remark as to chapter 23. All this is underlying, and making way for, the conditions that we have indicated in @Psalm 133: 1, "Behold, how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity." This last feature in 2 Samuel shows us the kind of man that David was, and the kind of administration that was in his mind and in his soul as he speaks of "the man who was raised up on high, the anointed of the God of Jacob, and the sweet psalmist of Israel," @2 Samuel 23: 1. All this is to intensify in our minds where the Spirit of God is, because the brethren dwelling together in unity, in @Psalm 133, draws peculiar attention to where the Spirit of God is free and unhampered. The reference to the dew and to "the precious oil upon the head, that ran down upon the beard, upon Aaron's beard, that ran down to the hem of his garment; as the dew of Hermon that descendeth on the mountains of Zion," reminds us of spiritual conditions among the brethren where the Holy Spirit is unhampered, so that conditions are fluid among the brethren in this light.
J.D. That really follows what you have been bringing before us in regard to the place that Christ has in the affections of the saints. I was thinking of the previous Psalm, David's concern for the ark and "habitations for the Mighty One of Jacob."
S.McC. So that all these passages bring out the moral greatness of David, and as he says in @2 Samuel 23: 3, "The God of Israel said, The Rock of Israel spoke to me, The ruler among men shall be just, Ruling in the fear of God; And he shall be as the light of the morning, like the rising of the sun, A morning without clouds; When from the sunshine, after rain, The green
{303}
grass springeth from the earth." This is the kind of administration that underlies what we have in @Psalm 133, as to the brethren dwelling together in unity; justness, ruling in the fear of God, like the rising of the sun, the morning without clouds, and the result in the green grass springing up, all suggesting life amongst the saints as the fruit of this kind of administration, laying the basis for the conditions that we have in @Psalm 133.
{304}
THE WORK OF GOD IN THE SAINTS (1)
@Ezekiel 37: 1 -- 10, 15 -- 20, 24 -- 28; @Ezekiel 40: 1 -- 4; @Ezekiel 43: 1 -- 6, 10 -- 17
S.McC. The passages that we have read are somewhat extensive and it will be apparent to the brethren that we cannot dwell on all the detail in the time that we have. What is in mind in this closing section of Ezekiel which forms a great part of the teaching, beginning with chapter 36, is the work of God in the saints, especially keeping in mind all the way through two thoughts as linked with the work of God -- spirituality and mutuality. It will be apparent, as we proceed, how these thoughts enter into what is suggested in our present enquiry into the truth.
The earlier part of Ezekiel is full of judgment, and very severe judgment, but when we come to chapter 34, we get Jehovah coming in, in regard to the matter of the flock. A new day is brought to our notice and stress is laid on God's personal care for the flock, and especially bringing up in chapter 34, as it does, the great end in mind in divine operations, namely, the whole scope of the truth; their own land, and David -- wonderful type of Christ in relation to the service of God. Then in chapter 35 we have the full exposure and judgment of Edom, the inveterate opposer and hater of the people of God. Then in chapter 36, we have the introduction of the principle of the new birth, where things are established, effecting a great national change in Israel. The cleansing service of the water, as it is referred to, and the operation of the new birth suggested, all pave a way for what we now have before us in regard to the introduction of a state of life amongst the people of God. As we know, dispensationally, Israel nationally is before us in the teaching here, in the great thought of national
{305}
resurrection; but as we go back into the Scripture with the help of the Spirit, it has a bearing on ourselves as we read it. One thought we might consider how this matter of life, a state of life, is brought in through the service of prophetic ministry; then the matter of unity suggested in the middle portion that we read; and the full result in mind in the end of the chapter (for the service of God is in mind all the way through in this closing section of Ezekiel); then in chapter 40 the reference at the beginning of this section to the divine standard of measure. The ministry has in mind that we should be brought to the divine standard of measure, "the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ." In the gospels we have in the manhood of Jesus, the full thought of the standard of measure; what God is toward man in Christ and what man is towards God in Christ; and the ministry has in mind our being brought to it, so that much is made of measure.
Much is made of the divine standard in this closing section, so that in chapter 43 we should see the importance of it as brought to our attention. God coming into the matter personally in chapter 43, so that the ministry is to have a moral effect on us. That is, God is not accommodating any of our minds naturally in these times that we are together, nor in any other times like these; He is not catering to our minds academically. He has in mind that there should be a moral effect in regard to the truth, so that as a right state is arrived at as helped through the truth, more of the truth will be unfolded to us, as God said in chapter 43: 10, 11, "Thou, son of man, shew the house to the house of Israel, that they may be confounded at their iniquities; and let them measure the pattern. And if they be confounded at all that they have done, make known to them the form of the house and its fashion, and its goings out, and its comings in, and all its forms, and all its statutes, yea, all the forms thereof, and all the
{306}
laws thereof," meaning that additional light is furnished as the ministry has a moral effect with us.
What one had in mind in the matter of spirituality in regard to this closing section -- and indeed it enters into other parts of the book -- is the stress on the Spirit. I am sure, if we are going to understand the work of God and to value it and appreciate it rightly among the saints, spirituality is needed, that is, a state habituated to making room for the Spirit.
W.J.B. There is something in that, that produces restfulness; the sense that we can lean on the Spirit. We do not have to be resorting to a great deal of mental activity, but we can rely on the Spirit. Is that right?
S.McC. It is a great help in a gathering like this, and a means of strengthening, that such a divine Person is amongst us, and we can rely on Him. There is a certain kind of safety in a position like this where He is amongst us and where we can make room for Him; constantly, at every turn, relying on Him and making room for Him; for how shall we reach the truth rightly, or the work of God rightly, except as making room for the Spirit?
W.J.H. Is not the line you have indicated wonderfully confirmed in John being in the Spirit on the Lord's day, and then becoming in the Spirit to take account of divine activities, ending in the same kind of way as you have indicated in the holy city?
S.McC. So that Ezekiel is the John of the Old Testament. There is a great analogy between the two ministries; the more we consider Ezekiel the more we shall see the resemblance to John's ministry, and John's ministry makes much of the work of God in the saints.
H.J.M. So that in @1 Corinthians 2, both for ministry and understanding, everything is made of the Spirit and what He brings forward in the spiritual means of communication.
{307}
S.McC. Paul seems to be greatly concerned in approaching the position at Corinth as to the refusal of everything that would be linked with the human mind -- human intrusion into the things of God. He is determined to discredit it and to make room for the Spirit, so that his word and preaching are not in persuasive words of wisdom, but "in demonstration of the Spirit and of power," @1 Corinthians 2: 4.
L.F. You were speaking as to the great matter of the work of God coming to light; that is very beautifully exemplified in the book of Ezekiel, is it not, when you take account of the state of the people in the earlier chapters and then think of what we have read together in these later chapters and the very end of the book?
S.McC. Well it is. God is going to impress our minds with the greatness of His work because as we have been taught, in the closing section of Ezekiel it is not just something that is going to come in, it is something that *exists*. God is measuring what exists, and what exists, as we would say now, in the work of God in the saints.
P.B. You would say that spirituality and mutuality would lead the saints to take account of the pattern as being one whole as to the truth and how the form would be worked out amongst the saints?
S.McC. Exactly. The first part of the chapter in relation to prophetic service stresses this matter of spirituality, in that it is being carried out in the Spirit. The middle part is to stress unity and mutuality and that makes way for the princeliness seen in David, a wonderful figure of Christ.
G.H.W-n. Is the ministry in Ezekiel to make way for the coming in of the Lord Jesus into the midst? It ends with, "the name of the city from that day, Jehovah is there," @Ezekiel 48: 35.
S.McC. Yes, God's place is in mind as we shall see,
{308}
and the great end of the ministry in Ezekiel, as in Revelation, is that God is there. I think we should be impressed in our localities that the working out of the truth and the appreciation of the divine standard of measure has in mind that God should be amongst us of a truth.
L.B.G. Are we in the time of the captivity?
S.McC. Publicly, of course. The book opens with Ezekiel amongst the captives, but we find here that "the hand of Jehovah was upon me, and Jehovah carried me out in the Spirit, and set me down in the midst of a valley; and it was full of bones." That is, a certain position is before us here, in which the people of God are to be served; and this extraordinary movement comes into view suggesting to our minds what involves spirituality.
J.P. Do the bones represent the work of God basically?
S.McC. There would be a link with it. It is the basic side, as you say; but then you have the sinews, the flesh, and the skin. All that would be a part of the whole matter in the final result.
A.C. Would this answer to the quickening as in Ephesians? They all stand upon their feet and they are all clothed, and then Jehovah says, "I will put my Spirit in you," verse 14.
S.McC. I suppose the principle of it would enter in there. Romans would be more correct to allude to, in regard to the working out of life potentially; life in the way of power in exercises through which we pass and the great results in @Romans 8; but the principle of Ephesians underlies and enters into it too.
C.E.J. Is that what is in mind in verse 5, "Behold, I will cause breath to enter into you, and ye shall live"? There is life, culminating in the exceeding great army in verse 10.
S.McC. That is an interesting reference showing us
{309}
that it is life on the higher side that would be in mind. That would be the link with Ephesians in the matter of life; but I think the work of God as it is contemplated in @Ephesians 2 involves the totality of it from Pentecost to the rapture, whilst Romans is dealing with the working out of it experimentally in the saints.
N.B.S. Would this word, "Come from the four winds, O breath," draw our attention to the unlimited supply of the Spirit that is available and brought in through prophetic ministry?
S.McC. Yes, it would point to the great range of interest in this matter; the extent and the scope of it.
J.G.C. Do the dry bones indicate that death having come in, every moral matter has been finalised to divine satisfaction so that there is liberty for the Spirit to move?
S.McC. Well, the question is as to whether that is so. It says, "And he caused me to pass by them round about; and behold, there were very many in the open valley; and behold, they were very dry." If it says they were very dry, it does not mean that every moral matter has been finalised. I should think there is room for inquiry as to whether that is so. Why are they very dry?
P.B. Do we get an answer to your question in chapter 33: 30 -- 31? Apparently things outwardly looked all right. "And as for thee, son of man, the children of thy people keep talking of thee by the walls and in the doors of the houses, and speak one to another, every one to his brother, saying, Come, I pray you, and hear what is the word that cometh forth from Jehovah. And they come unto thee as a people cometh, and they sit before thee as my people, and they hear thy words, but they do them not." That is the answer there, is it not?
S.McC. And it goes on to say, "for with their mouth they shew much love" -- with their *mouth* -- "but their heart goeth after dishonest gain. And behold, thou are
{310}
unto them as a lovely song, a pleasant voice, and one that playeth well on an instrument; and they hear thy words, but they do them not." The great point in the ministry is that we should see how it bears upon us morally. It is not just a lovely song, a wonderful train of thoughts and suggestions linked together by which the mind might be enamoured, but there is a moral reaction to the ministry. What is in mind in chapter 37 is that there is a moral state to be met here in the dry bones through the avenue of prophetic ministry.
W.J.B. So the dryness of the bones indicates a state of moral deadness. Is that so?
S.McC. That is what would be in mind; something that the prophetic word has to come in in relation to. It says, "And he caused me to pass by them round about." Why all this? This word "causing" is a very interesting word in Ezekiel, as if divine Persons are helping us on this principle, not exactly by force, though it involves a measure of authority. "He caused me to pass by them round about." That is, we have to get a *full* view of the situation.
S.E.E. So that the extent of the ruin and the deadness is not minimised, though at the same time it would magnify the work of God, as a result of which recovery is brought about.
S.McC. So that all around us in the profession we are reminded of conditions like this, and it may be that they may enter in amongst us at times in our local gatherings; but what the hand of Jehovah being upon us and helping us through the Spirit would have in mind, is that we should see this matter of the work of God and the state of life that is the result of the prophetic service.
J.H.H. I was wondering whether the psalmist went through some of these exercises when he says, "When I kept silence, my bones waxed old, through my groaning
{311}
all the day long. For day and night thy hand was heavy upon me; my moisture was turned into the drought of summer. Selah." @Psalm 32: 3, 4.
S.McC. Yes, it is the language of the remnant in the conditions in which they are, feeling the conditions in which they are suffering under the government of God. God has in mind here that a state of life is to be brought about.
E.A.K. Is there instruction in that they are alluded to lower down as slain, and then as an army, bringing in the thought of what is militant?
S.McC. Yes, it involves the saints as victorious. Romans is filled with military expressions: "in all these things we more than conquer." The thought is that, as reaching a state of life in @Romans 8, the believer is victorious, the saints are victorious; that is the thought in an exceeding great army. It is a matter of victory over the circumstances, causing him "to pass by them round about." He "set me down in the midst of a valley" -- it is not on the mountain here; we shall come to the mountain -- we have to understand this thought of the valley to get a full view of the position and the circumstances and to see how a state of life is brought about through prophetic ministry.
F.R.G. Does the Lord's dealing with the woman in @John 4, touching the moral matters but reaching an end with her, illustrate it?
S.McC. Yes, for she says, "Sir, I see that *thou art* a prophet." Immediately she says that, the Lord regards her as a subject of the work of God and enters into the great subject of the worship of God with her. She is a remarkable illustration, bringing out the Lord's skill in prophetic service to her.
H.J.M. I wondered if the early chapters of Acts would illustrate this in some degree, following Peter's word? "And as I prophesied, there was a noise, and behold a rustling, and the bones came together, bone to
{312}
its bone"; life is coming in. In Acts they were found together, having all things common; but there was a great mysterious movement, was there not, following the word of Peter and the opening up of the position?
S.McC. What a testimony there was in the opening chapters of the Acts in what was there substantially in these men! Peter could say to the man, "Look on us," referring to himself and John, and the man was affected by what Peter said and held Peter and John. That is, it is a matter of contact now. We have to see this great idea of contact in relation to this matter of the work of God and the state of life. It is not just that we are set together physically, but the matter of what is organic enters into this position, as it says, "bone to its bone." "And I looked, and behold, sinews and flesh came up upon them, and the skin covered them over; but there was no breath in them. And he said unto me, Prophesy unto the wind, prophesy, son of man, and say to the wind, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Come from the four winds, O breath, and breathe upon these slain, that they may live. And I prophesied as he had commanded me, and the breath came into them, and they lived, and stood up upon their feet, an exceeding great army." A wonderful result in regard to this prophetic service!
R.M.Y. Do you think there is anything today that corresponds with prophesying to the wind? Is seems just a little different from the prophesying over the bones, does it not?
S.McC. Yes, it is a question of divine resource coming in in the second relation. "He said unto me. Prophesy unto the wind ... Come from the four winds, O breath, and breathe upon these slain." It is not a question of water here, it is a question of wind, of breath.
W.H.F. What would the slain represent? Under what influence had these persons who were dry and
{313}
required handling come as the result of moral conditions?
S.McC. The history of the book would help us as to that; the teaching and all that has preceded; what has come into Israel's history; what has come in the ways of God; and the wonderful way that God goes over matters in detail in the prophets as to Israel's moral state. All that would enter into this as we think of its dispensational bearing.
P.B. Would you say more as to what you have said as to that side of the truth being connected with the wind?
S.McC. Just that it is not the water side, but it is what is linked with the breath and the wind. What the Lord Jesus did in @John 20 links on with it, "he breathed into them." It is life on that pattern, life on that level.
W.J.H. Would what the Lord says, "that which is born of the Spirit is spirit," touch spirituality?
S.McC. Yes, it is the positive side. The Lord refers to the two things, that which is born of water and that which is born of the Spirit. The water is the negative side; the Spirit is the positive side, laying the great basis for what we have in the work of God in this setting.
W.L.J. Would what took place several years ago when the matter of speaking to the Spirit came up, link on with this?
S.McC. Well, it might. We do not want to put more into it than is there. It says, "He said unto me, Prophesy unto the wind ... Come from the four winds, O breath." The breath would particularly link on with the matter of the Spirit. The Lord "breathed into them, and says to them, Receive [the] Holy Spirit," -- that is, it is that kind of life.
C.P.P. Does it link in that way with what is inward as preceding outward activities and mutuality?
S.McC. Yes. You have the thought of the prophetic service bearing on the bones coming together, bone to
{314}
its bone. That is a great service in prophetic ministry that things should come together in that vital way, and then "sinews and flesh came up upon them." Notice that it is as he prophesied that the bones came together, but it is as he *looked* that the sinews and flesh came up upon them. That is, the adorning side of life operating in the teaching in this passage, involves the working out of things as the result of another thing; that is, the bones coming together, and then as he looked, the sinews and flesh came up upon them. We have to make room for that side.
A.W.G. Why does the prophet say in verse 11 "these *bones* are the whole house of Israel"?
S.McC. He is illuminating Ezekiel's mind with what is in God's mind in this matter, that the bones are symbolical of persons, people, the house of Israel.
R.H.G. Does the breath involve the feelings and affections?
S.McC. It is that side that is particularly stressed in John's ministry. It is more the higher side of life, as we might refer to it, life affecting us as breath does.
F.W. Are the flesh and the sinews a reference to what it formative as a result of the breath having come in?
S.McC. Verse 7 says, "And I prophesied as I was commanded; and as I prophesied, there was a noise, and behold a rustling, and the bones came together, bone to its bone. And I looked, and behold, sinews and flesh came up upon them, and the skin covered them over." The first result is the bones coming together, bone to its bone, as a result of prophesying. Then there is another result as he looks, not exactly as he prophesied; he says, "And I looked, and behold, sinews and flesh came up upon them ... ." Then we have another move, "And he said unto me, Prophesy unto the wind, prophesy, son of man," and the breath comes in from that viewpoint.
W.J.H. Does not all this line touch what you
{315}
referred to at Newcastle, that most matters which arise can be met with patience by ministry?
S.McC. Yes, the prophetic ministry here would have in mind this kind of condition that arises amongst the saints; dry bones, "very dry" they are called. The position is met first of all by the activity of prophetic ministry and service, and then as he looks the sinews and flesh came up upon them and the skin covered them over, as if it is a natural outcome of what happened in the first matter in verse 7.
F.W. Having in view the development of spirituality?
S.McC. That is it. The breath brings us to the matter of the Spirit.
W.J.B. Bone coming to its bone would refer to divine order established, would it not?
S.McC. It is a structural thought, "bone to its bone." It is essential that the prophetic ministry should have to do with that side, the structural side of the truth in regard to the saints. But then the sinews and flesh and the skin bring up another side bearing upon that.
G.H. Is there any suggestion of personality in the expression, "O breath"?
S.McC. Well, the breath is personalised here, just as the glory is personalised. Oftentimes in the Old Testament we find things personalised. Divine Persons are involved in this great matter. As in @John 20, it is the last Adam, a quickening Spirit, that breathed into them saying, "Receive [the] Holy Spirit," a pattern of what was to come in in the Acts. A divine Person was involved in that great transaction.
D.J.M. Would @Romans 12 come in, "thus, we, being many, are one body in Christ, and each one members one of the other," and the chapter finishes with "Be not overcome by evil, but overcome evil with good"? Would that be the great army?
S.McC. Romans lays the basis for the collective side. The truth of the body is not developed in Romans; its
{316}
status is referred to as in Christ, but our attention is drawn to the links in the body between the members so that we are preserved from independency. So this state of life and what the chapter proceeds to speak about, is to preserve us from independency.
E.N.J. "And stood up upon their feet," would really be the result of the Romans exercises, would it not?
S.McC. That is, it is what *they* do here. The breath came into them and they lived and stood upon *their* feet, not on someone else's feet, but *their* feet, "they stood up upon their feet." We have in verse 8, "Sinews and flesh came up upon them," not dry bones now. It is not mere structure and framework new. It is sinews and flesh coming up upon them, "and the skin covered them over," showing that we come to a flexible side in the sinews and the flesh; and then "they lived, and stood up upon their feet, an exceeding great army," showing how the complete position as to the valley of dry bones is overcome.
H.J.M. Taking the general bearing and completion of the chapter, does it find an answer in the last chapter of the epistle to the Hebrews, in what is wrought in the saints: "But the God of peace, who brought again from among the dead our Lord Jesus, the great shepherd of the sheep, in the power of the blood of the eternal covenant, perfect you in every good work to the doing of his will, doing in you what is pleasing before him through Jesus Christ; to whom be glory for the ages of ages"?
S.McC. Ezekiel alludes to the everlasting covenant. It is a great fixed matter with God, going through all dispensations, and God is operating in relation to His own fixed thoughts of blessing in relation to His people, the resurrection of Christ standing in that relation.
F.W. Are you really helping us on to the thought of
{317}
conditions being brought about in which the Spirit is free to operate so that there is power by the Spirit?
S.McC. That is it; that is just exactly what one is trying to get at, because the great line of demarcation between us and the profession lies in a state of life amongst the saints, and that is what this chapter is dealing with. We look around and we can see the valley of dry bones, but we can see what has come in in the way of revival and recovery, prophetic ministry setting up, as it were, the saints in this state of life, so that they are victorious over these conditions which are holding so many ensnared.
F.W. So you change the position from a valley of dry bones to a living army in spiritual power?
S.McC. That is it; energised by breath; this feature of life; the Spirit of God, as we would look at it, in them.
H.J.M. Would you say something as to the putting together of the sticks and the making one stick? The bones came together and there was the building up and life, and then there is the putting together of the sticks and the writing on them.
S.McC. That is a very interesting matter, how this putting together comes into this chapter where prophetic ministry has such a place. It is important that, on the side of "bone to its bone," the saints should be right in their relations with one another structurally, in relation to the truth. That is a foundational matter, before the other things come about. But now we come to persons who are particularly alluded to, in Judah, and the children of Israel, his companions. "And thou, son of man, take thee one stick, and write upon it, For Judah, and for the children of Israel, his companions. And take another stick, and write upon it, For Joseph, the stick of Ephraim and all the house of Israel, his companions. And join them one to another into one stick; and they shall become one in thy hand." It is a
{318}
question now of unity arrived at, I take it; not so much stressing the idea of life, although life is there; but stressing the idea of love, love between the brethren, as John's ministry stresses it from this viewpoint.
H.J.M. Does the Philippian epistle bear upon it, in their being set together structurally, and love operating?
S.McC. Exactly, so that the truth as to our Lord's Person is not brought into Philippians to accommodate the academic mind. It is brought in with a moral result in view, a refined result in view in the saints, "let this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus," @Philippians 2: 5.
J.B. Would the bundle of sticks being gathered together in @Acts 28, come into it, the activities there of Paul in love?
S.McC. That is a material matter, it is just a matter of mercies by the way, and what Paul was in an unofficial way in gathering the sticks. Here it is a moral idea, a spiritual suggestion in this matter of Judah and Joseph being brought together, Judah and the children of Israel, Joseph and Ephraim, being all brought together; that is, that Ephraim does not envy Judah, and Judah does not envy Ephraim. We have holy conditions of love in unity and in mutuality through this operation.
L.G.S. Is that why the prophetic word is not prominent in this section? In the earlier section which has occupied us, the stress has been upon the prophetic word coming in; whereas here that is not so, is it?
S.McC. No. The stress on Ezekiel's *hand* is interesting. It is one thing to give a word in a meeting for ministry to promote conditions of life and to help the brethren structurally in regard to the truth; but it is another thing to be personally identified with this matter of promoting unity in love among the brethren. "In thy hand," would mean that the matter is intensified in Ezekiel. It is not just that he is giving a word, but
{319}
the sticks are in his hand, brought together, as it were, in his hand.
N.B.S. They were to become one. Does that involve a definite change, that whereas there had been disunity, there is now to be unity?
S.McC. Exactly. "They shall become one in thy hand." Notice the stress on Ezekiel's hand.
F.R.G. Had Abigail that in mind in relation to helping David? When he was in danger of doing what would be destructive, she helps him and goes on to say, "the soul of my lord shall be bound in the bundle of the living with Jehovah thy God," @1 Samuel 25: 29.
S.McC. That allusion is very interesting. It links on with what we have here, this matter of joining these persons together. It is a real *hand* matter, you might say. It is not a mouth matter here, it is a hand matter. It is in Ezekiel's hand that they are joined, as it says in verse 17, "they shall become one in thy hand." This is a great matter; Ezekiel is a great minister, a great servant; he is a priestly man and this bringing together is particularly linked with "in thy hand."
L.F. It is almost as if the Lord Jehovah identifies Himself with it, in verse 19; the word is, "Thus saith the Lord Jehovah ... and they shall be one in *my* hand."
S.McC. Very good. That is to show us the importance and authority of the ministry in Ezekiel here, involving that, first of all, on the prophetic side the conditions of the valley of dry bones is completely met. But now it is another matter, how the brethren are going to be brought together vitally in the bonds of unity and love, and the hand is stressed and God's hand, in principle, identified with it.
R.M.Y. Would Paul's word beseeching Euodias and Syntyche to be of one mind in the Lord, bear on this?
S.McC. That is a good reference, showing how it enters into how Paul personally takes a hand in the matter, as to bringing the brethren together. So that
{320}
you might say the ministry does not involve all platform work, there is this *hand* work. Think of Paul in @Acts 20 -- "these *hands*" -- the greatness of the minister, but what the minister was substantially! Think of what Eutychus could say about "these hands"; these arms by which he was enfolded! They enter into this matter of promoting unity amongst the brethren.
G.H.W-n. All are affected at the same time.
S.McC. Yes, that is the point in mind, that Israel, Joseph and Ephraim, Israel and Judah are brought together. That is a wonderful triumph as we think of the prophets and what they say about Ephraim! But *how* they are brought together is not by a prophetic word, but in Ezekiel's hand.
H.J.M. What had the writing in view?
S.McC. That is another interesting thought. Divine Persons are serving us in these matters. In @2 Corinthians 3 the ministry of the gospel takes the place of the new covenant. Divine Persons are serving us in view of righteousness, of life, of liberty, of love and right conditions amongst us.
H.J.M. And the servant, that is, the prophet, writes on the sticks with his hand. Does it mean that we would leave on one another permanent impressions of what the saints are in the mind and heart of God?
S.McC. That is what is in one's mind. It is not that we are dazzling the minds of the saints by great novelties in the truth. If such a *real* impression is left upon the saints through this kind of service, it is authoritative service because divine Persons are in this matter, as our brother was alluding to in verse 19, "Thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Behold I will take the stick of Joseph, which is in the hand of Ephraim, and the tribes of Israel his companions, and will put them with this, with the stick of Judah, and make them one stick, and they shall be one in my hand." So that Ezekiel's hand is God's hand, a wonderful allusion to Christ in
{321}
a supreme way; but then in ministry how serious it is to discredit authoritative ministry as it comes from God, for God is in it.
P.B. The prophet says twice that he prophesied as he was commanded. Is that not important?
S.McC. It is. Ezekiel is entirely amenable to the divine will in this great matter of bringing the saints together on these organic lines in life and love.
E.N.J. The apostle Paul at the end of the epistle to the Colossians says, "And when the letter has been read among you, cause that it be read also in the assembly of Laodiceans, and that *ye* also read that from Laodicea," @Colossians 4: 16. Is that on the line of joining the saints together?
S.McC. It would all enter into it, but this involves *more*; it involves that peculiar personal identification with the matter as we have in @Acts 20 set out peculiarly in Paul. He was a means, as it were, to bringing the saints together. The love that was in Christ is extended through Paul, and the love that was in Paul is extended through the saints, so that they are brought together and held together, so that the thought of "embrace" covers the chapter.
A.W.G. Is that service divinely supported according to verse 20? "And the sticks whereon thou writest shall be in thy hand before their eyes." Is that the mark of divine approval and support?
S.McC. It says, "the sticks whereon thou writest shall be in *thy* hand before their eyes," immediately after God had said, "they shall be one in *my* hand." It shows the great link between divine Persons and a servant like Paul, as Paul said, "If any one thinks himself to be a prophet or spiritual, let him recognise the things that I write to you, that it is the Lord's commandment." @1 Corinthians 14: 37.
R.L.P. Did you have something further in mind as to discrediting authoritative ministry?
{322}
S.McC. I think it is very important. One has heard more than one allusion in this country to the ministry of our beloved brother, Mr. Taylor, entitled, 'Paul's Militant Ministry.' The tendency is to discredit it. That has to be rejected entirely, because it is an intimation that the servant was not serving in the power of the Spirit of God; it has to be rejected completely in our minds!
J.H.H. Do we see both the hand and the authority in Paul at the end of the epistle to the Galatians, "See how long a letter I have written to you with my own hand," chapter 6: 11? Is he putting the authoritative touch on it?
S.McC. Very good; showing how intimately bound up he was with the matter that he was writing about. Now the chapter goes on to David, and that should be a great thing in our minds, that "David my servant shall be king over them; and they all shall have one shepherd." That is, the spirituality in the conditions of life in the first part of the chapter; the conditions of mutuality and love in the body of the chapter; and now this matter of the headship of Christ, "David my servant shall be king over them; and they all shall have one shepherd: and they shall walk in mine ordinances, and keep my statutes, and do them. And they shall dwell in the land that I have given unto Jacob my servant, wherein your fathers have dwelt ... and David my servant shall be their prince for ever." Now notice that mutuality does not militate against personality. Immediately we get the references to mutuality and the brethren joined together in unity and in love in the body of the chapter, God projects on to our view this wonderful idea of distinctive personality in David, seen uniquely in Christ of whom he is a type.
D.J.M. Is the thought of a prince, personality?
S.McC. Personality in the public position in the testimony. That is what the princely side peculiarly stands related to. As we know, later in the book, the prince could only go a certain length. He did not go
{323}
inside. The priest could go inside, but the prince can only go a certain length, he is linked with the gate.
H.J.M. The prince largely gives colour, does he not, to the habits and fashions and gatherings of the kingdom? They take account of the prince in the life of the kingdom, do they not?
S.McC. Yes, and especially bears upon the gates and the administrative side of things, the working out of government, the regal side of things in that light. And it says, "David my servant shall be their prince for ever." What thoughts David brings into our minds as we think of the New Testament, the Lord Jesus in the book of the Revelation as the root and offspring of David; what thoughts it brings into our minds of that kind of influence among the saints!
P.B. There is a wonderful touch at the end of chapter 37: 26 -- 27, "I will place them, and multiply them, and will set my sanctuary in the midst of them for ever. And my tabernacle shall be over them; and I will be their God, and they shall be my people." What a wonderful climax to what you have been saying!
S.McC. It is indeed! "*My* tabernacle shall be over them," God's tabernacle over us! What protection there is in that! How it saves us from other tabernacles. Peter had more than one tabernacle in mind when he did not know what to say on the mount, but God would impress us with the end of all the ministry here, that "my tabernacle shall be over them; and I will be their God, and they shall be my people. And the nations shall know that I Jehovah do hallow Israel, when my sanctuary shall be in the midst of them for ever."
A.W.G. Does the reiteration of the word "for ever" indicate that it is a fixed matter, and inviolate; it will remain?
S.McC. Yes, it is a permanent matter, and I think that is what we should have before us, permanent conditions among the saints. We are just about to enter
{324}
them at any moment now, permanent conditions at the rapture; but we should be concerned about enjoying them now, as it were, among the brethren; fixed permanent conditions where life, light and love are known and enjoyed.
J.W.H. Does this link on with @Revelation 21 in relation to what is eternal? It is in the light of eternity, is it?
S.McC. Yes. It is in the light of eternity, and God is bringing on to our minds David as His prince. We shall see later in Ezekiel that other princes are referred to, that have to judge their ways; but what God would bring into our minds is David, His prince, His servant; a peculiar reference to Christ and the spirit of Christ working out in every one of us as representing Christ.
C.P.P. Would it be an Ephesian touch; the beloved introduced as linking with David, forming in Himself the two into one new man, and the service of God and a dwelling place for God in the Spirit?
S.McC. Well, all that would be the great end in mind. @Ephesians 2 is a remarkable illustration of the chapter that we have read. Our brother was referring to it earlier; the principle of life was there in @Ephesians 2 at the beginning; and then reconciliation involving Jew and Gentile together in unity of affection, "and ... reconcile both in one body to God by the cross." Then the happy felicitous conditions among the saints as fellow citizens of the saints and of the household of God, and then the greatness of what you referred to, God dwelling Spirit-wise in His house. It fits in remarkably with this section.
{325}
THE WORK OF GOD IN THE SAINTS (2)
@Ezekiel 45: 13 -- 17; @Ezekiel 47: 1 -- 12
S.McC. Time did not permit our referring to chapters 40 and 43, parts of which we read this morning, and we might perhaps just consider them for a moment, particularly chapter 43, but alluding to chapter 40 which brings us within the range of a great scope of things as to the truth. We have considered the great character of the work of God coming to light in chapter 37; the culmination of the teaching in that chapter in the supremacy of Christ typified in David, and God's tabernacle spread over the people. Then chapters 38 and 39 give us a touch in regard to the breaking down of the last feature of opposition, as we might refer to it, before we come to chapter 40.
In chapter 39 God is seen allowing the enemy to oppose, to a certain extent, to bring out God's holy jealousy for His name; as he says, in verse 25, "Therefore, thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Now will I bring again the captivity of Jacob, and have mercy upon the whole house of Israel, and will be jealous for my holy name: and they shall bear their confusion, and all their unfaithfulness in which they have acted unfaithfully against me, when they shall dwell safely in their land, and none shall make them afraid; when I have brought them again from the peoples, and gathered them out of their enemies¬ lands, and am hallowed in them in the sight of many nations. And they shall know that I am Jehovah their God, in that I caused them to be led into captivity among the nations, and have gathered them unto their own land, and have left none of them any more there. And I will not hide my face any more from them, for I shall have poured out my Spirit upon the house of Israel, saith the Lord Jehovah." This and other references in the chapter are striking allusions to the
{326}
way God shows publicly His love for His people and regard for them, and His holy jealousy in regard of His name.
And then we come to chapter 40, which brings us to this great range of things that enters into the last eight chapters in Ezekiel, involving a good deal that tests us as to our apprehension of the truth. There are two things that run through the eight chapters, and that is the necessity for the man that is alluded to as standing by Ezekiel, and also for the Spirit. That is, the service of Christ mediatorially, and the service of the Spirit are important things to keep in mind in what we are about to consider in regard to the great scope of things here in the truth. In chapter 40 he is brought to the land of Israel and set upon a high mountain, and he sees "the building of a city, on the south," and "a man whose appearance was like the appearance of brass, with a flax-cord in his hand, and a measuring-reed; and he stood in the gate," all to intensify in our minds the thought of measurement, without which we shall be lost as to the truth; the divine standard of measure is a great matter. And a good deal is said as to the house; the first thing that is described is the house and the features of it. Then we come to chapter 43 and "the glory of the God of Israel came from the way of the east; ... and the earth was lit up with his glory." Then it says that, "the Spirit lifted me up, and brought me into the inner court; and behold, the glory of Jehovah filled the house. And I heard one speaking unto me out of the house; and a man was standing by me." I believe it is a great matter that we should get a sense of God coming into the position and a Man standing by us even now, not only in the service of God on the upward and heavenly side, but even now that we should have a sense of these great things as we go over the truth together, intensifying in our minds the thought of
{327}
spirituality, which is so greatly needed in taking on and apprehending the truth rightly.
G.J.G. The thought of the visions of God, we might say, in a certain sense is something beyond us, as the apostle says, "who is sufficient for these things?" and "our sufficiency is of God." Would that come into it?
S.McC. Yes, but the comfort is that we have the Holy Spirit, and the Spirit searches all things, even the depths of God. There is nothing strikes you more, when you read the last eight chapters of Ezekiel, than your finiteness in thinking, finiteness of apprehension; because, while what is before us is relative, yet there is an infinitude linked with it that is beyond us humanly speaking, and the necessity for a man standing by, typical of the service of Christ and the Holy Spirit would be apparent.
W.J.H. In the beginning of the book, the man, or the likeness of a man, is seen on the throne above the expanse; but the same blessed Man is here too, is He not, in relation to divine interests and divine operations?
S.McC. It is a great thing to see that. The principle of the man runs right through the book, and we have to be impressed with the greatness of Christ in heaven and how He is functioning as Man in heaven; and how the administration is proceeding from that viewpoint in the light of Ephesians, as the whole scope of the truth is in mind. There is nothing less in the Lord's mind than the whole scope of the truth, and both He and the Spirit are operating, administering towards this end, that we should come into the whole scope of the truth.
J.P. Would that be particularly seen in @Ephesians 3 in the apostle's prayer, that the Christ might dwell by faith in the saints¬ hearts, and the end to be reached, "that ye may be filled even to all the fulness of God"?
S.McC. That would enter into these closing chapters of Ezekiel; and what you are struck with in
{328}
Paul is the knowledge that he had. He is dealing with infinitude you might say, "the love of the Christ which surpasses knowledge"; but yet he refers to his knowledge and his intelligence in the mystery, showing a man who has arrived at the truth. How has he arrived at it? As one who has made room for the service of Christ and the Spirit. I think that is the great thing to see in this matter, that we shall never arrive at the truth rightly except by the Spirit.
H.J.M. So that David had the pattern by the word, but he also speaks of having it by the Spirit, does he not?
S.McC. That is the important thing to see, especially in the way that the Spirit has been called attention to in recent times. The Lord has in mind an increase in spirituality with us, that as making room for the Spirit and His service to us, we might come into all the truth; not a specific phase of it, not a specific application of it, but the whole truth and nothing less than the whole truth. That is the divine standard of measure.
P.B. So it is said, "shew the house to the house of Israel, that they may be confounded at their iniquities; and let them measure the pattern." The house had to be shown to the house of Israel, had it not?
S.McC. Showing that this is a practical matter. It has to be shown to the house of Israel, and therefore the need of our position, the "light of the house of Israel" -- the people of God have understanding as to what is being shown. It is coming by this way, as it says in verse 5, "the Spirit lifted me up, and brought me into the inner court; and behold, the glory of Jehovah filled the house. And I heard one speaking unto me out of the house; and a man was standing by me." The Spirit and Christ, in type, are operating together in regard to this matter of our coming at the truth from the standpoint of spirituality.
L.F. Does that require attentiveness on our part? I was thinking of the way in which it is presented to the
{329}
prophet in chapter 40: 4, "behold with thine eyes, and hear with thine ears, and set thy heart upon all that I shall shew thee; for in order that it might be shown unto thee art thou brought hither. Declare to the house of Israel all that thou seest."
S.McC. How detailed it all is in the way that he alludes to it thus. The importance of spirituality! We will miss the whole point in regard to the dispensation if we are not spiritual, if spirituality is lost sight of.
A.C. Would you mind telling us what produces spirituality?
S.McC. Making room for the Spirit. We all have the Spirit -- or we should have. If there is anyone here that does not have the Spirit, they should see to it. The Father who is of heaven is ready to give to those that ask Him; but it is another matter to make room for the Spirit. Spirituality involves that we make room for the Spirit.
E.A.K. Will the Spirit help us as to the matter of being confounded, which seems to be an essential condition of what is proposed? Does that involve the matter of self-judgment as using the Spirit?
S.McC. So that as self-judgment is maintained as making room for the Spirit the truth begins to open out, as it says in verses 10 and 11, "Thou, son of man, shew the house to the house of Israel, that they may be confounded at their iniquities; and let them measure the pattern. And if they be confounded at all that they have done, make known to them the form of the house, and its fashions, and its goings out, and its comings in, and all its forms, and all its statutes, yea, all the forms thereof, and all the laws thereof; and write it in their sight, that they may keep the whole form thereof, and all the statutes thereof, and do them." Now all this detail is an interesting matter, because where is all this detail? We do not get it exactly laid down, as we do in Leviticus, verse by verse, principle by principle. What is
{330}
to be understood, as we have been taught, is that room has to be made for spirituality in regard to the forms of the house, as Ezekiel presents it.
H.J.M. And the self-judgment is more than self-judgment as to my own *personal* sins, is it not? It would be self-judgment in relation to the public history of the testimony. You think of men like Daniel and Nehemiah, and in our day men like Mr. Darby. As they saw the true pattern, how it bowed them before God, did it not?
S.McC. As we go back to the days of the Acts, to the days of Peter and John and the twelve, and the days of Paul, we think of the pattern as it is set out, and the conditions of spirituality among the brethren; how they did things; they were intelligent in the way they did things. Some of the things they had no commandment for at all, but they did them as intelligent in what we might call the law of God. The book of the Acts gives us the pattern in that way.
C.P.P. Would the first epistle to Timothy, in another, sense, give us the pattern, and the second epistle call for the spirit of self-judgment as desiring to return to it, or come into conformity with it?
S.McC. Yes. "In order that thou mayest know how one ought to conduct oneself in God's house," @1 Timothy 3: 15. Paul is instructing Timothy as to behaviour in the house of God. The house of God is a wonderful realm. God is in it Spirit-wise, as was alluded to this morning, and He is here in this portion we have read; He has come in by way of the east.
P.B. This prophet would be typical of those who are controlled and led by the Spirit, so that he often speaks about being brought back, showing that there is nothing static in relation to what he has to give and show?
S.McC. Yes, it is a great matter that we should go over the truth in regard to its scope and fulness and the foundations of it; all that has come in in these last
{331}
days of revival in regard to the truth from J.N.D.¬s time onwards to F.E.R.¬s and J.B.S.¬s, and especially in the last fifty years in the great distinctive ministry of which we are all the products.
R.C.R. And is there enlargement by way of spiritual application in the operation in the house, apart from what we might be able to speak of as a specific verse of Scripture?
S.McC. That is what Ezekiel would help us as to. The great thing is, as we have often noticed in Ezekiel, that the thing exists there and it is measured according to the divine standard of measure; but it tests spirituality. A lot of the things are testing to understand; but divine Persons are serving us, and not only serving us, but using influence and authority to help us in the matter; as we were seeing this morning, "*causing*" Ezekiel in chapter 37, "causing" in chapter 47, gently, as it were, if we could put the words together, using their authority to help us in view of the liberty of the realm.
F.R.G. So what we arrive at would always be governed and bounded by the word of Scripture. Is that right?
S.McC. Yes. We do not set aside the Scriptures; the Scriptures must be held in their distinctive place and position.
C.P.P. Would the man in chapter 40 with the flax-cord give us a certain flexibility in the application of the truth? Does that fit in with what you are saying?
S.McC. Yes, only that the use of the flax-cord requires more care than the use of the reed. The use of the reed applies to straight measurements, but the flax-cord has to do with measurements that the reed could not cover, and it calls for greater spirituality in the use of the flax-cord.
W.J.H. Had you something in mind in referring to the east, which seems to be repeated over and over again in this section?
{332}
S.McC. Yes, I was thinking that the whole section here is to fill our hearts with hope -- not with despair. The rapture and the appearing are so near, we might say, specially the rapture to us, but we love the thought of the appearing. The Lord's coming is so near. It is a great matter that that should fill us, so that we should be anxious to get all the truth, to allow divine Persons to show us the truth as They are showing it to us here in the forms and fashions of the house, its goings out and its comings in; not only the service of God, but the gospel. We have been helped as to that recently in the way we have been brought to the greatness of forgiveness based on repentance; the grace and spirit of the dispensation; the greatness of the gospel; what we were having at Melbourne as to the love of God entering into and lying behind the gospel. How important that is! If we take the love of God out of the gospel, we take, as it were, the branch from the trunk, and it will die.
H.J.M. So that in the epistle to the Ephesians, the most glorious and great, in the way of the truth, we have the preaching of "the glad tidings of the unsearchable riches of the Christ," chapter 3: 8.
S.McC. Yes. And in chapter 47 of this book the great thought of the river flowing out of the house, the place and domain of love. The love of God is entering into it as it flows, grace adapting itself to the need present; but all that is linked with the whole scope of the truth. We were tested recently, as to the very rudiments of the gospel in regard to repentance and forgiveness, and now, we are being tested as to the service of God and our knowledge of the truth in regard to it. All that is bound up with what we have here.
D.J.M. Does @1 Timothy 2: 1 bear on it, "I exhort therefore, first of all, that supplications, prayers, intercessions, thanksgivings be made for all men," and
{333}
then, "the mediator of God and men," as linked with behaviour in God's house?
S.McC. Yes, it does; showing how intimately the glad tidings are bound up with this great matter of the pattern and the form of the house; the form of the house is a beautiful touch.
D.J.M. The gospel goes out from the house, does it?
S.McC. It does. The great error around us in regard to missionary work is that the house is left out, whereas, rightly speaking, the gospel goes out from the house. And then, as it says, "make known to them the form of the house, and its fashion, and its goings out, and its comings in, and all its forms, and all its statutes, yea, all the forms thereof, and all the laws thereof," Think of the fulness of it! That is where we run into the difficulties. It is in the fulness of the truth where spirituality is needed in connection with the working out of the truth of the house of God.
C.E.J. Is spirituality necessary if we are to know all the forms, or as it says, "that they may keep the whole form thereof, and all the statutes thereof, and do them." We are tested as to the application of divine principles, are we not?
S.McC. We are, because there is a good deal said in Ezekiel that is not said in the books of Moses, and we are to understand just what is in mind in that. It is especially stressing the spiritual side of things, the work of God in the saints subjectively, the greatness of that and how it can be measured. John is stressing that in his epistle, the work of God in the saints and how it can be measured and taken account of. "We know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the brethren," @1 John 3: 14. That is the divine standard of measure, as it were, being applied.
A.W.G. Is that why in Timothy the reference is to the Spirit speaking expressly? Should we have ears attuned to hear what the Spirit is saying?
{334}
S.McC. It is an important thing for us to discern the Spirit's voice in the ministry. Think of all the wealth and distinctiveness of it over the last fifty years! The more we go over it, the more we are amazed at the great wealth that there is in it.
J.G.G. So, important as spiritual instincts are, this conscious knowledge of spiritual matters is much more important.
S.McC. Oh yes, this is not instinct; we are not alluding to instinct. Spirituality is not instinct. Instincts are linked with the new birth. The new birth lays the basis for spirituality. "That which is born of the Spirit is spirit," it partakes of that character, but for spirituality we need the Spirit, making room for the Spirit.
A.C. It says that when the Spirit came down at Pentecost, He rested on them and they were all filled with the Spirit and then they spake as the Spirit gave them utterance. That was at the beginning of the dispensation. Are you calling attention to the close, that the Spirit should have His right and proper place with each one of us?
S.McC. That is an important thing. The pattern in the Acts would impress our minds distinctly with the great use made of the Spirit, and it is important that any of us who serve, whether in the preaching or otherwise, should make room for the Spirit. How important it is in a meeting like this, that room should be made for the Spirit to come in in regard to the truth. It is the hallmark of all proper and right ministry according to God.
E.A.K. Does not that involve the recognition of the Spirit objectively (you were speaking of the Acts), a matter in which we have been helped more recently?
S.McC. Yes, it is a great matter to see the place that the Spirit has in relation to the ministry. That was why I alluded, in a simple way, this morning, to the
{335}
necessity for care in regard to what we say as to the ministry; not that the ministry is infallible, it is not. The Word of God (the Scriptures) is infallible, it is inspired. Ministry is not inspired, neither is it infallible; but it is *authoritative* from two standpoints, in that the servant has a commission, and also that the Spirit is in the matter, and therefore the need of care lest we should impute to a servant bias in ministering, when the Spirit's voice may be in the matter. What care is needed!
P.B. It says in chapter 43, "and write it in their sight, that they may keep the whole form thereof, and all the statutes thereof, and do them." I wondered if what Paul says in @2 Corinthians 3: 1, 2, 3, would be in line, "Ye are our letter, written in our hearts, known and read of all men, being manifested to be Christ's epistle ministered by us, written, not with ink, but the Spirit of the living God; not on stone tables, but on fleshy tables of the heart." This writing that has to be written is really substantially in the hearts and spirits of men, is it not?
S.McC. Yes, exactly; the hearts and spirits of the saints. So how important it is that the ministry should not just be carried in our minds, but that we should be practical and living exponents of it. I think that is what the Lord is aiming at at the present time, that we should be substantially formed in the ministry, that we are not dealing with it as we would deal with literature in the world. It is a question of the truth of God, that which the Spirit is in, searching us morally, helping us in self-judgment, that, as we make room for the Spirit, we might become exponents of the truth.
G.J.D. Is that why the idea of the mountain is introduced, "This is the law of the house: Upon the top of the mountain"? I was thinking of the Revelation, where John wrote, "And he carried me away in the
{336}
Spirit, and set me on a great and high mountain, and shewed me the holy city," @Revelation 21: 10.
S.McC. Very good; showing how elevated our thoughts are to be in regard to the law of the house. That is, spirituality is needed for this too. It is on the top of the mountain. "Upon the top of the mountain all its border round about is most holy." It is an elevated position, that is, as we might say in our way of speaking, a heavenly view.
G.J.D. Would that help us in regard of matters that come up amongst us, that we think on them from this level?
S.McC. So that we do not resort and sink to carnal and fleshly levels in our operations in the working out of the truth. The ministry of Ezekiel would help us to reject thoroughly all that is linked with the operations of the mind of man in relation to the truth, and we all have to face that. Every one of us knows just what it is for the mind of man to intrude in the holy things of God and bring about disaster.
J.H.H. Whereas when we do have one who is a distinct exponent of the truth amongst us, we value even his opinion. I was thinking of @1 Corinthians 7: 25, "I have no commandment of the Lord; but I give my opinion, as having received mercy of the Lord to be faithful." That is to be thought of too, is it not?
S.McC. Very good; showing how Paul distinguishes between certain things he says, but how he has confidence that the saints would recognise the weight that his opinion would carry. And then we have this great thought of the altar, verses 13 -- 17, just a brief allusion to the greatness of what enters into the altar, because it is going to come into chapter 47. Here it is linked with the law of the house and the forms and the pattern, all that is shown. We are to be impressed with this view of Christ, and what is set out in the manhood of
{337}
Christ in this relation, so that we might take on what is linked with the features suggested in it.
C.P.P. Do the various details in these verses again remind us of the need of the help of the Spirit to understand what really did come out in the manhood of the Lord Jesus in what the altar speaks of?
S.McC. Our minds are to be affected by this allusion to the hearth of God; how God is near to us in this great matter, "the hearth of God." We have the glory coming in in the opening of the chapter, the whole earth lit up with His glory; but here was have allusions to the hearth of God, doubly referred to, the meanings are "Mount of God" and "lion of God". Now we want to see where strength and dignity is to shine in the working out of things in this realm. It is going to work out this way, on the basis of sacrificing love, the altar, preparedness to sacrifice, to suffer. That is what is in mind, the way of suffering love.
F.R.G. Paul could speak of himself as being willing to spend and be utterly spent for the sake of the brethren.
S.McC. Paul is a great illustration of this in the epistle to the Corinthians. There were those who were reigning in Corinth, claiming to have the power, whilst Paul was regarded as the offscouring of the world.
W.J.B. You were speaking on Wednesday evening in Newcastle about suffering and saying that the Lord sometimes comes in in relief, and sometimes He does not.
S.McC. It is an important thing to see that. It does not mean that we are going to be delivered from every test. We may have to go through things to the extreme, the martyrs had to do so, they were not delivered; we have to face that side of things, but there is power. Think of the power and the strength that was with the martyrs! As you read the history of the martyrs and the marvellous way they died for the truth, you see the strength, as the result of the work of God in them!
{338}
That is what this altar suggests in the "lion of God" and the "Mount of God." God is linked with that matter.
E.A.K. James was slain by the sword, but Peter was delivered; and it says, "they were the days of unleavened bread," @Acts 12: 3.
S.McC. That shows how there may be deliverance and there may not be deliverance.
W.J.B. Do you think that some questions may not be resolved until the judgment seat?
S.McC. Well, I am sure that as to many things that happen in our lives, which are perhaps inexplicable to us now, we shall get an answer then; as to calamities and other things that have come into our lives.
H.J.M. What does the "hearth of God" really mean?
S.McC. Well, we know what a hearth suggests. I think we are so near to God in the last eight chapters of Ezekiel. He is so near in these matters, with and amongst His people. These chapters contemplate the saints at home in this great realm of love; the chambers and the cells all suggesting the great idea of love and the saints dwelling together with God.
R.H.G. So is it in mind that all the detail that is seen in the house is in full accord with the glory that is coming in?
S.McC. Yes, and in full accord with the death of Christ; full accord with the hearth of God. You will remember how Paul insists on that as he opens the first epistle to the Corinthians. He refers so much to suffering in that letter, but he refers to Christ, the wisdom of God and the power of God. It is striking how, in Ezekiel, the thought of power and strength is not only linked with the pillars, as we have it in the temple, Jachin and Boaz, but it is linked with the altar.
G.J.D. Would the apostle have us to see all these matters that relate to our business here, and see the saints
{339}
in the light of the altar? This could be seen easily, could it not, in this position?
S.McC. We are to be imbued with the spirit and grace of Him who gave His all for the saints. The altar would bring that into our minds; how He suffered to establish the will of God; how He surrendered in relation to things in His path, that the will of God might be supreme and that the saints might be secured.
L.F. There seems to be a fresh standard of measurement in regard to this altar. I was wondering, following what you have just said, whether that has in view the expansion of our thoughts as to what is here? The cubit is a cubit and a hand breadth.
S.McC. Very good. That is just what is in mind, the expansion of our thoughts. That is what spirituality means, that our thoughts are being continually expanded in relation to the truth; and Ezekiel is especially helping us as to that. When you come to the river, the further it goes, the deeper it is. With some of us, you know, it, may be that the further we go the shallower we get, the less we have; but in Ezekiel, the further the river goes, the deeper it goes and the wider it becomes.
G.J.D. Is this portion here what the apostle means when he says, "holding the truth in love," @Ephesians 4: 15.
S.McC. Yes, that is stressed. As we look at Ezekiel we are impressed with that thought, that the truth is to be held in love. That is what these chapters would remind us of. And so we come to this next chapter where we get mutuality so much stressed. In chapter 45: 16, 17 it says, "All the people of the land shall be held to this heave-offering for the prince in Israel. And it shall be the prince's part to supply the burnt-offerings, and the oblation, and the drink-offering, at the feasts." Now this should help us in the working out of things, that mutuality among the brethren never militates against personality, as suggested in the prince. Sometimes we
{340}
speak of mutuality as if it were something that shuts out personality, shuts out leadership; but it never does. *Mutuality makes way for leadership* among the brethren.
G.A. Would it be right to ask if those features of personality and mutuality are expanded in @Deuteronomy 33, and culminate in the state of blessing: "Happy art thou, Israel!" and so on, as though all the features of personality and mutuality are in Moses¬ mind, by the Spirit?
S.McC. Very good. I think that section is very illuminating in regard to what we are saying; that mutuality in relation to the work of God and our relation together in the family of God never militate against leadership or personality. In that closing section Moses stands out in a way that he has never stood out before.
W.J.B. So that mutuality is not democracy.
S.McC. An important thing to bear in mind. Sometimes under the plea of concern for mutuality, democracy may be advanced, and democracy is not according to God. I know we have democracy in America, but democracy is not the right kind of rule according to God, and democracy in the assembly is not in accord with the truth.
J.H.H. It might lead on to every man doing that which was right in his own eyes.
S.McC. Well, exactly. Instead of having confidence in one another! Mutuality makes for confidence in one another, and makes way for spiritual leadership amongst the saints. How important that is in regard to our readings. How to make room for mutuality and leadership is a great matter, because if everybody is saying something and nobody is saying anything distinctive, we do not get very far; but where you get mutuality supplying and entering into and contributing to what there is in the gathering, it makes room for leadership, as in the prince here.
{341}
P.B. I suppose the prince was of the tribe of Judah, and represents Christ. Is not personality connected with what represents Christ in each one of us?
S.McC. That is just the point. Personality has to do with the reflection of Christ, because your impression of Christ is not mine, and my impression is not yours. We have all got a distinctive impression of Christ; we do not need to imitate one another in that regard. What the last eight chapters of Ezekiel would bring out is the graded character of the work of God. The work of God is not always the same in every one of us. I mean, if Paul were here, how delighted we would be to make room for him and to listen to him.
J.D. Is that seen at Antioch where "as they were ministering to the Lord and fasting, the Holy Spirit said, Separate me now Barnabas and Saul," @Acts 13: 2?
S.McC. What mutuality among the brethren! The fasting; the precluding of any personal preference in my mind. I might say, "I would like so and so to take the lead." But oh, the need of fasting in this matter, that natural proclivities might be shut out, so that room might be made for the sovereignty of the Spirit in the matter of distribution!
W.J.H. "I John, your brother," and "I myself, Paul."
S.McC. Very good. What personalities they were! what princes they were! we might say what leadership in both men, but yet how they linked on with the brethren! It is a great thing for us to keep in mind that the prince can only go a certain distance here. I am alluding, of course, to ourselves, I am not alluding to Christ, (bearing in mind that He is a divine Person and can go where no one else can go; as to creatures, I mean, no creature could go where He, as a divine Person, could go.) But thinking of the prince representing the spirit of Christ amongst the saints, the prince goes a certain distance, but that is all. That is, gift or leadership on administrative lines goes a certain
{342}
distance, but the priest is morally greater; he goes further, and the sons go further, they go right into eternity.
F.R.G. Does @Acts 15 illustrate it, in the bringing forward of great personalities, and yet it speaks of "it seemed good to us," of "the whole assembly" and so on. There was what was mutual there, as well as what was outstanding in leadership.
S.McC. This side of things where the offerings are mentioned so much here, verses 9 -- 12, is important, and we need to take it to heart. I suppose it would allude in type to the hierarchy around and the way the flock is exploited. But everyone of us has to take it home, as to what there may be in our hearts. "Put away violence and spoil, and execute judgment and justice; take off your exactions from my people, saith the Lord Jehovah. Ye shall have just balances, and a just ephah, and a just bath." Notice how, all the way through, justice is being stressed in regard to measurement; the divine measurement. And then in verse 13, "This is the heave-offering which ye shall offer: the sixth part of an ephah out of a homer of wheat, and ye shall give the sixth part of an ephah out of a homer of barley; and the set portion of oil, by the bath of oil, the tenth part of a bath out of a cor, which is a homer of ten baths, for ten baths are a homer; and one lamb out of the flock, out of two hundred," -- notice that -- "from the well-watered pastures of Israel -- for an oblation." The standard of measure is intensified in regard to these conditions of mutuality impressed upon our minds here, that all the people are to be held to this heave-offering for the prince.
R.L.P. Why did you stress one lamb out of two hundred?
S.McC. There is something in that. Why should it say, "one lamb out of the flock, out of two hundred"?
{343}
It shows how measurement enters into this great matter of what is to be for the prince.
H.J.M. Would it involve that there is plenty on hand in all these matters, but the matter of measurement and selection comes in? We are to be selective in our approach, are we?
S.McC. That is it exactly. Some brother might say he has two hundred thoughts in the reading meeting -- far too many; Better to have *one* out of two hundred, that is the point, you see. You do not throw everything on the table. You do not bring out everything that you have. You have a lot more than what comes out. That is the point in spirituality, in making room for the Spirit, you have a lot more than comes out, it is one lamb out of two hundred.
S.E.E. So that the point would be, would it, that the saints should have the best at the time; and in turn, that God thus should have the best from them?
S.McC. Yes, because it is what is for God that would be in mind here. The service of God is ultimately in mind, and all the readings and all the meetings should have that in mind. As it says here, "one lamb out of the flock, out of two hundred, from the well-watered pastures of Israel -- for an oblation," -- not the valley of dry bones now, it is "the well-watered pastures of Israel." The brethren are feeding on the best. They are going in for the best. The young people want to go in for the best, not the inferior. Go in for the best! God has kept the best to the last and we want to go in for it.
J.P. I think you said a little earlier that the priest goes further than the prince, but I notice it is the prince here who is to supply the offerings. What do we understand by that?
S.McC. Showing the great place that the princely side has in the matter of supporting the service of God. As we were saying, gift and the working out of gift
{344}
in personality and ability, in influence and administratively, and the like (as the prince would suggest), would have primarily in mind the service of God; the supplying of wealth for the service of God.
S.E.E. It would mean he would need to acquire spiritual substance, would it?
S.McC. Yes. "The well-watered pastures of Israel." I think that is a beautiful touch coming in here, amid all that God is saying, as if the thing is present. Someone may say, "Well, in our locality things are pretty dry." But this is what we should have in mind, as we sit down together; "the well-watered pastures of Israel"; and surely they are well-watered because the Spirit of God is standing related to them!
G.J.G. Would there be a further suggestion of spiritual reserves in that? You have spoken of one lamb out of two hundred, but the well-watered pastures are unending spiritual reserves to bring things forward amongst the saints?
S.McC. That is it. There is no aridness. If there is spiritual aridity in the gatherings, the question comes up as to whether the Spirit is being made room for. The sisters enter into that. The sisters are, as it were, furnishing part of "the well-watered pastures."
L.G.S. And are we to note that it is a heave-offering?
S.McC. That is an important thing to notice; it is love working vertically. The wave-offering is love working on a horizontal plane; but this is working out what we were considering in the altar, the mountain of God, the strength of God; the love of God is introduced into our hearts by the Holy Spirit, so that there is power, as it were, to heave; it is the movements of love upward amongst the saints.
G.H.W. Does it indicate a fulness and wealth and rising up of affection?
S.McC. Exactly.
W.H.F. Referring to the well-watered pastures of
{345}
Israel. Paul refers in the introduction in the first epistle to the Corinthians, not only to those at Corinth, but "in every place." Might we not expect the Spirit of God to help us to know more of the well-watered pastures of all the saints upon earth?
S.McC. The whole assembly, those who are walking in the truth in regard to the well-watered pastures. It is a great thing to see what supplies there are to feed us; and the 'one out of two hundred' should encourage the younger brothers and sisters that in this matter of the heave-offering, it is not two hundred that are being looked for, but, one out of two hundred. Sometimes you hear young brothers refer to others and say, "Why, they have got so many spiritual thoughts and I seem to have so little." Well, this is an encouragement. It is one out of two hundred, but it is part of the wealth of the well-watered pastures of Israel that are contributing to the service of God.
F.W. And what is the last part of verse 17 of chapter 45 in regard to the prince?
S.McC. "And it shall be the prince's part to supply the burnt-offerings, and the oblation, and the drink-offering, at the feasts, and at the new moons, and on the sabbaths, in all the solemnities of the house of Israel: it is he that shall prepare the sin-offering, and the oblation, and the burnt-offering, and the peace-offerings, to make atonement for the house of Israel." I suppose it is to show how leadership enters into this matter of the sustaining of the festive occasions, the new moons and all the solemnities of the house of Israel in regard to the taking care of matters as to cleansing.
F.W. "And the peace-offerings, to make atonement for the house of Israel." Is the prince something special in regard to the whole of Israel?
S.McC. Well, exactly; so that in verse 18 it is to be noted this in unique to Ezekiel. "Thus saith the Lord Jehovah; In the first month, on the first of the month,
{346}
thou shalt take a young bullock, without blemish, and thou shalt purge the sanctuary." Of old, in the books of Moses, the cleansing of the sanctuary was linked with the seventh month, the final month of the festive year; but in Ezekiel we begin with that, we begin with finished matters on that line. "The first month, on the first of the month," matters are cleared in regard to the sanctuary.
R.M.Y. Would you say something in that connection as to the matter of Saturday night care meetings, which have been taken on amongst us; and perhaps a word as to the most suitable Saturday?
S.McC. I do not know that too much could be said, only that we might read chapter 40: 6 -- 8: "And he came to the gate which looked toward the east, and went up its steps; and he measured the threshold of the gate, one reed broad; and the other threshold one reed broad. And each chamber was one reed long and one reed broad; and between the chambers were five cubits; and the threshold of the gate, beside the porch of the gate within, was one reed. And he measured the porch of the gate within, one reed." That is, as you draw near to the house, all that is linked with the administrative position is marked by uniformity; one reed, one reed, one reed. And I think that is the important thing that governs us in regard to the care meeting; uniformity, we are all doing to same thing, in that light.
E.A.K. Do you consider, in saying that, that a universal Saturday amongst the saints, irrespective of countries, is desirable?
S.McC. The general principle of uniformity should be in our minds. Of course, it would be a happy thing if it were the same Saturday universally, but the question would be as to whether that would be possible.
E.A.K. Well, that is in one's mind, because we have had to recognise that the universal thought in relation
{347}
to the hymn book has had to be a little modified in the limited conditions in which we are, and I wondered, perhaps, whether the same feature did not enter into this matter.
S.McC. Yes, it might not be possible for all to have it on the same night.
G.W.B. You have drawn attention elsewhere to the desirability of clearing the month.
S.McC. Yes, when I said it might not be possible to have it on the same night, I meant the same Saturday night. I was not meaning any night in the week.
F.W. You mean, do you, that we should all do the same thing in principle; but in various places there might be slight differences in detail.
S.McC. The thing is to get the principle of uniformity among the brethren, and as you draw near to the house, the gates, the porch, you are affected by this one measurement, one reed, all the way round.
Chapter 47 is to impress us with this great matter of the flow of the river, and meeting current need. As we find, it is a double river. That is, it is something that has to be spiritually understood; the need for spirituality is again impressed. And there are many things that are linked with it that are important, but the first matter is, "he brought me back to the door of the house; and behold, waters issued out from under the threshold of the house eastward: for the front of the house was eastward. And the waters came down from under, from the right side of the house, south of the altar." We are to be reminded of the source of the waters here, linked with this great realm that lies in the work of God in the saints.
G.A. Could we have a word as to the relationship of this Scripture to what appears in the first portion of @Revelation 22: 1, 2?
S.McC. I suppose it links on in the teaching with that. The administration of grace marks the heavenly
{348}
city, and we are to understand its spiritual bearing upon us now; this fluid state of things, going on and deepening, not decreasing, but increasing; not getting shallower but getting deeper all the time, and Divine Persons serving us as They do in the ministry. The new covenant is to help Israel and Judah in their relations with God, but Divine Persons in Their service in @2 Corinthians 3 are helping us now. They are helping us from glory to glory, further and further into the enjoyment of the truth. The whole truth is in mind, not only that we should be in it with our feet, but that we should be in it altogether, waters risen, waters to swim in, a river that could not be passed through.
G.J.G. In the thought of the river where there are waters to swim in, is there a suggestion of our ability to move in such a sphere, to be at home in it?
S.McC. That is it. It would be the exercise of life. We are not, as it were, drowned in it. It has often been said as to @Ephesians 3, while infinitude is in mind in our being filled to all the fulness of God, we are not lost in it, but we are held in it; that is, it is waters to swim in, a river that could not be passed through; it is infinitude, but yet we are in it intelligently in the activity of life.
D.J.M. It says, "to know the love of the Christ which surpasses knowledge."
S.McC. That reminds us of infinitude, but yet we know it.
J.H.H. Would @2 Corinthians 3 be something like what you have in your mind, "according to the same image from glory to glory"? Is that how we get into this?
S.McC. That is it. "The same image." We are not to be thinking differently and speaking differently. In a great city like this, where there are so many meetings -- thirty meetings, I believe -- how important it is that there should not be sectionalism, that the brethren should all be thinking the same thing and speaking the
{349}
same thing, and we will if we are brought into this flow. It says, "When the man went forth eastward, a line was in his hand." He is not giving up the line, he is not giving up the divine standard of measurement. It says, "he measured a thousand cubits, and he caused me to pass through the waters." Then, "And he measured a thousand cubits, and caused me to pass through the waters." That is what the Lord has been doing these times, just causing us to come in, you see; and the saints cannot hold themselves back from this viewpoint, the Lord and the Spirit using Their authority to help us from glory to glory.
E.N.J. Would you say that we have come to a great healing time -- this chapter suggesting much healing -- and that we need to be careful lest we be found like the marshes and the pools, unaffected by this wonderful ministry.
S.McC. A very important thing. The marshes and the pool, I suppose would represent the principle of apostasy -- terrible thing -- stagnant conditions. But as we stand related to this river, and as we are brought back over the scope of the truth, we see so much that we never saw before. That has just been the very matter in regard to all we have been going through recently; the Lord has been helping us to see the truth, as it were, from another point of view.
E.N.J. Thinking of the healing, the Lord has helped us in cases of breakdown, so that the matter of healing is more rapid now, under the Spirit's teaching.
S.McC. And so it says after the words "shall be healed." "And it shall come to pass that every living thing which moveth, whithersoever the double river shall come, shall live." That is, this great current or flow of healing grace and love has a double action; it is not only what is towards the saints, but it is what is towards God. That is the double action of it.
N.B.S. In chapter 41 there is an enlarging which
{350}
event round about the house increasing *upward*. Here, there is an enlarging *outward*. Does that come first, the enlarging God-ward, and then the enlarging outward?
S.McC. Yes. The importance of enlargement; Ezekiel is stressing that side, enlargement on the line of love. The heave-offering in the next chapter is wonderful. Not the testing, rugged, uneven lines of the inheritance in Joshua; it is not that side in Ezekiel, it is a matter of straight lines. The heave-offering in the next chapter, linked with the tribes, and the straight lines of the inheritance; meaning that the brethren are now moving on together in this matter of love, the healing service of the river having its place with us, so that we have these things that are healed, and then, as it says, "the fruit thereof shall be for food, and the leaf thereof for medicine," the medicinal qualities that enter into this stream of administration, for that is what it is. Just pending the rapture, as it were, the Lord is intensifying it with us.
C.E.J. Is a living condition of things in mind here, that everything should be living?
S.McC. Everything is living, as this double river comes in touch with it. Whether we think of the double river in relation to the Lord, and His activities on high, and the Spirit down below; or whether we think of it as the Spirit introducing into our hearts the love of God; or whether we think of it as ourselves loving God as helped by the Spirit; whatever form the double river may take, we can see that life is in mind; life in our relations with God, life in our relations with one another.
F.W. Would you please say a word as to verses 6 and 7: "And he said unto me, Son of man, hast thou seen this? And he led me, and brought me back to the bank of the river. When I returned, behold, on the bank of the river were very many trees on the one side and on the other."
S.McC. It is an important thing to see that. Recently,
{351}
we were talking to someone who was out of fellowship and thought he was getting help, and he implied that the brethren were coming back; whereas the point was, the Lord was bringing him back. That is what we all want to get help on. We may want the brethren to be brought back, but the Lord is, maybe, bringing me back, to show me the truth in the fulness of its bearing, especially in this matter of life.
F.W. It was Ezekiel who was brought back. Is there a suggestion that we have not taken, in detail, all the ministry of the past fifty years, and there is wisdom in looking back and seeing what it is that the Lord has really been saying in the last fifty years?
S.McC. That is the whole point, going back over the truth. One can speak for oneself, that one is amazed, in going over the reprinted ministry of beloved Mr. Taylor at the amount that we have missed, the amount that we have never noticed. It throws into relief how the Spirit of God was in that ministry, that it yields so much as you go back over it, even extending back through the years.
F.W. And you would value it as much now as ever?
S.McC. Certainly. I think we want to value to the full what has come to us through the leadership in the ministry in our time.
P.B. So it says, "and everything shall live whither the river cometh." Is that important?
S.McC. "Shall live." The important thing is to see that Divine Persons are in the matter and the saints are thriving, they are coming into life as under the influence of this great administrative flow, as we might refer to it.
V.T.S. Is God committed to that, in that way? It says, "Be not deceived: God is not mocked; ... but he that sows to the Spirit, from the Spirit shall reap eternal life," @Galatians 6: 7 -- 8.
S.McC. Yes, showing the need of making room for the Spirit.
{352}
THE ASSEMBLY AS THE REALM OF DIVINE RIGHTS
@1 Corinthians 1: 1 -- 3; @1 Corinthians 10: 30 -- 32; @1 Corinthians 11: 20 -- 26; @1 Corinthians 15: 7 -- 10
S.McC. In suggesting these passages to be read, one is thinking of the expression which enters into them, namely, "the assembly of God." This letter is often alluded to; often have we gone over the teaching contained in it. One thought that we might get fresh help in taking account of the assembly of God, as it is referred to in this epistle. In our day, when ruin and breakdown mark the public position, we could not claim to be the assembly of God -- far be the thought! But as available to each other in the light of @2 Timothy 2, we walk together in the light of what is becoming in, and proper to, the assembly of God, as in this and other epistles. And it would seem important that we should apprehend the greatness of the saints in any given locality, as walking in the light of the assembly. This letter is to help us as to the dignity of this wonderful realm constituted by the assembly of God; a realm that God's rights enter into in a peculiar way; a realm that is the base of all operations in any given locality, the assembly; a vessel that is particularly marked by the presence of the Spirit of God in it, and also marked by being the anointed vessel. The teaching in the letter has in mind that there should be found among the saints, in any given city, a vessel answering in holiness to the light within. The saints are referred to in different ways in this letter in the light of the assembly of God, some of which we referred to in other parts as to the temple and the body. It is important that we should have a right viewpoint of the saints in any given locality, the dignity that attaches to them in the light of this expression, as the assembly of God. It is a realm where
{353}
God is going to set out in an ordered way His own testimony. The assembly of God is a vessel to which He commits Himself, and where human glory, human power and human resource, are to be excluded, which would all belie the dignity of the anointing which attaches to this vessel in any given locality. But I think it is important to see how Paul begins with this thought in verse 2, "the assembly of God which is in Corinth, to those sanctified in Christ Jesus," reminding us of the dignity of the personnel who form the assembly of God. We are thus reminded of the divine right of proprietorship in a realm like this, that it is God's assembly, and a realm that is to be viewed, and moved in, in that light; and where the dignity that is suggested in these verses as characterising the personnel is to appear. It says, "called saints, with all that in every place call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, both theirs and ours;" the authority of Christ as Lord particularly entering into the earlier part of the letter in regard of the teaching.
Rem. So that it is an exceedingly exclusive sphere.
S.McC. Exactly; exclusive of man in relation to what he is after the flesh; exclusive of human resource. It is a realm where the order of man that is linked with "those sanctified in Christ Jesus, called saints," is peculiarly before us; where the presence of the Spirit of God is to be known and relied upon constantly all the way through, whether in relation to the glad tidings, the reading of the Scriptures, the meeting for prophetic ministry, or the service of God. "Do ye not know that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you?" -- @1 Corinthians 3: 16.
N.B.S. Would you say a word as to the difference in the bearing of "the assembly of God" here, and the Lord's word, "my assembly," in @Matthew 16?
S.McC. The Lord is not exactly alluding to the assembly there in a localised way, although the
{354}
expression of it would be seen in localities; He is not thinking of it exactly, either, in regard to just the time or the moment in any specific way in which it appears; He is thinking of it as covering the whole dispensation, as that which Hades¬ gates shall not prevail against. The light of that maintained in our localities helps us in the understanding of the dignity that attaches to what the saints are in a given locality.
W.J.B. Is the term "assembly of God" suggestive of the fact that the character of God is there; God is represented there?
S.McC. God is to be rightly represented there; it is His own realm. The saints constitute that in this city as moving in the light of the assembly, as conveyed in this epistle, and therefore it is important that we should see the dignity of the saints in our cities in this light, that it is a realm in which God is to be represented.
W.J.H. Would you say a little as to the distinction between "sanctified in Christ Jesus," and "called saints"?
S.McC. I suppose that "sanctified in Christ Jesus" embraces the totality of the work, in which the history of the man after the flesh is entirely closed up; and "called saints" would allude to the wonderful way in which we have been affected by the calling of God; God calling us in relation to these great dignified thoughts that are in His mind, calling us out of the realm where He has taken, up His abode.
G.J.D. Does the expression "the assembly of God" bear on the public testimonial side?
S.McC. This epistle is largely dealing with that. It is not a question of the assembly in heaven; it is a question of the assembly down here as the base of divine operations in our cities, where God sets forth His thoughts in testimony in an ordered way; the anointing involving that God commits Himself to the position, and the representation of God in that realm involves
{355}
that we know God, and are formed in the moral characteristics that are linked with the way that God has shone out in the glad tidings and otherwise.
W.J.B. So we would have great respect to the thought of the assembly of God, not only in our own city, but in every place where the saints are found walking in the truth.
S.McC. Because it is divine property, and it is important that we should see that it is divine property. The teaching in this letter is to remind us of the dignity of it. It is not a realm in which human resource is to be exploited, but a realm in which human resource and all that is linked with man after the flesh is to be definitely refused, so that room is made for the Spirit of God amongst us.
G.J.D. Would we appreciate that, when we think of what Paul said in @Acts 20, "the assembly of God, which he has purchased with the blood of his own"?
S.McC. It shows the infinite cost that it has been to God, purchased at such cost, and therefore should be treasured in that light. I think we need to see what comes into this letter; it is a realm where the Spirit of God is to have prominence; prominence in the preaching, the teaching and in the working out of the distributions in the body. Whatever way we may think of it, the Spirit of God is stressed as the great resource that we are to rely on, if the thought as to this vessel is to be maintained in its proper dignity.
J.H.H. Is that why the beloved apostle was such a great help to the saints at Corinth? While he knew, probably, when he began this letter, the adjustment that was needed, yet he could see them in all their greatness, as from God's side?
S.McC. A very important thing. We can never serve the saints rightly unless we value and view them rightly. Even if concrete features may deny the true character of the saints according to the divine thought,
{356}
we can always resort in our minds to what the saints are abstractly, and clothe them in that light.
S.E.E. Do you mean that they are never less than that, whatever the outward evidences may be?
S.McC. Yes, so that Paul moves to bring in the needed adjustment that has been referred to, and to deal with what comes up, in the light of what he is referring to in these few verses.
C.E.J. Would you say that God has provided everything that is necessary from His side to enable us to be here for Him testimonially?
S.McC. Yes, and especially to work out this great thought of the assembly of God in a locality, and what the saints are, as set together in the light of it. The position has been divinely provided for, and the furnishings from the divine side are to be noted.
W.J.B. So that we need not be unduly anxious about matters. Primarily it is God's matter, and He has the situation in hand in every case. Is that not so?
S.McC. That is the great thing that we should see. It is God's realm and the Spirit of God is in that realm. Hence the importance of relying on the divine Presence in that light, so that God's thoughts may be set out in the ordered way in which they are intended to be set out. That is, as the thought of the assembly of God lays hold of our minds, the prime concern with us is that it belongs to God, and God is to be represented in it; His rights are to be acknowledge in it; His sovereignty is to be made room for in it. It is not a realm for human manoeuvring, but a realm where the Spirit of God is to be relied upon all the way through.
A.W.G. Does the apostle himself serve as conscious of his own call being a divine calling, and that according to God's will, and would that dignify his service and the saints in his eyes as he seeks to serve them?
S.McC. It is a great matter that we should learn how to rely on the work of God in the saints, so that when
{357}
the truth comes up and is to be maintained (as in this letter it had to be maintained), we can rely and base our confidence on the work of God in the saints, and the presence of the Spirit among them.
W.J.H. These great thoughts would be equally true, would they not, in smaller towns and even villages where there are saints walking in the truth?
S.McC. It says, "in every place." It is inclusive of every place where the saints are found walking in the truth, and in the light of what is becoming to, and proper in the assembly. The number may be numerically very small, but nevertheless the truth equally applies, as it would apply in a city like this where numbers are so ponderous.
J.H.H. I was thinking that when Paul came to Philippi, he sat down and spoke to the women who had assembled. Of course, it is not the assembly of God there at that time, but it seems that Paul could link on with the work of God in a small company like this.
S.McC. It is a great thing that we should know how to link on with the work of God among the saints, and to clothe them with divine thoughts as we sit down together in relation to one another; as we are now, I mean; as we think of what there is in the body of the saints, and how much depends on what there is in the body of the saints; it is a great matter to cling to the abstract thought, wherever we are, in reading meetings or otherwise.
G.H.W. Would this linking on be seen in @Acts 18: 10, where the Lord says to Paul, "I have much people in this city"?
S.McC. Yes. The Lord enters into the position in a peculiar way. He tells Paul that he is not to be afraid to speak, that He is with him; showing that the local position is such an important matter that the Lord takes a personal hand in it in @Acts 18, to stand by the maintenance
{358}
of the truth in regard to the assembly of God.
W.J.B. I was just thinking of the importance and dignity of the local position, however small or obscure it may be, whether in a little village or a great city. So that we would need to tread softly in the matter of influencing brethren in a locality, for fear we might encroach upon the divine realm.
S.McC. There would be holy concern as to the matter, and we would view very soberly, in the light of what the assembly of God is in any given place, any thought of writing it off, or setting it aside. Paul does not make any suggestion in this letter because of the conditions that obtained, of setting the assembly aside, or, as it were, beginning on a new foundation. There is no suggestion of that in the letter at all. He writes for their building up, not for their overthrowing. The whole body and substance of the ministry in these two letters is not for their overthrowing, it is for their building up; therefore the importance of keeping in mind that assembly judgments are always right, *in principle*.
F.W. Calling on the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ. Would you say something as to the importance and force of the word "name" there?
S.McC. I think it is that we are in the sphere of the Lord's absence. The Lord is not here, in the light of what is referred to here; it is the scene of His betrayal. But the saints are here and they are calling on His Name, bringing in the element of dependence, and setting out where the resource of the saints is. There is what is linked with His Name objectively on the one hand, and what is linked with the Spirit and His presence in the vessel too.
J.C. Would you be free to open up that remark as to assembly judgments being always right in principle?
S.McC. We must not think that on account of what
{359}
was done recently in another land that we are to regard assembly judgments lightly. I am sure that we shall never be helped or supported in regarding assembly judgments lightly. We are to regard assembly judgments properly in their dignity. So that *in principle* assembly judgments are always right. They may be shown to be wrong, as in the case I have referred to, but in principle the assembly is always right.
J.H.H. Have we any scripture in the New Testament that would suggest anything else?
S.McC. No; and it is a great thing that we should not be careless in regard to the great thought of the assembly of God in any given place; that we should hold the saints in a given place, and what they arrive at and what they do, in the proper dignity that belongs to them as moving in the light of the assembly of God in the place.
W.J.B. So that we would not question an assembly judgment, unless it is clear that some divine principle has been broken?
S.McC. Exactly, because the Lord is with His people. We are to remember that.
G.W.B. Does that give point to what was said a few moments ago about the importance of influencing what may be done in a place?
S.McC. What holy care is needed! It is God's realm and therefore priestly and holy care would be needed in our regard for it and our movements in relation to it.
F.W. Is that because what is done, is done, or is ostensibly done, in His Name?
S.McC. Yes, and the Spirit is among the saints.
E.B.McC. There is no excuse for an assembly judgment not being according to truth.
S.McC. What one is thinking about is the necessity of seeing the dignity of the assembly of God, and, in that light, that we should not lightly regard what is linked
{360}
with, nor what is arrived at by the saints in any given city.
E.B.McC. It is a great administrative body, is it not?
S.McC. Yes, it is the greatest administrative body on earth, and we think of the personnel that compose it, "sanctified in Christ Jesus." That is, it represents the closing up of the entire history linked with the man of sin and shame. We are to learn to think of the saints in their proper dignity, if we are going to serve effectively in helping them in any matter.
L.G.S. And it always functions in administration locally, does it not?
S.McC. The saints in a given locality have only administrative authority within that realm. They have their own realm of administrative authority in the place, and not outside of it.
A.C. It says in @John 20 that "Jesus came and stood in the midst," and then again, "eight days after" (which takes in a new dispensation) "Jesus comes, ... and stood in the midst." Is that not a fixed position? It says in @Matthew 18: 20, "where two or three are gathered together unto my name, there am I in the midst of them." He is there to guide and direct even the two or three.
S.McC. Matthew would be quite distinct from @John 20 in that sense. In Matthew the Lord does not ascend, but in John the Lord ascends and He comes to His people. His presence is not continuous in John; it is continuous in Matthew.
J.D. Would the contemplation of this, "all that ... call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ," promote holy feelings amongst us? I was thinking of the Name.
S.McC. It would, because you are thinking of the renown of that Person. The Name is linked with the renown of that Person whom God has made Lord and Christ: "the name of our Lord Jesus Christ." We do not take other names on our lips, as it were, we take
{361}
*this* Name on our lips. Other lords may have had dominion over us, but this is the Name that stands out, and upon which we call.
C.E.J. Is it that all we do, we would seek to do as the Lord would do it Himself?
S.McC. Yes, exactly; and to do things in the dignity that becomes the vessel that is called the assembly of God.
G.H.W-n. Would "both theirs and ours" bring in the link that we have with our brethren in other places?
S.McC. Yes, showing that the light that would apply to the saints at Corinth equally applies to the saints in other parts, so that we are linked together in unity in that way. While the local assembly is a distinct vessel by itself, divinely furnished, yet we are bound up together with the saints in other places in the unity that is suggested in these verses.
A.E.D. Despite the conditions in Corinth, it says at the end of the epistle, "the assemblies of Asia salute you." There would be respect from those assemblies to the assembly in Corinth.
S.McC. Exactly. It is important that the thought of the assembly in any place, and the saints as forming it, should always be maintained in their proper dignity before our minds and souls.
W.J.B. Chapter 10 would show, would it not, that our consideration is not to be confined to the assembly of God? It goes out to Jews and Greeks as well.
S.McC. It is rather remarkable how the public position comes on to our view in chapter 10, and how the apostle begins that passage with, "All things are lawful, but all are not profitable; all things are lawful, but all do not edify. Let no one seek his own advantage, but that of the other." Then, "If I partake with thanksgiving why am I spoken evil of for what I give thanks for? Whether therefore ye eat, or drink, or whatever ye do, do all things to God's glory. Give no occasion to stumbling, whether to Jews,
{362}
or Greeks, or the assembly of God. Even as I also please all in all things; not seeking my own profit, but that of the many, that they may be saved." It gives a remarkable touch here to the assembly of God in the way it is referred to, alongside of Jews or Greeks in the public position.
A.W.G. Is it, so to speak, the philanthropy of God that would be referred to, as bringing forward the Jews and Greeks in that relation, and the assembly following? Would it be the expression of the grace of God and His philanthropy in that way?
S.McC. Well, it would have in mind God's operations through the assembly that we are concerned as to how God is coming out, how God is to be represented, and how persons are to be saved; that we are not there to give occasion of stumbling, we are there having in mind that persons might be saved. Not pleasing ourselves, as Paul says, "Even as I also please all in all things; not seeking my own profit, but that of the many, that they may be saved." That did not mean that Paul was compromising the truth; it has to do with a right representation of God in view of persons being saved.
G.A. Would the scripture in @Acts 17: 17 illuminate for us, perhaps, what you have in mind: "He reasoned therefore in the synagogue with the Jews, and those who worshipped, and in the market-place every day with those he met with"?
S.McC. Well, we can see how Paul was concerned always by all means to save some; and that is a great matter in the right representation of God. He is dealing here particularly with the matter of liberty, as he says, "for why is my liberty judged by another conscience? If I partake with thanksgiving, why am I spoken evil of for what I give thanks for?" It is a very important thing, where the truth is not compromised, that we do not, as it were, entrench ourselves upon one another in the way of presuming to
{363}
tell one another as to what we should give thanks for, and as to what we have liberty for, in our relation with God.
E.B.McC. It should always be a great matter with us to commend God to others, that they may be saved, as the apostle says.
S.McC. Yes, and it is rather remarkable that the assembly of God is brought into this passage here, that we are to give no occasion to stumbling. The note says, to 'be offenceless ... to both Jews and Greeks and the assembly of God.'
J.H.H. What a beloved brother Paul must have been! How he could come down to them! "Even as I also please all in all things." How he could come down, let us say, to the weakest saint, and yet hold the truth in all its dignity and height!
S.McC. Maintaining it uncompromisingly, as he does in this letter, yet having such an outlook in regard to all, as he says, "Even as I" (it is the emphatic '*I*') "also please all in all things." That did not mean that he was giving up the ground in regard to the truth; it is his attitude and outlook in relation to all, having in mind their salvation.
J.D. And then, would he not have in mind, too, in regard to the assembly, God's glory?
S.McC. Yes, and especially as he is stressing the matter of liberty. As beloved Mr. Taylor once said of Paul when he went up to Peter, "I do not suppose that Peter ever saw liberty in a man, as he saw it in Paul." Paul is stressing this matter of liberty in regard to what we give thanks to God for, and in the matter of what we are doing. We are to do all things to God's glory, giving no occasion to stumbling, whether to Jews, or Greeks, or the assembly of God.
J.C. Would the light of this scripture preserve us from internal interference? We often try to regiment one another to our own fixed ideas.
{364}
S.McC. I think that is the point of it, that we should not seek to interfere in one another's houses, and in one another's matters, and in one another's liberties, where the truth is not compromised. We are to give no occasion for stumbling to Jews, or Greeks, or the assembly of God.
S.E.E. The apostle refers to the conscience several times in this passage. What has conscience to do with these matters?
S.McC. Conscience is a great thing where it is regulated by the word of God. It is an important matter that we should see the place that conscience has, as regulated by the word of God, because it is a saving element to man.
W.J.B. If we neglect conscience, we shall make shipwreck as to faith.
S.McC. That is the truth. It is important that our consciences be regulated by the word of God. Sometimes you hear persons entrenching themselves in a position, where they say, 'Well, I have no conscience about the matter,' and they may be altogether wrong in it. That is not ground for any of us to take, because our consciences must be regulated by the word of God. The Lord examines us.
S.E.E. I was thinking, rather, of the other side; that is, the seeking to impose things upon persons against their conscience, where they have a genuine conscience about things.
S.McC. Well, that is what Paul is dealing with here, that he would have regard for persons where there might be an occasion of stumbling.
G.W.B. Does it help to see in verse 29 that the apostle says, "but conscience, I mean, not thine own, but that of the other"?
S.McC. He says, "But if any one say to you. This is offered to holy purposes, do not eat, for his sake that pointed it out, and conscience sake; but conscience, I mean, not thine own, but that of the other." But then
{365}
he says, "for why is my liberty judged by another conscience?" He balances the truth to show us the seriousness of one person imposing his conscience upon another person, where another person may have liberty and the truth not be compromised.
G.J.G. Is the great point of liberty in the apostle's own soul, "the earth is the Lord's and its fulness"?
S.McC. Yes, and he says, "Everything sold in the shambles eat, making no inquiry for conscience sake." "For every creature of God is good," as he says in @1 Timothy 4: 4. It is a matter of liberty here, while he is having regard for conscience where it may be pointed out that the thing is offered to holy purposes.
A.C. This is a person that has accepted an invitation from an unbeliever, and while they are eating the man that has invited him points out that it was offered to holy purposes.
S.McC. Yes.
H.E. Do the first two scriptures and the truth bearing upon them greatly help us in coming together at the Lord's supper, in the way we appropriate the saints?
S.McC. The chapter is dealing with that; the appropriating of one another and the enjoying of one another. That brings us to the next passage, where Paul says, "When ye come therefore together into one place, it is not to eat the Lord's supper. For each one in eating takes his *own* supper before others, and one is hungry and another drinks to excess. Have ye not then houses for eating and drinking? or do ye despise the assembly of God, and put to shame them who have not? What shall I say to you? shall I praise you? In this point I do not praise." He is bringing into our minds another point in the truth in regard to the dignity of the assembly of God, the possibility of despising the assembly of God by the way we act and by the way we do certain things.
{366}
S.E.E. Does that emphasise the need for respect for the assembly of God? I was thinking of the dignity in the first passage, and the liberty in the second.
S.McC. Well, exactly. He opens up the passage by referring to conditions among them, "I hear there exist divisions among you, and I partly give credit to it." He is taking account of conditions among them. Then he says, "For there must also be sects among you, that the approved may become manifest among you." Then he goes on to speak of the Lord's supper, which is the great centre of unity in regard of the position. It is an important thing, if the dignity of the assembly of God is to be maintained, that we do not move on isolationist lines; that we move together in the light of all that attaches to the assembly of God in a place. Especially in a city like this, where there are so many subdivisions, how important it is that there should not be sub-divisional influence, but that the saints should be moving together in the light of the dignity attaching to the assembly of God in the place.
S.E.E. Would the recognition, that the apostle emphasises here, of the fact that it is the Lord's supper, and not our supper, help us in that?
S.McC. We are in the realm of the Lord's dominical rights. What a serious thing it is to interfere with His dominical rights! The supper is brought into its true setting in the assembly by Paul's ministry. He is stressing the matter of headship in the beginning of the chapter, in this great thought of the authority of God, working down through Christ, through the man to the woman; then the truth of the supper; then the truth of the body; but then this great important point as to the dignity of the assembly of God, in which the supper is set.
G.J.D. Is he seeking to eliminate from our minds the matter of social caste and all that sort of thing, that makes for so much grief sometimes?
{367}
S.McC. It is all to be excluded, and all that would centre around men and persons. All that is to be excluded in this realm. It is God's realm. Our natural predilections, love for certain persons more than others, preference for some to minister more than others, all this is interfering with divine rights of proprietorship in this dignified realm, the assembly of God. All that is linked with that is to be excluded, so that, the Spirit of God being amongst us in this vessel, we are to rely on Him, and make room for Him, in the setting forward of whom He will.
W.J.B. So then, if God has given a brother ability to minister and he is in fellowship, we leave that matter with the Lord; we do not have our predilections and prejudices; we respect this divine territory and the divine rights in it, do we not?
S.McC. Yes, and the great need of recognising it is God's realm, so that every element of partisanship is judged in our souls every element of natural predilection is judged, so that we make room for what is in this realm, especially in the light of what lies in the body of the saints, the work of God and all the latent wealth linked with the body of the saints.
W.J.H. Is that in keeping with what the apostle says, "For ye can prophesy one by one"? That is, he makes room for all that may be able to edify the saints.
S.McC. Yes. It is a question of the whole position, and therefore, how we need to judge unsparingly in our hearts any suggestion of certain sections of the city having particular affinities or coteries or whatever may enter in to becloud the great thought of the assembly of God!
F.W. So, is it in that realm that you referred to, that the Lord's rights and the power of the Holy Spirit are to be recognised? It is not the opinions, as it were, of brethren, but rather the place that belongs to the Lord and the Spirit in the assembly.
S.McC. Exactly, so that we do not set man forward.
{368}
I think we have to learn that it is God's realm and it is not a question of setting man forward in this realm. It is God's realm, and we are to make room for divine sovereignty in it, in relation to the whole position.
S.E.E. Would the apostle provide an example of that in chapter 12: 28, where he says, "And God has set certain in the assembly," and then he refers to numerous gifts and so on? The footnote says that the significance of the verb is, "set for himself," and another reference to that particular verb shows it has a reflexive force, so that the glory of the thing falls back upon the One who does it; so that the glory of everything is for God in the assembly.
S.McC. Some of the Corinthians were using their gifts to exploit their own prowess and ability, a very subtle snare that we might fall into. Especially are we to be sober and calculated in our outlook in the cities in which we are set, as to the assembly of God in it, so that we do not entrench upon God's right of proprietorship. It is His realm, it belongs to Him, and the Spirit of God is there, and we are to rely on the Spirit of God; refusing every feature linked with human strength and human energy. We do not need to be unduly anxious about setting persons forward. If persons are gifted, then gift will make room for itself. We are to be concerned that God is made way for in His own realm, and His rights are recognised in it, and that the Spirit of God is recognised as the power for everything in the realm.
D.J.M. As in @Acts 13, "Separate me now," and then the brethren recognising it?
S.McC. Yes. The Spirit of God is sovereign in that realm. It is what He is setting forward, not what I want to set forward. I may want to set myself forward; and we need to judge that in our hearts.
W.J.B. I might want to hold someone else back. That is just as grave an error.
S.McC. That is equally as bad. We are to make
{369}
room for the divine right of way in this realm; the promotion of mutuality among the brethren. I know the difficulties the brethren have in a big city like this where there are so many, but it is a great matter that we should make room for what there is in the *body of the saints*, as adding to the wealth of the position locally.
G.C.S. Features of spirituality and mutuality coming to light?
S.McC. So that in the last scripture read, Paul would never forget what he was in his unregenerate days in persecuting the assembly, and he retires into what he was by God's grace: "by God's grace I am what I am." Why should any of us try to make out that we are something else than we are? Why should we not, in the light of the greatness of the assembly of God, accept what we are, as in this realm where God asserts His rights.
{370}
THE ADMINISTRATION OF CLEANSING
@2 Corinthians 2: 4 -- 11; @Leviticus 14: 10 -- 20; @1 Kings 7: 23
I want to say a word, dear brethren, on the administration of cleansing. It is something that fills a great place in the working out of things in our local gatherings, and something that in its operation magnifies the spirit and grace of our dispensation. The administration of cleansing involves certain principles, and we must observe principles, otherwise we lose our way. Principles never change; *we* change -- how well we know it! When I allude to the administration of cleansing, I am alluding to the way it works out formally amongst the saints. I need not say perhaps, that there are informal ways in which it works out, for the means of help in the divine realm are abundant, especially when it comes to the adjustment of our relations with God and with one another; the adjustment of our relations with the truth, because the truth must have its place. There is no lack in divine suggestions that are made to us as to the abundance of resource that is available to help in this matter, whether formally or informally in adjusting relations in whatever way it may be. There often is a lack with us, and the Lord would help us to see the importance of this administration.
The word 'administration' is a good word in itself. It is a word that the Spirit of God has taken on and made much use of. I know there are times when administration is referred to, that immediately the care meeting comes into some of our minds, and cases of unrighteousness or evil. While administration enters into these matters, divine administration is far more extended than that. But it is all part of the administration.
{371}
Paul brings up this matter of the brother that had been withdrawn from; one who had walked with them in fellowship in the local assembly at Corinth; one who had been the subject, as I would take it, in what comes out in this second chapter, of tender solicitude on the part of the apostle at least, although I do not think that Chloe, Stephanas, Fortunatus and Achaicus would be behind. It is important to understand that cases such as are represented here, those who are no longer with us should be the subject of priestly care and solicitation. You will notice how much the priest is mentioned in @Leviticus 13 and 14, some seventy to eighty times, all to impress our minds with the priestly outlook on matters. The tent of meeting does not come into our view until well on in chapter 14. The priest is stressed throughout, and I am sure that the brethren will have noticed and been affected as this chapter (@2 Corinthians 2) was read, by the heart of the great priest who is writing this letter. He speaks of distress of heart, he speaks of tears, he speaks of the love which he has abundantly toward them. Who but a priest in reflecting on the subject of the writing here, could write in these holy terms! He has a full judgment of the evil involved in the case. He is not palliating the evil, and I am sure that as time went on the evil and the character of it did not become attenuated in his mind, but there is a time for everything; and while in the chapter we have read, reference is made to the judicial infliction on the one who had sinned involving that the saints could no longer walk with him, the time had come for the operation of the administration of cleansing, and we are to see what enters into it. As I have said, Paul fully measured the evil. It was *the kind* of evil that could not be passed by lightly. Paul refers to it as 'such fornication' and 'this deed,' the kind of evil that required that the person should be withdrawn from and nothing less, if the holiness of the anointed vessel, the
{372}
sanctity of the realm and the honour attaching to the Lord's name were to be maintained.
You will notice in @1 Corinthians 5, that there is no reference to repentance in the whole chapter. There is no suggestion in that chapter of looking for repentance. Instead, there is the emphasis that this realm, where God dwells and where holiness is essential, must be cleared of this kind of evil. So he says in @1 Corinthians 5: 2, "Ye are puffed up, and ye have not rather mourned, in order that he that has done this deed might be taken away out of the midst of you." There is no thought here of keeping him in. Notice the language employed, "in order that he that has done this deed might be *taken away out of the midst of you*." Then later on, in verse 6, he says, "Your boasting is not good. Do ye know that a little leaven leavens the whole lump? Purge out the old leaven, that ye may be a new lump." There is necessity for this strong action, purging out the leaven, that which was amongst them. You will notice that the word 'purging' is used only twice, here in @1 Corinthians 5 and in @2 Timothy 2. The word 'purified' in @2 Timothy 2 is the same as the word here, and it says there, "If therefore one shall have purified himself from these, in *separating himself* from them." It might be said, Can it not be purged; can the purification not go on, just in the matter of judging the thing there? In the profession around us they profess to work out @2 Timothy 2: 21 by saying that they have a judgment about conditions, but what can they do? They say they can do nothing, they have to go on with it. But that will never do! The purification in @2 Timothy 2 involves *separation* from the vessels to dishonour; and the purging, dear brethren, in @1 Corinthians 5 has in mind a thorough dealing with leavening character of evil: "purge *out* the old leaven that ye may be a new lump, according as ye are unleavened." What about
{373}
the one who has sinned? Maybe he is repentant. That is not the point here, dear brethren. It is the gravity of the sin, the holiness of the realm, and the greatness of the saints in the light of what they are in this letter, because the aim of the ministry is to secure a vessel answering in sanctification to the light within it. God is there, His holiness is there, and let none of us think that the magnification of grace minimises holiness, or unrighteousness, or lawlessness. The magnification of grace is to show us how things can be met. In this chapter the character of evil being the kind it is, is met by excision, so the last word is, "remove the wicked person from amongst yourselves." This particular kind of case has to be dealt with on this line. It *necessitates* the *judicial infliction* that Paul alludes to in @2 Corinthians 2.
It may be said that if he was repentant, what more is to be looked for when he is restored? I suggest to the brethren certain features linked with the subject that is before us, the administration of cleansing. We are to understand what the administration of cleansing means. We might say in regard to the leper in the Old Testament, is he not healed, has not repentance taken place? But that is not all. As Mr. Taylor once said, "Healed leprosy is not enough." *More* is required, as the administration of cleansing sets out. Normally, in cases amongst us where there is repentance, remission is extended, but the degree of the sin in @1 Corinthians 5 requires this extreme exercise of discipline.
There are added thoughts which come into view, as we shall see, but I want to say a little more about this passage in @2 Corinthians 2. We have to get the balance of the truth, dear brethren, in all these matters. It is not the time in @2 Corinthians 2 for judicial infliction; it is the time for the administration of cleansing; it is the time of restoration; it is the time of setting up again; and Paul says, "Sufficient to such a one is this
{374}
rebuke which has been inflicted by the many," @2 Corinthians 2: 6. Apparently, they were not unanimous about it in Corinth; they were not all of one mind about it; but it was inflicted by the many. As we well know, unanimity is not according to God in the assembly. It is not a question of unanimity. It is a question of unity, the unity of the Spirit, and this is bound up with the 'many' that are operating in regard of the matter on hand according to divine light afforded. It says, "on the contrary ye should rather *shew* grace." We have been speaking about grace, dear brethren, but what Paul is referring to here is not speaking about grace -- it is one thing to speak about it from the platform -- but it is a great matter to *show* it. That is what we need, persons who can *show* grace. We might have wonderful readings about it, but we want to come down to the showing of grace. He says, "ye should rather shew grace and encourage, lest perhaps such a one" -- remember that, dear brethren, remember how he said, "such a one" in @1 Corinthians 5: 11. He is now speaking again, using this word, "such a one". He says, "encourage, lest perhaps such a one." Who is the "such a one" here? The brother who belongs to the assembly; he belongs to the family of God, he belongs to us. These persons withdrawn from *belong* to us and we should cry to God for their recovery. If on a priestly basis we can help them, let us help them, but not on a social basis. Let us never have to do with such on a social basis, otherwise we may become defiled and partakers of their sins. The priest can deal with sin authoritatively because he represents God, and if we have to do with sin or with persons who are characterised by sin, let us have to do with them and with it on a priestly basis, guarding ourselves, "girt about in our loins" with the truth. How important these matters are, especially the balance of the truth in connection with priestly activities. He says, "lest perhaps
{375}
such a one should be swallowed up with excessive grief." Oh, the way Paul couches the truth in this chapter, replete with the feelings of a priest who is with God about the matter! He is not speaking arbitrarily here. He speaks with apostolic authority in the first letter bringing in light that must meet the situation that was defiling the saints. It *must* be dealt with and dealt with *authoritatively* as in @1 Corinthians 5 by the assembly.
Now the priest is before us dear brethren, none the less the apostle, but the priest operating in regard to helping the brethren as to the administration of cleansing, and he says, "Wherefore I exhort you to assure him of your love." He is not in fellowship, yet. But he is operating towards the saints in view of his full restoration, and he brings love into the teaching, love into the subject. We might have everything, but if we have not love, we have nothing. Oh, the importance of love! Not only in relation to the truth but in relation to our links with one another. We want to be like God. God is love! His love is a holy love. The lake of fire where evil will be consigned and limited throughout all eternity, is the necessity of His love. We should be like God, and have a judgment about things as God has a judgment about things, and then we will be marked by the features that enter into the administration of cleansing. It says, "Wherefore I exhort you to assure him of your love. For to this end also I have written, that I might know by putting you to the test, if as to everything ye are obedient. But to whom ye forgive anything, I also; for I also, what I have forgiven, if I have forgiven anything, it is for your sakes in the person of Christ." You see how he is in line with the brethren. He is not moving apart from them in the way in which we are now referring to it. He says, "to whom ye forgive anything, I also." Think of the way he writes here, and he says, "if I have forgiven anything, it is for your sakes in the person of Christ." It is on the high level on which he is
{376}
moving as drawing attention to the administration of cleansing in regard to this erring one that had been the subject of judicial infliction, as Paul alludes to it, the rebuke, which involved his being put away. He says, "it is for your sakes in the person of Christ; that we might not have Satan get an advantage against us." Notice that, "against *us*." We are to allow nothing on the part of the enemy to divide the saints and the ministers, to come between the ministers themselves and to come between the saints. Paul says, "ye are in our hearts, to die together, and live together," @2 Corinthians 7: 3. Oh, dear brethren, what a holy system we are in, where divine affections are radiating and where the radiancy of divine love is being diffused through those that have been the subjects of its operations!
Those of you who read the Synopsis (and I hope that all the young men and young women here read the Synopsis, if they do not, they should), may recall Mr. Darby saying in regard of the conflict in @Ephesians 6, "The enemy is subtle, we have to withstand his stratagems even more than his power."
Read the Scriptures, of course; they must have the first place, for ministry is not the Scriptures. The Scriptures are the divinely inspired Word of God, the ministry is not; nevertheless the ministry is authoritative because it is the Spirit's voice to the assembly, but it is not inspired, it is not infallible. The Scriptures are inspired; they have their own authority. The Scriptures carry the standard of the truth, and it is well that the brethren should sit in priestly examination of what is being said now and have a judgment about it. That is the priesthood in Numbers, that what is being said is being discerned. Discerned by the standard of truth in the ministry? Not exactly in the ministry, but in the *Scriptures*. The standard is in the Scriptures, dear brethren; even the ministry must be tested by the standard of truth in the Scriptures. Let us not relegate
{377}
the holy sacred letters, the Scriptures, the divinely inspired Word of God, in any way to a place of inferiority. Let us keep them in all their dignity as that in which the standard of the truth is presented and by which all things must be regulated; of course in the power of the Spirit; the Spirit is the truth.
Now I come to @Leviticus 14. The section that we have read, dear brethren, is a wonderful section. You will read, it is a wonderful section. You will notice how much is devoted to this subject. The brethren are speaking a lot about it these days, and asking many questions. The Spirit of God puts a lot on record in these chapters. Oh, you say, but you are referring to Leviticus; that is not the New Testament! The Scriptures are one, they cannot be broken. We *must* maintain the unity of the Scriptures in relation to the balance of the truth, but we must never allow the Old exactly to regulate the New. In the working out of *our* matters, we must let the New regulate the Old, and therefore when we come to @Leviticus 13 and 14 it is replete with spiritual instruction in regard to the administration of cleansing. This man that is referred to here is to be presented for cleansing. He is not presented to be healed -- notice that. The healing has taken place. One of the great things that come up in the enquiring minds of the brethren is if leprosy is healed, what more is to be looked for in one withdrawn from, but who has expressed repentance and yet *his course requires*, because of the gravity of the sin, that he should be withdrawn from. What *more* is to be looked for? Well, @Leviticus 14 helps us on that matter. There is a good deal that we have not time to go into, as to the washing of the garments, the shaving of the hair and the bathing in water. It is all part of the administration of cleansing -- not to keep the man out; that is not the point here. The whole point is to bring the man *in*. You are not looking for something else to keep him out, you are looking, as it were, for
{378}
something to bring him in. Oh, we want to be in line with God, dear brethren, in these matters! If souls are moving our way as affected by the work of recovery, we want to make the *most possible* of what we find. We do not want to be on the lines of searching out evil. One was referring to it recently, as the beloved and honoured servant in New York said in a remarkable letter (which the brethren will soon see when the published letters come out) in regard to witness, that God never helps us on the lines of seeking out evil. Notice the importance of this. He helps us as evil comes *out*. He helps us to deal with it, but He *does not* help us in ferreting out evil. It is a great matter, in the operation of things in the assembly, that we are not to be on the line of ferreting out evil! Evil will come to light, and when it comes to light let us not be slow in dealing with it, because we are to be like God in that respect too.
So in @Leviticus 14 this man is coming up for cleansing, not for *rebuke*, for criticism, or something that will send him back outside the camp. He is coming up for presentation. What a word, dear brethren, in this chapter! It says in verse 11: "And the priest that cleanseth him shall present the man."
"Oh." some brother says, "I do not like to link on with that kind of man! He has had such a history!" Not this priest here! It says this priest is to *present* the man. What a word that is! What dignity enters into this word! It is a word in the divine vocabulary, a word that is used in relation to divine Persons Themselves. You will remember how Paul uses it in relation to Christ as to His presenting the assembly to Himself; how he, Paul, uses it himself in Corinth in relation to the saints being presented as a chaste virgin to Christ. We have to understand this word. We have to understand these great terms of
{379}
the truth. We do not want to devaluate the currency. We do not want to use spiritual expressions -- what I might call divine expressions -- loosely. We want to keep on the gold standard. It enters into this great matter of the administration of cleansing. It says, "the priest that cleanseth him shall present the man." Now it says in the furnishings in verse 10, "on the eighth day he shall take two he-lambs without blemish, and one yearling *ewe*-lamb" -- notice that word "ewe" -- "without blemish, and three tenth parts of fine flour mingled with oil, for an oblation, and one log of oil."
Two things are mentioned here that are not used very often. The ewe-lamb is one. It is mentioned in connection with the fulfilling of the days of the Nazarite in @Numbers 6. It comes into his offering. The only other time it comes in in these books is in this relation here where the man is being *presented*. It is a dignified thought. You understand the dignity that enters, into the fulfilment of the day of Nazariteship. What wealth, what dignity attend the completing of those days! And this is a dignified matter here. The administration of cleansing involves this ewe-lamb, no doubt an allusion to what you would expect in the man that is being presented. The second is, "and one log of oil." Now this is something new, something different; it had never been seen before. So, dear brethren, when we ask these questions as to what more we would look for in the restoration of a person, this is one of the things that we would expect to find in the working out of the administration of cleansing, the feature of the log of oil coming into view. You will notice that it is the twelfth part of a hin. You will notice in Scripture the much use of the numeral twelve, not that I want to put too much into it. It is here abstrusely in the log of oil. The Spirit is suggested in the log of oil -- a special touch as to the Spirit -- not in a very extended way. But there is a suggestion here in the log of oil
{380}
of something that we have to look for. The numeral twelve, as we know, is the love number. It is the great number that enters into the vessel of administrative glory in @Revelation 21, and I believe that the one log of oil suggests among other things what we would *expect* to see in persons that are coming under the administration of cleansing, a link of affinity between them and the system that they are having to do with and of which they are the subject of the operations. The Spirit is here in the assembly; He is not in the world, He is in the assembly. In the man that is being cleared -- he is being *cleared*, he is being cleansed -- you would look for this kind of affinity, not exactly a great extended matter -- a twelfth part of a hin -- but you would see love there, not in a fully developed way but in an abstruse way. In Galatians the first feature of the fruit of the Spirit is love. Paul stresses, in @2 Corinthians 2, the element of love, and I might say the element of love is in the one log of oil. It is a great thing to notice how that enters into this matter.
"And the priest that cleanseth him shall present the man that is to be cleansed and those things before Jehovah, at the entrance of the tent of meeting." Oh, the glory and dignity of the assembly! It is coming into our view here. It is coming to the man's view. It is well that the man should see in being presented, the dignity of *this* position, the entrance of the tent of meeting, the dignity of God's assembly, the greatness of it, the vessel of *grace*, the anointed vessel! What a vessel it is! And this man draws near with the priest -- with the *priest*! The right kind of man is presenting him, the right kind of element is presenting him, the *priest*, who having the Spirit has capacity to think and act for God. You say he is acting for the man. Certainly, but he is acting for God and representing God in what is being done. And so the importance, in the administration of cleansing, of priestly minds
{381}
and priestly hearts. It is not a matter of anyone taking on the matter; it is the *priest* that enters into the matter. Of course, we do not have special priests in Christianity; *all* the saints are priests as having the Holy Spirit, but there are those who have developed capacity in the priesthood as making room for the Holy Spirit. And so Galatians says, "ye who are *spiritual* restore such a one in a spirit of meekness, considering thyself lest *thou* also be tempted," showing how the priest is regulated. The "spiritual" represents the priesthood from the side I am speaking of it, and they are regulated in dealing with sin; they have to beware, and girt lest they also be tempted. So it says here that "the priest shall take one he-lamb, and present it for a trespass-offering, and the log of oil, and wave them as a wave-offering before Jehovah "
Now I want in passing to refer to this horizontal action. You will notice it is not a heave-offering here; it is not the vertical action. It is the horizontal action. It says, "the priest shall take one he-lamb, and present it for a trespass-offering, and the log of oil -- and *wave* them as a wave-offering before Jehovah." The wave offering would take into account all upon the horizontal plane. It is before Jehovah; it is at the entrance of the tent of meeting; all that is linked with the horizontal plane would be taken into account in this great matter. I suppose it would leave such an impression on the man, and on those that were looking on, that they would never forget. How often it does, dear brethren, in the working out of the administration of cleansing. When we see a soul having fully judged himself, healed, cleared, cleansed, we see him set up in relation to God and in relation to the assembly. What a sight! What a sight for heaven, and what a sight for us, the saints! It is a wonderful sight! How we should rejoice in the wonderful work of recovery and the administration of cleansing linked with it! Much is made of the man
{382}
being covered by the oil, his head, his hands and his feet. Well, these are all added matters that we would look for, in any one who has judged sin. You would look for features of the Spirit's presence. The natural energy and the energy of the flesh unjudged which caused the leprosy, which has been the means of the lawlessness, is now replaced by the kind of power that this world does not understand, presented in the log of oil. Now, you will notice that there are degrees in leprosy. Have the brethren ever thought of that? We often think of leprosy as all one thing, but there are degrees even in leprosy. There are degrees in sin. There are degrees in leprosy. So that if a man has leprosy in his head, if he is teaching what is evil, teaching what is wrong, he is *utterly* unclean. That is not said of the others, showing that there are degrees in leprosy.
Now I come to this matter of the sea. How dignified the administration of cleansing is in Solomon's time, as the light increases from the Mosaic side to the Davidic side and from the Davidic side to the Solomonic side. As the light increases, the requirements become greater, the administration becomes enlarged, so that the abundant provision made for the administration of cleansing in the wonderful system of things under Solomon, who sets out the great feature of sonship, is something to be noticed. The very word "sea" -- what a word! It says, "he made the sea," it is not a bottle of water or a little vessel, it is a *sea*! It is intended to convey large thoughts, inculcate large thoughts into our minds, in regard to the administration of cleansing, and the interesting thing about it is that it had much greater capacity than what was actually held in it. Generally it carried two thousand baths, but its capacity was three thousand baths, meaning, I take it, that the principle in Christianity is 'more and more'; if there is need for more it can be brought in, its capacity is there, two thousand baths, but it can be extended to three thousand baths according to
{383}
Chronicles. It is a very interesting thing because Chronicles deals with the earthly side. On the earthly side in Numbers in the millennium, there is constant decline in the number of bullocks, but in Christianity we have perfection. We begin with perfection in Christ. 1 Kings suggests Christianity and so we have only got two thousand baths in the sea. It says, "it held two thousand baths." Notice the recurrence of the word "twelve". The great numeral of love, the divisible number, twelve. How it colours the scene! The first numerals are the responsible numerals, as you will notice -- five, ten and thirty -- but then when we come to what supports the sea, the number twelve comes into our view, the twelve oxen, meaning the patience that is required in the administration of cleansing. It is for the priests to wash in, and the oxen look on all the points of the compass. What an outlook from this system of glory, with all the light that enters into it! What an outlook on every position! It is as if the divine suggestion would be that *whatever* way persons come (they are coming, as Isaiah says, coming from all points) and the administration of cleansing will meet them as coming.
You will remember Ahaz, that ungodly king to whom God gave great opportunity. He tried to encourage him, He tried to help him but he would not be helped. God said to Ahaz, "Ask a sign!" He wanted to help Ahaz, and Ahaz piously says, "I will not tempt Jehovah." How God was wearied with this as He Himself says there! It says of Ahaz in @2 Kings 16, that he "took down the sea from off the brazen oxen that were under it, and put it upon a stone pavement," verse 17. You can understand, that that man did not understand the administration of cleansing. "*A stone pavement*." He refused the idea of the oxen. He separated it from the idea of the oxen, the patient pursuit of the brethren in help, in the administration of cleansing. He removed
{384}
it from there and put it on a stone pavement. Think of how crystallised a stone pavement is, nothing yielding there, no suggestion of love there, whereas the twelve oxen suggest divine love among the saints in this wonderful system of glory that is operating in support of this great administration of cleansing.
Well, may the Lord help us as to this important matter, dear brethren, in all our gatherings in relation to the administration of cleansing.
{385}
"DOING THINGS"
@Mark 2: 1 -- 12; @2 Kings 2: 9 -- 15; @Exodus 4: 1 -- 7
In reading these passages I have in mind to say a word on doing things, and the spirit and power in which they are to be done. There is a good deal to be done, and there is little time left in which it is to be done, for the Lord's coming is very near. We are on the eve of the translation and it is important that what is to be done should be done, whether in ourselves or in others. Christianity is marked by this great feature. The Lord Jesus inaugurated Christianity, and He not only said things, but He did things. That is one of the great features linked with Christianity. Many have set out trains of religious thought in the world, but they have not been accompanied by the practical side of things being done; but Christianity is a very practical matter. It is not something in the air, it is not a picture just to be looked at; it involves what is worked out in a very practical way with every one of us. And the means are supplied by which and through which things are to be done. If we have been taken up in the ways of God in sovereign mercy, God would have in mind that we should all be employed in His testimony, in the promulgation of all that is linked with His testimony, and what thoughts are linked with God's testimony! Soon it will be displayed to wondering worlds. It will all come out soon in wondrous display, but in the meantime it is a period of faith. It is not our time yet, we may say, just as it was not the Lord's time. His disciples wanted Him to go up to the feast and manifest Himself to the world, but it was not His time, and we are to understand that it is not the time of display. It is the time of faith and we want to have
{386}
our eyes open to see in a spiritual way all that is linked with the testimony of God in its power and glory, a testimony that is being carried through by means of divine power and divine resource and nothing in this world can stop it, and divine Persons would desire to impregnate our minds and our souls with the stability and fixity of divine thoughts in relation to the testimony of God. We often have to own that with ourselves there is much vacillation, much fickleness, a good deal of lightness and shallowness, but the knowledge of God as it comes to us in the glad tidings has in mind to bring about depth where there has been shallowness, and to bring about steadiness and stableness where there has been instability, and it is important that we should all make room for the fundamental teaching of the gospel in our souls. I am speaking to ourselves, beloved brethren, as having known and tasted the initial benefits that the glad tidings have brought to us. But how important it is that we should understand the teaching of the glad tidings, and all that enters into that teaching, as forming us inwardly and subjectively in relation to the knowledge of God as it comes to us in those glad tidings.
And I want to speak first about this case of paralysis in @Mark 2, having in mind that we all might be helped to put our hands to things. It is not a time for letting others do things. It is not a time for sitting by and letting a few do things. It is a time for us all to put our hands to matters, and Mark's gospel would impress us with the brevity of time. How compressed time is in this gospel and it is a gospel that brings before us service, and we need to understand service better, every one of us, brothers and sisters alike, but especially those who take part in the assembly in matters that we are privileged to take part in. It is important that we should understand this gospel. Everyone who is privileged to have any little part, however small it may
{387}
be, in the service of God publicly or on the inward side, should understand Mark's gospel, because it is a gospel into which compression enters. The more we read Mark's gospel, the more we shall understand compression. Whether it be in regard to service, ministry or suffering, Mark would teach us compression. And we are to understand compression, understand what it is to condense and compress things, and how to work out things with the help of God where compression is marking the circumstances and the moments in which we have to do with divine things. It is important that we should be freed from fickleness. The writer of this great gospel, for it is a unique gospel, was one who had to judge in his own heart the elements of shallowness and fickleness. John Mark had gone forward in the work with two great servants of God, but because of what the work involved, he went back from them, not going forward in the work.
This gospel stresses that the Lord Jesus, in the figure of the one who goes away, gives to His bondmen the authority and to each man his work. And it is important that we should understand the work from this viewpoint. I know that we are sometimes inclined to think the work is linked with those who are out serving in the ministry, but it embraces much more than that, and we are all to be in the matter. We are all to put our hands to do what is to be done. We must not deprecate in any shape or form what we have. Some of us may think it may be becoming and it may be humility and lowliness to make little of what we have at times. It may be at times, but at other times it may not be, and Mark would especially help us as to how we are to be in the work, how we are to do what is to be done in the several places in which we are set, learning how to do things from the One to whom Mark draws our attention, the Son of God. "Beginning of the glad tidings of Jesus Christ, Son of God." We are
{388}
to learn from Him in all things, and especially in this matter of how we are in the testimony from Mark's viewpoint, doing what we are required to do.
And Mark flinched in the crisis, when the pressure got severe, when he measured what full committal would entail for him. He was not prepared to go all the way, and I would earnestly encourage every one of us, especially the younger brethren, to face the matter of full committal in the light of Mark's gospel, so that we may not be in the meetings lightly or loosely, but with settled purpose of heart, as helped by the Lord and strengthened by the Holy Spirit whom we have, to commit ourselves fully to what is on hand in relation to our part in the testimony of God. You remember what is said as to the young man in this gospel. When the crisis linked with the cross drew near, when there were those that were around who were taking Jesus to crucify Him, there was a young man who fled leaving his garment with them. His garment, as we know, was lightly cast about him. We do not want to be in the testimony thus in any light, shallow and superficial way. The gospel tells us of another young man, at the end, after the Lord had risen from the dead, who was sitting clothed in a white robe, a great example for us in regard to any part, however small it may be, that any of us may have in relation to the testimony of God. It is important that our robes are white. It is important that our manner of life should be unstained by the things that are around us in the world, that we should be free as marked by purity, not only purity inwardly in our hearts and souls, but purified circumstances, as the white robe suggests. And Mark had learned these lessons. It involved much for him, but he had learned these lessons. He had turned back from the work when he was most needed, and we ought all to learn, especially the younger ones, the need of standing true in the present moment of the Lord's
{389}
rejection, to Himself, as to the requirements of the testimony and all that the testimony calls for, to "take our share in suffering as a good soldier of Jesus Christ." We have to learn, as Paul says to Timothy, to "be strong in the grace which is in Christ Jesus." What a resource that is for faith, for every one of us, in a day when things are difficult, and they are difficult; they are difficult in business, difficult in school, difficult in every way, but the great thing is to see that the grace that is in Christ Jesus remains unchanged. Whatever may have changed with us, or with our circumstances, or in the dispensation, "the grace which is in Christ Jesus" represents an unfailing, unchanging resource that we can constantly resort to and be strong in, according to Paul's word to Timothy.
Now this gospel is dealing with service and it is a time when service needs to be understood. There are small gatherings and there are large gatherings in this country, as in other countries, and there is much to be done in the way of service. *Things are to be done*, not just to be spoken about. It is easy to speak about matters, but what is needed is the doing of things, and many of us deprecate and make little of what we have, but whatever the Lord has given to us, let us make the most of it, and if with any of us there has been a waning of spiritual energy and spiritual desire, let us "rekindle the gift of God" that is in us. In the midst of the public waning of energy in the darkening state of things around us, let every one of us seek to rekindle what is within us, not to make little of it, not to deprecate it, not to set it aside. But let us each make the most of it. Mark's gospel would help us as to this great matter, because Mark himself had proved things experimentally. It is a gospel that is written by a brother like ourselves that had a definite experience, who knew what it was for his courage to fail in the time when it was needed, and who amongst us has not known that? We have
{390}
faced crises in our businesses and in our lives and oftentimes we have experienced what it is to fail at the moment when courage was most needed. But then Mark's gospel brings into our view one who has got the full gain of the experience he has passed through. He did not lose that gain. We might say he kept it by the Holy Spirit. The gain that he had reaped through that experience comes into this gospel and it is embodied in it, as he is helped by the Holy Spirit to draw attention to Him whose courage never failed, Whose service was marked by perfection from beginning to end, Whose energy never waned. Whose devotion never deviated from the path of full and unreserved committal to the will of God. He is the One we have to learn from. He is the One into whose spirit and grace we are to drink. He is our great Model in service.
I have read this chapter to draw attention to this man who is affected by paralysis. Many of us are more affected by paralysis than we would care to admit. It was a great matter that this should be taken account of. We find that there are persons here, they are not named, they are called four, as it says, " ... borne by four." It says, "There come to Him (men) ... " The 'men' is in brackets, but it no doubt involved men. "There come to Him (men) bringing a paralytic, borne by four ... " I think the service is open to sisters as well as brothers as to this matter of burden-bearing, for that is the thought that comes up here. Mark's gospel is the *pressure* gospel. It is the gospel that gives us pressure as no other gospel gives it to us. The sufferings of Christ in Mark's gospel are drawn attention to in a way that is peculiar to this gospel, and Mark would impress us in his teaching with the need of understanding how things are to be borne. I need not refer you to the great matter of what the Lord has borne, what it cost Him to go all the way to the cross and to bear our sins in His own body on the tree. He did not
{391}
turn back. While in Gethsemane He was tested by the awfulness of what He was to pass through, and His language there was, "Nevertheless not my will but Thine be done." The will of God was uppermost in His soul, and the will of God should be uppermost in the soul of every one of us, whatever it may cost us. And of course He went where none of us could ever go. He bore what none of us could ever bear -- the full weight of God's wrath and judgment against sin and sins. We think of His moral glory as the great Sin-Bearer; the holy, spotless, perfect One of God, yet made sin, Him who knew no sin, that we might become God's righteousness in Him. Think of what He has borne, the heaviness of sin's load which He has borne, that we might go free, that we might be liberated to have the blessed conscious part that we have in the testimony of God at the present time! Think of what it cost Him! Are we not ashamed of ourselves as we think of the lack of devotion that marks us, when we think of all the way that in His suffering love He has trodden, bearing the full weight of that awful load of God's wrath and judgment unsparing against sin and sins? We are to learn from that, and the more that it enters into our minds, into our souls, the more we shall see that there is no time to be lost in regard to filling out, as we can fill out with the help of the Holy Spirit, every one of us, our part and place in testimony, wherever we are set, for the pleasure of God. And so there were these unnamed persons; men, they are called, but the door is open for all, men and women, brothers and sisters alike, to carry these kinds of burdens. There is someone here in this section who is paralysed. We know what paralysis is. We know how it operates, and the helplessness that it brings about. We know full well from practical observation the state of weakness that is linked with it. But here there are those who are taking account of this matter, measuring what
{392}
it involves, and taking full account of how it can be met. They *know* how it can be met. They know *where* it can be met, and they know *Who* can meet it, and surely that is a word to all of us in our gatherings, that we learn how to carry these kinds of burdens. There may be persons that are put our way, that are perhaps near us and by us, who are not functioning as they should in the energy of life in the service of God. What are we doing about them? Are we sitting by and pitying them, looking on them and observing them and just commenting on their helplessness? Or are we entering into the matter feelingly, as the Lord Jesus entered into all these matters feelingly, feeling in His Spirit what He took away by His power. What an example He is as we take account of Him in these matters! And we are to look around and see what can be done for persons like these. It may be a brother or a sister who is affected by moral and spiritual paralysis. It may be paralysis through fear, through the fear of man. It may be paralysis through certain things in the world that have come into their lives and affected them, producing a spiritual paralysis. It may be their businesses. It may be we are too much engaged in our work, too much time taken up with it, producing a moral and spiritual paralysis that renders us ineffective in our part and place in the testimony of God.
Well, there were four here who knew what was needed and knew where the need could be met, and how important it is, this great matter of caring for need amongst us in our gatherings, moving forward to do what is required, and they do it. But what I want to stress in regard to the man himself is that they bring him to the right source of help. It is a great matter that we should be brought to the right and the true source of help. The difficulties were many, but faith can overcome the difficulties. You will remember it says, "But Jesus, seeing their faith ..:" I wonder
{393}
whether the Lord sees our faith operating in our localities in relation to these matters of need, where spiritual and moral paralysis may have set in. What a matter it is to be marked by faith! These four were not only marked by faith, but they put their hands to the matter. They bore the man and carried him along to where he could be helped, showing how real this matter of serving one another is. That is the blessedness of being in the assembly, of being where God has set us in relation to the testimony, that we are in a sphere and an environment where we can be cared for and helped as we need it.
And Jesus says in relation to this man that was set down in His presence, "But that ye may know that the Son of man has power on earth to forgive sins, he says to the paralytic, To thee I say, Arise, take up thy couch and go to thine house." Now that is a word for any of us. The Lord said, "*To thee*." He has had words to say to others in this passage. He saw the faith of those who were carrying the exercise in regard to this person afflicted in this way, but now He has a word for the person. There is what *we* have to do, and the Lord says, "To thee I say, Arise, take up thy couch and go to thine house." This is a word to us, that whatever has been holding us, whatever we have been held by, the Lord would help us in energy by the Spirit, as it would mean to us now, to arise from the circumstances that are holding us and to take up this matter which we have been held on -- the couch -- whatever it may be. We all know best what is detaining us, what is hindering the testimony from getting the best from us, and we should all be concerned that the testimony of God should get the best from every one of us. And that is what the Lord has in mind in saying to this man, "Arise, take up thy couch and go to thine house." The house represents the local position. He is not sending him to some other place. He says, "Go to thine house."
{394}
That is, we are going to serve best in our local position Sometimes we think, Oh if we were only somewhere else in somebody else's local position we should be so much freer, so much better in serving. But the word the Lord would give to us is, "Arise, take up thy couch and go to *thine* house." That is, the sphere of our local responsibility, and it says, "And he rose up straightway, and, having taken up his couch, went out before them all, so that all were amazed, and glorified God, saying, We never saw it thus." What a wonderful thing it is when persons, brothers and sisters, get help in regard to what has been crippling them, in regard to what has been holding them down, helped through the service of the Lord personally, helped through the prayers and the service of the brethren towards them! How we should be thankful for the service represented in the four, the brethren that we have to care for us! In whatever way they may render service to us, if it sets us free from moral paralysis, how thankful we should be, because they bring the man to the Lord, and the Lord sets the man free, and I believe in the light of Mark's gospel the service is calling for it that every one of us should be set free in regard to whatever may be detaining us, whatever may be hindering us. There is no time to be lost. The Lord would have us *all* free, because great matters are on hand. The Lord is doing great things in view of the completing of the dispensation -- the taking of the assembly home to be for ever with Himself -- and we are all to be in it and the Lord would help us as to what we are to do, as He says, "Take up thy couch and go to thine house."
Now I want to speak of Elisha just for a moment. It is another condition of things, in which we have set out for our encouragement in one called Elisha the spirit in which we are to do things, the spirit and the power in which things are to be done. This passage is well-known. Elisha was greatly attached to Elijah.
{395}
I should like to ask all our hearts if we are attached to Christ. Is there one in this hall whose heart is not attached to Christ? How important it is that they should be, and how important it is that, we who have had our hears attached to Christ should be held in that attachment to Him, because there are so many things that would detach us from Christ, which would keep us at a distance from Christ. But what shines in Elisha is that he will allow *nothing* to keep him away from Elijah. And we should see to that, dear brethren.
The testimony presents another view in this chapter. Gilgal, Bethel, Jericho all represent ramifications of the testimony of God, and the Lord is having to do with it in all its varied features as typified in Elijah, and Elisha represents any one of us as coming into the testimony and learning from Elijah, learning from the Lord Jesus Christ, and allowing nothing to come between us and our links with Christ. That is the teaching in this passage. There were those who would suggest certain things, those that would cause Elisha to deviate, but Elisha's mind and affections were on one person, that was Elijah. And that is a word for us. We are to have one Man before us, and that is the Lord Jesus Christ, and we are to allow nothing to cause our thoughts and our affections to deviate from that one Man. And now the working out of things in Elisha's soul, in his history, involves that the time comes when he has to *do things*. Elijah has been doing things, and doing things wonderfully. Think of what the Lord Jesus did in the gospels! We have been reading about what He did in Mark. Think of what He did in Matthew as well as Mark, and what He did in Luke and what He did in John! All the wonderful things that Jesus did, and that He began to do and carried through! What an example for us as learning from Him! But now the time comes for Elijah to go on high, and the Lord Jesus has gone on high. How are things to be carried on then? When
{396}
Elijah goes up, who is going to carry on, speaking reverently? Elisha! And now that the Lord Jesus has gone on high, that He has ascended up into heaven, who is carrying on now? Well *we* have been left in the position of carrying on in the testimony of God.
Elijah had suggested to Elisha to ask "what I will do for thee." Think of the Lord promoting with us this spirit of asking, this spirit of desire! The Lord is prepared to do much for us. Elijah was prepared to do much for Elisha. He valued the affection that Elisha had for him, and so does the Lord Jesus. He values our attachment to Him. He values our preparedness to cover all the points of the testimony of God in attachment to Him and in devotedness carrying on and moving on with Him in all that He has in mind in these various points in the testimony. And the Lord would answer these movements by promoting increased desire with every one of us, and he says, "Ask what I shall do for thee before I am taken away from thee. "And Elisha said, "I pray thee, let a double portion of thy spirit be upon me." I want to be brief about this section. In the type it alludes to the way that Elisha comes in for the spirit of Elijah, and that really represents the manner and way and spirit and power in which things are to be done. The Lord Jesus has gone on high and His Spirit has come here, and O what a resource we have in the Holy Spirit to do things, so that we are not lacking in what is needed to do things. If there is a lack, it is on our side, it is not on the divine side, because the Lord Jesus in going on high has shed forth the Holy Spirit in order that we might be empowered to *do* things for God in the testimony in which He has set us. It says of Elisha when Elijah's mantle was about to fall, "Then he took hold of his own garments and rent them in two pieces. And he took up the mantle of Elijah ... " Now that is an important principle in this matter of doing things, that we deal with what attaches to ourselves. That
{397}
is our biggest stumbling-block in our part in the testimony of God. Elisha deals with what is connected and linked with himself in order that he might pick up the mantle of Elijah. He understands that if he is to go forward in the great things of God, he is to go forward not in his own strength, or what attaches to himself as would be suggested in his garment, but he is to go forward in the strength and power of the man who has ascended up, who has gone out of sight. And if we are to be effective in the testimony wherever God has set us, it can only be in the Spirit and power of the glorious Man who has ascended up into heaven and who is seated in heaven and who is the Centre of the great administration which is working out in relation to the testimony of God, and in which through grace we all have part. What a wonderful thing it is to make use of the Spirit according to this principle, because that is the thought. The Spirit is available; indeed we have received the Spirit, we who believe and are subject to the Lord. But the thing is, are we making use of the Spirit in this light -- the power of the ascended Man, not our own resources, not our own strength, not our own mentality, or our own ability according to nature or the flesh, but this power which is resident in the assembly; for the Spirit is not in the world. He is here in the assembly, and He is here, the Spirit of the ascended Man, available to be made use of so that we might go forward. It says of Elisha, "And he took hold of his own garments and rent them in two pieces. And he took up the mantle of Elijah which fell from him, and went back and stood by the bank of the Jordan; and he took the mantle of Elijah which had fallen from him, and smote the waters, and said, Where is Jehovah, the God of Elijah? He also smote the waters, and they parted hither and thither, and Elisha went over." Think of the power exercised by Elisha! There was this great barrier, the Jordan! Think of
{398}
what it means. We speak of difficulties which stand in our way. We bring up difficulties which hinder us from going forward. Dear brethren, there is no difficulty which cannot be surmounted as we take up the Spirit from this viewpoint -- the power linked with the ascended Man in heaven. Think of the dynamic character of that power, that power to go forward in the testimony of God, however formidable the barriers may seem or the obstacles may loom. Let us take hold, reverently speaking, of the Spirit of the ascended Man and move forward in the Spirit of the ascended Man to meet what may stand in our way, because the ministry as it comes out in Elisha is a ministry that is linked with succeeding crises -- one crisis after another -- and Elisha has the power to meet them as having taken on the mantle of Elijah. We want to understand the power that is resident in the Holy Spirit and the resources that are linked with the Holy Spirit, so that we may go forward wherever we are set, not daunted by what may present itself in the way of obstacles and difficulties, maybe in the way of exercise in our gathering, maybe in our profession or our business, not daunted by these things, but realising that we have a power in the Spirit to go forward and to surmount every difficulty. It says, "And the sons of the prophets who were at Jericho on the opposite side saw him, and they said, The Spirit of Elijah rests on Elisha." If there is any better testimony that we could desire or covet, I do not know of it -- the Spirit of Christ resting upon a brother or a sister in the way they do things, the way they go about things, the way they move forward in the testimony of God!
I wanted to allude to Moses in regard to how God educates him in relation to his part in doing things, how he is shown the awfulness of what may be used of God in certain circumstances, but if it gets out of hand may become a power of evil and terrible to our sight. So it is said of Moses that he fled from it. What an awful
{399}
thing it is, for the staff would represent with us what is of God in that relation, but if it gets out of divine control, how serious it may be! How we may well flee from it, because of the seriousness of it, but then God would help us to see how He has empowered us to take things. Moses was to take it, and it became a staff again in his hand, a staff that was used in the liberation of the people of God, in the help and leading forward of the people of God. Then the matter as to his hand is something we all have to learn. We have often heard of it, often spoken of it. He put his hand into his bosom and every one of us has to learn the wickedness and awfulness of what is in our own hearts if we are to serve effectively in the testimony of God. Many of us have been far too occupied with what is in other persons, without discovering what our own hearts are capable of. None of us will be effective in doing things in the testimony of God unless we learn, through the help of God, what is resident within our own hearts.
May the Lord help us as to this matter of our part in the testimony of God, that things are to be done, and the Lord Jesus and the Holy Spirit would help us to do things, however small our capacity or ability may be. The Lord Jesus said of the woman, "What she *could*, she has done." May the Lord help every one of us, wherever we are set, to do what we can with divine help.
{400}
THE SUFFERINGS OF CHRIST
@Zechariah 11: 7 -- 14; @Zechariah 12: 5 -- 14; @Zechariah 13: 4 -- 9
These passages that one has read are somewhat lengthy, but it was necessary to read them because of what one has upon one's heart to refer to tonight, namely, the sufferings of Christ.
The sufferings of Christ in themselves are an immense subject, but they are a subject that we do not know enough about; a subject, perhaps, and a theme, in the apprehension and appreciation of which we have not allowed the Spirit to help us as we should. I am referring to what I notice in myself when I say that. But it is a theme, that if engaged on with the help of the Spirit, will draw us nearer and nearer to the One Whom we love, Who has suffered so, our Saviour. We need to make room in our minds for the teaching that enters into the foundations of the truth of the glad tidings. I am sure if we better understood the sufferings of Christ in relation to the atonement, we should be more delivered from the influence of sin and sins. For when we see what it meant to Him, what it cost Him that we might be initially set up in relation to God, according to the way He has made Himself known in the terms of the glad tidings, if we allow the Spirit to bring more home to our souls what enters into these foundations, in relation to the sufferings of Christ, we should be far better men and women in the assembly.
There is nothing so cold as a knowledge of the truth in the mind, that has never affected the soul or the conscience. It is so easy to let our souls drift into a state of indifference in regard to the teaching of the knowledge of God, in the elements of it in the gospel; but we must never assume, dear brethren, to get to a
{401}
point, as long as we are here in the public position, where the sufferings of Christ are forgotten, or that there are loftier subjects to engage us so that we leave them behind. The sufferings of Christ underlie everything that we have together, and everything that we enjoy together; and we need to allow teaching in relation to the sufferings of Christ to infiltrate into our minds, to enter our hearts, so that we might be softer and more mellowed in our spirits under the preciousness of their touch.
We want to beware, dear brethren, of going with things merely externally, for there is a constant tendency with us to live at a distance from divine Persons, while invariably ostensibly clinging to the truth, as Mr. Darby has said in relation to Jerusalem, and their sorrows in the last days in the reception of the antichrist. To be in outward nearness to God and yet inwardly not so, is a terrible thing, and to invest one's heart with the Name of God, clothing oneself with it as a cloak of pride, a buckler, so that the arrows of God do not reach the conscience. What could be more dreadful than what the Lord Jesus has to say to Jerusalem: "Your house is left unto you desolate." And Jerusalem is the centre of the prophecy that I have read from; God has it in mind from the beginning to the end. In Haggai it is the house, special allusion being made to the matter of the glory of the house, but in Zechariah Jerusalem is the central point, everything is measured in relation to Jerusalem. Jerusalem is a wonderful type of the assembly. The more we read the prophets, and especially this prophet, we shall see that Jerusalem is the apple of God's eye. Indeed this language is used. Everything in this book, the great powers and authorities among the nations, are all being regulated in relation to Jerusalem; and we want to see that we cherish what God cherishes, the assembly is God's chief interest on earth at the present moment, so it should be our chief interest. Indeed, the practical
{402}
result of the apprehension and enjoyment of union with Christ, the heavenly Man, the exalted Man, is that His interests become our interests; and we can see in the epistle to the Ephesians that the assembly is His great interest. He has gone the full length to secure the assembly, He has endured the sufferings, He has endured the cross, that the assembly might be His. He has taken up the sin question, that the moral history of sin and shame linked with the members of the assembly should be fully cleared. All the nourishing and cherishing features of His ministry and service at the present time are directed towards the assembly. And this book would make much of Jerusalem in our minds and before our hearts. It is not the mere ecclesiastical position, as we might refer to it; for we can see in all that is around us what disaster attaches to a professed external nearness to God, yet with hearts that are far from Him. And now in this passage that I have read, Jerusalem is in mind, Israel is in mind; and I want to draw attention to the Lord Jesus in His ministry and service in this relation.
Chapter 11 of the book of Zechariah opens by drawing our attention to the way that the power of man and the force of man has swept in on Israel and overcome the position. The noble ones are spoiled, the cedars are devoured. It is the overrunning scourge of human resource in man's power and strength, entering upon the realm that belongs to God.
For we can understand as we read the opening chapters of the gospel by Luke, the pathos of the position to those with a godly heart and a godly mind, such as Zacharias and Elizabeth. How they felt the Roman yoke, and the fact that the resources linked with man's uncontrolled power and energy, had entered on the realm of Immanuel's land, and were holding in captivity what belonged to God. We might apply it in principle, dear brethren, to the whole scene around us
{403}
following in the wake of the Reformation. That great servant of God, Martin Luther, was raised up to bring out that important feature of the glad tidings, justification by faith. What a service he rendered to all! But in what followed in the great Protestant movement, the resources of man came into play, the Spirit of God was set aside, and the whole position marred by the assertion of the might of human intellect in the things of God. These are real matters. How we should sorrow with godly sorrow over our brethren who are held captive in these spheres and systems around us, where the might and sway of the power of man and the intellect of man is known. How we should be crying to God, in view of the imminence of the rapture, for their emancipation. They will all be emancipated at the coming of the Lord; we shall not go up without them, dear brethren; we shall all go up together. Wonderful things will be done, but we will not go up without our brethren around us. They shall go up with us. But we should be thinking more and more, as to the awfulness of the enforcement of the mind of man in the realm of God, in relation to God's property, what belongs to God. We are to be with God in a priestly way as to all these matters. Let us not think alone of what we enjoy so blessedly in the light of Philadelphia, as faithful to the truth. Let us cherish the promise of the Lord Jesus to Philadelphia to those who are faithful to the truth: "*I* also will keep thee out of the hour of trial." What a promise! How we cherish it! But let us think of those that are around, and let us pray for them; and if we meet them on the way, let us serve them in view of their extrication. Not returning to them, as the word is, "Let them return unto thee; but return not thou unto them." And if we meet them on that returning path, let us serve them so that they might be liberated. God is not unmindful of these conditions. He realises what man in his responsibility
{404}
has entrenched himself upon. It is Immanuel's land, it is God's realm.
There are those who are referred to here as the possessors. It says, "whose possessors slay them without being held guilty." Think of the ravages of the lawless mind and will of man, ravaging the heritage of God, pillaging what belongs to God, and yet not being held guilty. It says, "they that sell them"; think of the flock of God being sold. What a disaster! And it says, "they that sell them say, Blessed be Jehovah! for I am become rich." All this kind of thing, outward nearness to God, but inwardly far from Him. The Name of Jehovah, the Name of God being used as a buckler to keep the arrows of the truth, the arrows of God, from affecting the conscience. But God is taking account of these matters. He is intervening in this section of the prophet; and the word to the Messiah is, "Feed the flock of slaughter." That is, the Lord Jesus is contemplated as coming into these conditions in the early chapters of Luke and linking on with the remnant; as it says in verse 7 that we began with, "So I fed the flock of slaughter, truly the poor of the flock." Oh! the lowly service of Jesus, of our Lord Jesus Christ, in linking on with the remnant under the oppression of the Roman yoke, to say nothing of what happened in relation to the leaders amongst the Jews. And it says, "So I fed the flock of slaughter." Think of a suffering and afflicted people, the flock of slaughter, the remnant viewed as the poor of the flock, without human resource, a poor and afflicted people, whose trust is in the Name of Jehovah, whose trust is in God. And the Lord Jesus linked on with them, entering into and bearing and carrying in His spirit all the sorrows of the remnant. What suffering it involved for Christ, in all the perfection of His holy sensibilities as Man, that unique humanity that was His, untouched, unspoiled by sin and it's workings, the One who was perfect
{405}
in every way here, with undulled sensibilities; not like us with our contact with sin! What He must have felt, as in His ministry and teaching He looked over the position, and saw the position of the poor of the flock; How He links on with it! It was to involve suffering for Him, as we shall see; it was to involve His death, His rejection. But let us drink into the spirit and grace of our Saviour, and our Master who has left us a model, that we should follow in His steps. He has suffered for us to this end, and we are to take our share in suffering; although there are sufferings in relation to Christ that we could never have part in, but which affect our souls as we contemplate them.
It goes on to say, "I took unto me two staves; the one I called Beauty, and the other I called Bands; and I fed the flock." I fed the flock. We have been thinking about this administrative service of Christ, how He came in by the door to lead out the flock. And so it says here, "I fed the flock." Oppressed in anguish of spirit and of soul under the yoke of the nations, yet He links on with them, "thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness." He links Himself on with the remnant in that state of oppression of mind and anguish of soul, and it says, "I fed the flock." Oh! the instances in the gospels that speak of His feeding the flock. These two staves remind us of Christ as the bond in relation to the nations and the bond in relation to Israel and Judah. You remember when Simeon came into the temple how he took the Child, and received Him into his arms. What grace, that He who was so high in glory should stoop so low in grace, linking on with humanity representatively in Simeon in such a way, in such accessibility that Simeon could receive Him into his arms! And as Simeon receives him into his arms his soul is expanded in that view of the thoughts of God, that only the reception of Christ in this way can give. And so he
{406}
speaks of "a light for revelation of the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel." And these two staves have to do with these two thoughts. The Lord Jesus served in Israel, having in mind the unity of Judah and Israel, having in mind the brotherhood, but they rejected Him, they said, "This is the heir; come, let us kill him." They appraised Him at a contemptuous price. Oh! the awfulness of outward external nearness to God, but the conscience unaffected by divine light, as in the ministry of Christ to these that I am referring to, Israel and Judah. And before going on to speak of the staff, it says, "I destroyed three shepherds in one month; and my soul was vexed with them, and their soul also loathed me. And I said, I will not feed you; that which dieth, let it die; and that which perisheth let it perish; and let them which are left eat every one the flesh of another." It shows the position arrived at as light from God is rejected in a ministry of Christ among the remnant. Jerusalem's house was left unto her desolate. How the Lord weeps over the position in @Luke 19, as He draws near and thinks of the wealth of ministry towards that city, but the hardness that marked them in the rejection of light from God.
The Lord felt it. As I have said He wept over Jerusalem. He says, "I took my staff. Beauty, and cut it asunder, that I might break my covenant which I had made with all the peoples." This matter refers to the nations, to the peoples; the staff was broken. Then he says later on, "And I cut asunder mine other staff, Bands, to break the brotherhood between Judah and Israel." The teaching is that the inheritance of the nations was to be taken up in relation to the position in Israel, but being rejected and refused, the staff, Beauty, had to be broken. But the Lord will come back to that great moment. What a time, when as in the light of the prophets, the peoples will come from afar; as Isaiah says, "they shall come," coming in different ways,
{407}
some on dromedaries, some on mules, etc., but they shall come, Isaiah says. The glory will be the great rallying point. But in the meantime, all that is held up. The sufferings of Christ in being rejected by Israel has changed the position, and you will notice how it says in verse 11, "And it was broken in that day; and so the poor of the flock that gave heed to me knew that it was the word of Jehovah." Think of how the poor of the flock are referred to as discerning where the word of God was, the state in the remnant over against the Jewish leaders in their day. Some of them had attacked Christ openly and publicly, but the poor of the flock knew where the word of God was. We are reminded of what the Lord says, "Thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them to babes." What need to maintain in our souls the unsophisticated, the uncrystallised state suggested in the babes, the impressionable state, so that we may not be like the wise and prudent around us. The word says, "The poor of the flock that gave heed to me." They are the sheep that know the voice of Christ, and will not follow the stranger; He had come into the confines of Israel and linked Himself on with the remnant, and they knew His voice, and they followed Him. But then the time comes when He is presented to the leaders amongst the nation of Israel, and it says in verse 12, "And I said unto them, If ye think good, give me my hire; and if not, forbear. And they weighed for my hire thirty silver-pieces. And Jehovah said unto me, Cast in unto the potter: a goodly price that I was prized at by them. And I took the thirty silver-pieces, and cast them to the potter in the house of Jehovah. And I cut asunder mine other staff, Bands, to break the brotherhood between Judah and Israel." Let us enter into the feelings of Christ in regard to this moment. There were the sorrows which were experienced by Him in the abandonment, but think of the sorrows too, that were
{408}
linked with the position in relation to the remnant, bearing in His spirit all that was linked with the position, feeling in His sprit the whole matter, suffering as He did as identified with the remnant. And then this matter of complete rejection. What sufferings of Christ in this relation! And we are to understand, dear brethren, and to read the Psalms, and to read the Prophets so as to enter sympathetically and feelingly into what it meant to Christ to serve in this way amongst His people, and what it meant to Him to be rejected, to see the truth set aside as it is all around us on every hand.
Now I want to come on to the second part of what I have in mind, the principle of what is anti-Christian, which comes into the closing part of the chapter. They will not receive Jesus, but they will receive another. But then God has His eye upon things, as the next chapter unfolds, "Jehovah, who stretcheth out the heavens, and layeth the foundation of the earth, and formeth the spirit of man within him," what an allusion in this environment, in this context, "that formeth the spirit of man within him." He is taking up matters. He has Jerusalem in mind; He has recovery in mind; He is going to stimulate and revive where there has been decline in regard to the truth. That is the whole burden of the ministry here. And after God comes in in verse 5 it says, "the leaders of Judah shall say in their heart." Notice this, this great beginning of recovery in Judah, as Mr. Darby said "guilty yet beloved Judah." Judah in the place of nearness to God, God's sanctuary, such a place of nearness, but her conscience becoming so hardened that she becomes a leader in the rebellion against God. But God is thinking about Judah, guilty as Judah may be; but beloved Judah. But Judah is David, and David is Judah. And God is thinking of Judah, just as He is thinking of the assembly today, thinking of Christ and thinking of the
{409}
assembly. He is not forgetting it amidst all man's wilfulness on every hand. And it says, "And the leaders of Judah shall say in their heart, The inhabitants of Jerusalem shall be my strength." Instead of the mighty prowess of the false shepherds referred to in the previous chapter, and their exploitations, the leaders of Judah, as affected by the word of God in this great time of revival, now come to see the importance of Jerusalem; and not only Jerusalem as a type of the assembly, but the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the personnel of the assembly. And it says, "And the leaders of Judah shall say in their heart, The inhabitants of Jerusalem shall be my strength through Jehovah of hosts their God." What a word to any of us who may in any way be able to give a lead; for a leader suggests those that are able to give a lead. I am not speaking of what is official, but there is the thought of giving a lead, even in paying honour to one another. But the leaders of Judah say, The inhabitants of Jerusalem shall be my strength. They are not going to tread over the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the personnel of the assembly. The assembly is glorious, but the personnel are glorious. And they say "shall be my strength through Jehovah of hosts their God." The God of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, does He not see? Does He not hear? Did He not say in Exodus that He had heard their cry? He had seen their sorrows, and He came down to deliver them. What a God we have, dear brethren! May He be magnified more before our souls. And it says in that day that God is coming in. There is what the readers of Judah have done, but there is now what God does. He says, "I will make the leaders of Judah like a hearth of fire among wood, and like a torch of fire in a sheaf; and they shall devour all the peoples around about, on the right hand and on the left; and Jerusalem shall dwell again in her own place, in Jerusalem." What does this mean? It means that all the extraneous matter is to be dealt with,
{410}
and dealt with through the leaders of Judah, "like a hearth of fire among wood, and like a torch of fire in a sheaf." Think how quickly matters are disposed of, these extraneous matters that are alluded to here. Those that have led in the matter become the great helpers on in the clearance of everything, that Jerusalem might come again into its own place; that the assembly might stand out in our eyes and in our vision in her rightful and true place, her own place, according to divine thought.
Then it says, "Jehovah shall save the tents of Judah first." He is thinking of Judah, that choice area where His praise is going on, where the service of God is maintained. How thankful we should be, as faithful to the truth, to be amongst those that God is thinking about first. "Jehovah shall save the tents of Judah first, that the glory of the house of David and the glory of the inhabitants of Jerusalem be not magnified over Judah." Notice this balance. We have been speaking about the leaders, and then it says, "that the glory of the inhabitants of Jerusalem be not magnified over Judah." We are to make full room for what God's sovereignty represents in Judah, so that the glory of the inhabitants of Jerusalem is not magnified over it. The leaders of Judah say that their strength is in the inhabitants of Jerusalem. But now God is balancing things, that the glory of the inhabitants of Jerusalem be not magnified over Judah. Then it says, "In that day Jehovah will defend the inhabitants of Jerusalem." Think of how the personnel of Jerusalem is coming up time and again here, the personnel of the assembly. And it says, "he that stumbleth among them at that day shall be as David." Think of that. Think of the level that the stumbling one is brought on to, in this great realm and sphere of reviving activities in relation to Jerusalem. You remember there were certain of whom they said to Gideon, "As thou art, so were they." Think of this wonderful realm, where the stumbling one is made as
{411}
David. We are so easily inclined to write off stumbling persons, and weak persons, whom we think do not have the knowledge of the truth that we have. God is coming in here to show us that He is going to make the stumbling among them as David. Think of the greatness of the position, when God comes into it. Then, "The house of David as God." Think of the moral power linked with the house of David, where the full spirit and grace of the anointing shine, that system where Christ's kingly power, and His royal power are known. It is representative of God, "as God." God is in the matter, you see. And we read, "as the Angel of Jehovah before them." Think of that. The way is made clear providentially. The Angel of Jehovah before them may be an allusion in our way of thinking to the Holy Spirit going before them. In this time of revival, the Holy Spirit is going forth. And then it says, "And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will seek to destroy all the nations that come against Jerusalem." Jerusalem is in God's thoughts, and He will not brook any entrenchment upon the assembly in her dignity according to divine thoughts. Whether as an entity, or whether in the personnel, God will not brook any interference.
"And I will pour upon the house of David and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem the spirit of grace and of supplications." Think of this wonderful reviving stream pouring upon the house of David. The house of David had an important place in the matter of defection, as being in the place of responsibility; but God is pouring upon it the spirit of grace and of supplications. I want you to note that it is not just because of their sin, and the length to which they went, or the shame to which they sank, but this spirit of grace and supplications is linked with the sufferings of Christ; it is because of what it meant to Christ, as it says, "And I will pour upon the house of David and
{412}
upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem the spirit of grace and of supplications; and they shall look on me, whom they pierced, and they shall mourn for him, as one mourneth for an only son." They are not mourning for themselves, that they have been brought down. They are not mourning over the fact that their guilt has been discovered. They are mourning over the fact that their sin cost their Messiah the sufferings of that hour. Oh, the compression at Calvary, when Jesus suffered on account of Israel's unbelief! Think of what will come into the heart of the remnant in the day to come, into the heart of Israel, when they shall look upon their Messiah, whom they pierced.
Then it says, "there shall be a great mourning in Jerusalem." There is no glossing over matters. How segregated the matter is. These personalities, these systems, these houses that are represented. It says, "their wives apart." The sisters are not out of this. Why should the reference to the wives be repeated as it is? Dear brethren, I have found in travelling around that while generally there has been a righting of things, sometimes with the sisters there are feelings of bitterness because of what has transpired. Let the sisters suffer the word of exhortation, that they are to come into this matter of the mourning because of the sufferings of Christ, "the wives apart." Not with their husbands, but the wives apart. It is not a question of condemnation. Chapters 13 and 14 show us that the whole position is met by the grace that is administering cleansing. It is not a question of retribution, but a thorough judgment with every one of us of the unbelief in our hearts. And so there is a fountain opened. This great administration for sin and uncleanness is essential that uncleanness should be cleansed. We cannot enjoy the truth, if sin and uncleanness is gone on with in any one of us. Young brothers and sisters, I would appeal to you in regard to the sin and uncleanness in
{413}
the world, that like a Joseph and a Daniel, with purpose of heart you eschew the evil and pursue the good. Forsake the world and its ways. Avail yourself of this great administration of cleansing.
Now I just desire to refer to the sufferings of Christ in this passage. It says in verse 5, "And he shall say, I am no prophet, I am a tiller of the ground; for man acquired me as bondman from my youth." Oh, what an allusion to Christ as available to man, available to humanity. Man acquired Him. Think of Him who was God, He who brought the world into existence, coming into a position, where man acquires Him as bondman. There is no official feature there. He could have well claimed what was officially due to Him; but as in @John 13 there comes a time when He lays aside His garment, so here He is available to every one of us, to all men. Man acquired Him as bondman. "And one shall say, What are those wounds in Thy hands? And he will say, Those with which I was wounded in the house of my friends." Think of what Christ has suffered in the realm where He should have been honoured. How we are to enter into that feelingly. And it says, "Awake, O sword, against my shepherd, even against the man that is my fellow, saith Jehovah of hosts: smite the shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered, and I will turn my hand upon the little ones." Think of the sufferings of Christ alluded to here. We have not time to go into them. They are all paving the way for what we have in verse 9, "I will bring the third part into the fire, and will refine them as silver is refined, and will try them as gold is tried." Do not let us think that suffering is over. Do not let us think that the days of discipline are past. God may bring us through deeper waters yet, in regard to this process of refinement. And it says, "will refine them as silver is refined, and will try them as gold is tried. They shall call on my name, and I will answer them: I will say, It is my people." What
{414}
a touch, dear brethren. As God looks amongst us, as He takes account of us in relation to His work, and we come under His hand in His disciplinary way, what joy it gives to His heart to say, "It is my people!" And they shall say, and may we all say, dear brethren, "Jehovah is my God." What an answer to the sufferings of Christ! If there is anything that will help us in our links with one another, and in our links with God, it is the sufferings of Christ, as the truth of them finds an entrance into our souls. May the Lord bless the word.
{415}
SUFFERING
@Revelation 21: 18 -- 20; @Numbers 7: 10 -- 17; @Colossians 1: 24 -- 27
It is in mind, dear brethren, to speak a word on suffering, having in mind certain definite exalted objectives that are linked with it. We all know that it is the time of suffering, it is not yet the time of glory, that is still before us. It is the time of suffering, and I think we want to appreciate more the privileges that are linked with this suffering period in time. God would bring into our minds the greatness of what is linked with suffering. It is something that we might reverently say that God puts a premium on. *We* do not naturally put a premium on suffering, but I think as we look into the subject of suffering in the divine mind, we shall see more the advantages that it affords. We shall see that it is not something to be shirked, it is not something to be flinched from; but it is something, as we apprehend the fulness of what is linked with it in the divine mind, for which we shall desire our capacity to be increased. It is a great thing to have our capacity for suffering increased and enlarged, for God places great value on the sufferings of His saints.
I have begun with this passage in the Revelation because I want to stress at the beginning the exalted objective that is reached in this wondrous city, the holy city, through the process of suffering. The stones, the precious stones, which adorn the foundations of the wall of the city, are to bring into our minds, by the Spirit, the exalted objective in the divine mind in all the sufferings of the little while that we might be called upon to pass through. I particularly want to refer to the stones as linked with the foundation. There are other features of the city that speak of the great advantages
{416}
that suffering has afforded the saints, and I want to speak of what is linked with the hidden side in the foundation, and yet, we may say, not the hidden side because the marvel about this city is that its foundations are in full view. So that the stones which adorn the foundations are in full view. The city itself is said to be the bride, the Lamb's wife, which I believe is to remind us, amongst other things, as she is brought into our view, of the great interest and pleasure that divine Persons have in what has been witnessed to, and what is the product of the capacity of this vessel in suffering. We little understand the greatness of what has come about through the principle of suffering, as seen in relation to the saints of the assembly from the beginning of the dispensation until now; and I believe that God would encourage the heart of every one of us, by showing us the prime interest that the assembly has in the divine mind as a vessel peculiarly formed and capacitated for suffering; we might say for glory, and that would be true, for the vessel has the glory of God, the city has the glory of God But the fact that she is alluded to as the Lamb's wife at this particular juncture, and the fact that the foundations of the city are alluded to, having in them the twelve names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb, and the fact that the foundations of the wall of the city are referred to as adorned, is to show us what is the outcome and result of the great capacity of this vessel for suffering. The more we understand suffering from this viewpoint, dear brethren, the more there will recede in our minds the disadvantages connected with it materially and naturally and temporarily for us. It would seem as if in the divine mind, in going over in such a detailed way the glory of this vessel, the holy city, that divine Persons would impress us with what the sufferings have produced in a vessel that is capacitated to share with Christ on the basis of a sympathetic link with Him in suffering, in all the
{417}
glory of the administration of the moment that is in mind. She is the Lamb's wife. I need not remind the brethren as to what the Lamb suggests, the One who is uniquely the holy Sufferer. Oh, the sufferings of Christ, in which the way has been pioneered for us in relation to the working out and effectuating of the divine thought! In suffering He has gone where we never will have to go, but in suffering He has set the model for us, left us a model; that in itself would increase in our minds the advantage of suffering, in that He has left a model. We know, what enters into the idea of a model. Peter says in regard of the Lord Jesus that He suffered leaving us a model, and we have that particular advantage of having a model in Christ for suffering. We can understand in some measure what the sufferings of Christ must mean to God, when we have in the Pentateuch detailed with such care and such precision, all that enters into the matter of the offerings. What has God in mind in giving us the infinite detail that we have in the offerings, but to impress us with this great matter of the sufferings of Christ in relation to the testimony? And I would seek tonight, that our hearts might be strengthened in suffering. And we need to feed on the sufferings of Christ. God intends that the sufferings of Christ should become food for our souls; that, as feeding upon them, they might build up in us and with us a constitution that will help us in the sufferings that we have to rejoice in having part in, in sharing with Christ in. There is that which we cannot share in. There are the sufferings of Christ that we can never enter upon. We can contemplatively take account of them, and our spirits are affected as from the distance we look on and think of all that He entered upon that full clearance might be ours. Let us think of His words, "It is finished!" the first cry after the abandonment. I believe that the first cry would, as we understand it rightly, throw into relief
{418}
before our souls the greatness of the capacity of Christ for suffering, because the first cry is the witness to our minds and to our hearts that He had exhausted the judgment of God. In the hours of abandonment He underwent the judgment of God against sin and sins and, think of the profoundness of it, dear brethren, that He exhausted it! He emerged with a loud cry, "It is finished." Think of the capacity for suffering of our Lord Jesus Christ in holy manhood. He has suffered as none of us will have to suffer, and we have to learn how to contemplate Him in suffering.
There are other sufferings of Christ which are more in mind tonight, in what we have to say, in which we *can* have part. Oh, the necessity for feeding upon the sufferings of Christ! We need, dear brethren, to go into the gospels more, especially to feed upon the perfection of manhood seen in Jesus. The reason why, perhaps, we are not formed in the features of manhood as we should be, is because we have not fed enough on the perfections of manhood as seen in the Christ of the gospels. The epistles set us up in the primary thoughts of Christianity. They set us up in relation to Christianity established in relation to Christ in heaven and the Spirit down here. But as having thus been set up, we go back into the gospels and take account of what is set out in them, in order that we might be built up in the features of spiritual manhood needed and required to fill out in fulness our part in Christianity as set out in the epistles.
So the city is said to be the Lamb's wife. She is suitable to Him in glory, as we see here, but she is suited to Him in suffering too, as the Lamb's wife. I particularly want to allude to this matter of the precious stones in the foundation of the wall, so that we might all be encouraged, while things may be difficult at the present time. If we could but see, as heaven sees, the testings, afflictions and sufferings of the saints, the
{419}
diversified character of them, the variety that enters into the different tests and afflictions of the saints, if we could but see what heaven sees, what has been arrived at through them, what a sight it would be! The twelve stones of aesthetic beauty adorning the foundations of the wall of the city are to remind us of the great diversified result, the result of the working out of suffering among the saints. We often wonder at the different things that affect us. Some are tried by one thing, some are tried by another; but is it not an encouragement to see, that as the suffering themselves are diversified, the result will be diversified, but all in infinite unity, the unity of love, as the twelve stones suggest. These stones of variegated beauty and glory, all suggest to our minds and our hearts what is arrived at through the principle and process of suffering in the present little while. And I say this, to encourage our hearts. The brethren in this city have suffered, and will suffer, and the brethren in other cities are suffering. And we suffer not only on account of these specific matters to which I refer, but other matters too in connection with our bodies, in connection with sickness and bereavement, in connection with infirmity and weakness, in connection with our businesses, and pressure in an economic way. All these things are under the divine hand, all held in relation to the exalted object that is in mind, namely, that the holy city, in the foundations of it, will be adorned by twelve stones; nothing less, dear brethren, than the twelve stones. And it is an encouragement to think that every feature of suffering that the saints are called upon to pass through, is part of the divine specific end that is in mind in the twelve stones.
It says, "the foundations of the wall of the city were adorned." It is not just that they are placed there, but they are adorning the wall of the city. We think of what the wall of the city represents now; the principles
{420}
that the brethren have stood for, that they have laid down their lives for. Publicly there may seem no result, and we are not always to expect that God will come in for us as we think He should come in. There may be no deliverance for us, but we want to see that what is in the divine mind is not just exactly deliverance. What is in the divine mind is that there should be produced through the process an enlarged capacity to suffer, for God delights to think of persons formed after Christ, not only in relation to His thoughts in glory, but formed after Christ in suffering, in the spirit of suffering. It is an important thing, that we see suffering and affliction and tests from this viewpoint, that God has had one Man under His eye here in Whom the whole perfection of suffering has been set out, and what fragrance, what redolent odours ascended to God from the sufferings of Christ! Every detail and feature of suffering only served to bring out the infinite fragrance of the holy excellence of the manhood that was there.
God had in mind in the dispensation from the beginning to the end -- in Peter, in John, in the twelve, in Paul to follow (exceeding all others in suffering outside of Christ), and then the martyrs down through the ages to our own time when sufferings are more of a spiritual character, but nevertheless real -- the continuation of the delight He found in Christ here in this great matter of suffering. It is not that He delights to see us suffering, dear brethren, but He delights in what comes through suffering; the ability as it were of His own work to go through in relation to that which would overthrow every one of us naturally. What pleasure, what delight God has in the matter of suffering, and we have to count it a matter of rejoicing that we are called to share in this matter of suffering, and the divine result in the holy city would impress our minds with the advantages of suffering. So that we can see the divine premium put on suffering
{421}
because the result in the twelve stones is reached via this end. It shows that the results are varied but all in themselves perfect, because whether it be the first stone or the twelfth stone, the glory does not decrease in any one of them. Each of the twelve in itself is so distinctive, but in the aggregate adding to the glory of the whole position in the foundations, and we have to get an apprehension of this in our minds, in all that we are passing through, when things seem so difficult and it seems as if we can go on no longer. Our natural strength may ebb, it may be sapped, our minds may tend to give way under the strain; but let us remember that, as it were, beyond all is the great divine objective of the holy city whose foundations will be adorned with nothing less than the twelve stones. That is, the *whole* idea, the whole objective in suffering, the twelve stones in diversified beauty all adding to the glory of the whole in the foundations of the city. That is what might be hidden ordinarily, but what is brought out into full view in the heavenly city, as if God will be delighted to give testimony in that day to all that is the result of what the saints have passed through in suffering untold, in the present dispensation.
One would desire that our hearts may be strengthened in this, dear brethren, so that we might not look at the things which are seen, and be overcome with the difficulties, with the sufferings, intense as they may be, but that we might be with divine Persons in the great objective to be reached in diversified beauty and glory in the precious stones. The very allusion to precious stones suggests the value in the divine eye. The Lord Jesus is going over this matter with John. He wants us to be impressed, not only with the city as a whole, but with the diversified features entering into it, as suggested in the names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb. We think of how they suffered; we think of the detailed suffering in their lives, John, James and
{422}
the others; what a testimony there was to suffering! But how they adorned the position in suffering, and we are to adorn the position in suffering. Spiritual dignity is to come out of suffering, for that is the divine end. The stones are cast in the sufferings of this little while. The twelve precious stones of variegated beauty all suggest the fine result that has been arrived at through the pressure and suffering and afflictions of the present time.
I want to elucidate a little what is in one's mind from the type. I want to refer to the princes of @Numbers 7 as an encouragement to our hearts in apprehending and appreciating the value of the principle of suffering, and to encourage our hearts from this standpoint that the matter is taken full account of by God, and God comes personally into this chapter linking on with the outgoings of thought and affection on the part of the princes in the appreciation of the principle of suffering. You will recall that it is said that the princes presented the dedication gift of the altar on the day that it was anointed, and the princes presented their offering before the altar. Now you will remember that there is one thing about the anointing of the altar that is different from everything else, and I believe it serves to show the premium that is divinely put on the feature of suffering. In Leviticus we are told in relation to the day of the anointing, that the altar was anointed seven times. Knowing as we do what is meant by that, it is intended that this feature should stand out in our minds; it is not just something in the background. The suffering position is not just something by the way. It is not just something, as it were, haphazard, but it is set in our view in a very defined and definite way as signified in the anointing of it seven times. The princes here recognise the value of the altar; it says they "presented the dedication-gift of the altar on the day that it was anointed." As I understand it and as we
{423}
would all understand it, it means that they have taken into full account this outstanding feature in the tabernacle, the altar, and they are moving in their hearts and in their thoughts in the appreciation of it. And God, as it were, holds up everything for the moment to enlarge upon our view what He thinks of a movement like this; and I believe God would bring it into our minds tonight, so that, as we are brought onto His own side in regard to the principle of suffering, we may appreciate it in the light of the divine thought as to it; and as we move in that appreciation of it, God would give us a sense of the delight He has in it.
You will notice that it says, "the princes presented their offering before the altar. And Jehovah said to Moses, They shall present their offering for the dedication of the altar, each prince on his day." Now we read, dear brethren, what comes in at the end in Revelation in the foundations of the holy city. Here, we are reminded of what enters into it at the beginning in the Acts, at the inauguration, and we are to take account of the twelve in the beginning of the Acts in this light. Suffering was something that was understood by them. Peter in his epistle would help us in the way he writes. He would show us that it was not taken on as something that could be avoided, something that just came in by the way; he would show us that it was taken on in the light of the divine intent that the saints should suffer. We often view it as if it were something that comes in by the way, but we want to see that it is in the divine mind. The altar is an integral part of the divine system. It belongs to the present time. It belongs to the millennium. It belongs to the public position. It does not quite belong to eternity; the altar is linked with the court. That is, the value of it is in the present time and in the public position in the millennium. The great value that God puts on the principle of suffering is set out in the place that the altar had and
{424}
the way it was anointed seven times in the day of the anointing. The princes, coming in as they do, represent what is in our hearts as the Spirit of God has His way with us promoting ennobling thoughts with us, promoting exalted objectives with us. It represents what there is with us as moving in concert with the divine mind, apprehending the importance of the principle of suffering. It says, "Jehovah said to Moses, They shall present their offering for the dedication of the altar, each prince on his day." Now we are to be reminded of this. It speaks to us of the pleasure that God has in going into what each of us has come to in regard to the altar, what each of us has arrived at in regard to the sufferings of Christ, for that is what is in mind, in our apprehension and appreciation of them. We pass through these trials and difficulties and afflictions, so intense at times, pressure so intense at times, and we get occupied with ourselves, and our weakness at times well-nigh overwhelms us. But the Spirit of God would help us to get the exalted objective in mind in relation to suffering, that the capacity in correspondence with Christ, in so far as we can suffer with Christ, is in mind in passing us this way. It is a wonderful thing to think, dear brethren, of the pleasure and delight that heaven has in capacity to suffer. You will notice that in the detail of the princes¬ offering, much is said as to vessels. You will notice it is said in verse 13 in regard to the first two vessels, "both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for an oblation." Any one of us who has read @Leviticus 2 would be reminded in this of the preciousness of the sufferings of Christ in the three-fold way in which they are presented in the oblation there, and now what marks these princes in moving in appreciation of the altar, is that they understand something about that, and we are to understand something about the sufferings of Christ in the three-fold way in which they are presented in the oblation in @Leviticus 2. It says, "both of them full
{425}
of fine flour mingled with oil for an oblation," emphasising what the Lord Jesus went through under the eye of God in the perfection of His humanity for the delight and pleasure of God; and as we contemplate that kind of manhood and our vessels, in principle, are filled with thoughts of appreciation of that kind of manhood, we shall come out in the features of it, for it is a different kind of Man from what is around us. We know that men suffer around us, we know that they pass through pressure and difficulties, but what is to be seen in the saints is a different kind of Man, features of another kind of Man, the Man that was anointed with the Holy Spirit as suggested in the mingling with oil, the kind of Man that the Spirit could come upon, the kind of Man that the Spirit was seen in relation to; all this would mark the princes in substance in themselves. They are not only presenting it to God objectively in relation to the dedication of the altar, but they themselves are the vessels that they present, filled with this thought that comes out in the features that are suggested in this kind of manhood. That is what the type suggests.
Then it says, "one cup of ten shekels of gold, full of incense." Notice this word, "full". I believe it is to remind us of this matter of capacity, capacity that is linked with the appreciation of suffering. It means that God has in mind that we should understand this matter of capacity developed in the appreciation of suffering, and the infinite pleasure that God has in it. And we are to take account of the saints in our cities and that through which they are passing, some of them passing through things far more severely than others; and we want to be with God and see what has been enlarged through it, see the capacity that is being enlarged through it. And every one of us who are in these circumstances of suffering need to be concerned more as to the enlargement of the capacity in relation to
{426}
suffering. Then it says, "one young bullock, one ram, one yearling lamb, for a burnt-offering; one buck of the goats, for a sin-offering," all these details representing that not only is the altar in mind, but what is to be on the altar is in mind. And I believe it suggests that, as committing ourselves to what the altar suggests, the great thought of Christ, unique in suffering in relation to the carrying out of the divine will, we are to be reminded, as moving in the appreciation of that, how God would have us marked by the features that were seen in Him in the way we think, in the way we speak, in the way we act, in the way we move. For I believe that is the thought in the vessels full of the incense and full of the fine flour, and the animals, it is what we are inwardly and what we are outwardly. The vessels full of the fine flour and the incense are speaking of what is within; the animals have to do with what is without, as for instance in the burnt-offering itself. Christ marked in His movements by devotion to the will of God, or in other ways as we may think of it in these animals here. It says, "This was the offering of Nahshon the son of Amminadab." How God goes over all these twelve offerings in detail, as if He would enlarge upon our view what He thinks of the saints in the Numbers position in the wilderness, moving in the appreciation of His ways in regard to this matter of suffering, especially in the appreciation of the supreme thought of suffering set out in type in Christ in the altar.
Now I come to Paul, just for a minute, to show how this great picture in the New Testament takes up the matter. Colossians, as we know, is a critical epistle and helps us to see, as the glory of Christ is presented to us and the greatness of the assembly, as these thoughts lay hold of us, the need of going all the way; that the objectives are so great, so infinitely great, that we must go all the way. The objectives in the teaching
{427}
in Colossians are to help us that we may not fall short but that we may go all the way. I want to speak of it for a moment in relation to this matter of suffering. He says, "I rejoice in sufferings for you, and I fill up ... " Notice this reference to filling, again the reference to capacity. If the holy city suggests capacity, if the vessels of the prince's that they brought suggest capacity, here again we have the thought of capacity brought before our view in a vessel, a man of like passions with ourselves, but one who in devoted love for the assembly was prepared to fill up that which was behind of the tribulations of Christ in his flesh, for His body, which is the assembly. The exalted objective we can see is in mind in His body, the assembly. And Paul is one of the great leaders in suffering, and we are to understand how sufferings come in on this line, that we are to be concerned as to how we view them, as to how we take up suffering from this viewpoint, whether we just view it in regard to what it means to ourselves, or whether we understand the prime place that the assembly has. That is what is in Paul's mind here. He says, "I rejoice in sufferings for you, and I fill up that which is behind of the tribulations of Christ in my flesh, for his body." Think of what it would be to Paul in the midst of all the pressure and the afflictions of the various hours in which it was so intense, what it was to him to have before his mind and his soul, Christ's body, the assembly, the mystery, that which was hidden throughout the ages in God, that which was in the purposes and counsels of divine love! Think of how the sufferings were balanced by the weight of the greatness of the objectives in regard to the assembly in that light One would encourage our hearts, dear brethren, by reminding us of this side of the sufferings, for while it is seen specially in Paul, the door is open for every one of us, as appreciating the principle of suffering, to go in for it more and more, filling it up indeed, filling
{428}
up what is behind, seen uniquely in Paul. It is wonderful to think that the Lord has not completed all the sufferings, that some of the sufferings have been left behind as it were. It says, "I fill up that which is behind of the tribulations of Christ." Think of it, think of the Lord speaking of His own in this light! He has left us a model in suffering, but here we have the tribulations which are behind, in the filling out of which we come in, as it were, after Christ. What an exalted objective, having the assembly in mind!
We should be encouraged in regard to this feature of suffering, to see how divine objectives are in mind through it all. There may not be deliverance, and indeed in many cases there is not; but think of what is being expanded and enlarged through all the processes of suffering. We have thought first of the twelve stones, the great flexible administrative number, the number of love; the twelve stones in their variegated beauty, the result of the processes of suffering. In Numbers we have the princes moving in the appreciation of the principle of suffering, and bringing into our view what was developed in them in manhood in their apprehension of Christ's humanity in the type, in all its uniqueness; this no doubt marking them, as the type would suggest. It is to mark us too, as we appreciate the altar, and as we move in the appreciation of what is suggested in @Numbers 7. And then there is the great exalted line of suffering; set in our cities as we are, in different ways, but yet we are thinking of Christ's body, thinking of the assembly; thinking of what is behind of the tribulations of Christ, realising the greatness of our portion in having part in filling that out, filling up what is behind. Oh, that we may not be behind in it, but realise more and more the advantages of suffering, the greatness of our position in the assembly as linked with suffering! The assembly as the holy city in @Revelation 21 shows the full result of it, a result that
{429}
cannot be improved on. May our hearts be encouraged, and our minds helped in the midst of suffering, so that we may not be overcome, so that the enemy may not gain the advantage in the hour of pressure, in the time of suffering, by casting before us all the disadvantages of it. Let God help us to see all the advantages of it, as we have referred to them in these passages, and to yield ourselves to it in view of our soon appearing with Christ in glory.
{430}
CHANGE
@1 Samuel 9: 27; @1 Samuel 10: 1 -- 7; @1 Samuel 25: 39 -- 42; @2 Corinthians 3: 18; @Philippians 3: 20 -- 21
I have in mind to speak a word on change. Christianity involves that we are changed. @2 Corinthians 3: 18 speaks of being changed "from glory to glory." It is wonderful to take account of the changes that are brought about in Christianity; changes that involve the operation and exercise of divine power and authority, in certain relations. I have read these passages to refer to certain specific changes that take place. First, a moral change contemplated: "thou shalt be turned into another man" -- changed into another man; what we might refer to as a moral change in persons. Then I want to speak of the thought of a marital change -- in Abigail's status; Abigail is a type of the assembly in the Old Testament. When we come to the anti-type, it would be in the working out of things experimentally in the members of the assembly. Then I want to speak of a spiritual change in @2 Corinthians 3, as the result of the operation of Him to Whom we have sung, the Lord Spirit, a real substantial inward change that takes place in the saints, especially in view of the service of God; not wholly limited to that, but specially with that in view; involving, too, the liberty of Christianity, entered upon, known and enjoyed by believers. Then, lastly, the greatest of all changes, as we might say, the great physical change, when the One whom we look for will come and will not tarry; when He will change our bodies, these bodies of humiliation, these bodies in which so much is experienced now, these vessels where the treasure is stored in relation to the knowledge of God. The Lord Jesus will change them by a mighty
{431}
operation of His power, the power that He has to subdue all things to Himself.
It is important that every one of us should be amenable to change; it is a poor thing if we are not amenable to change, because Christianity refines us. If it does not refine us, it is questionable whether the truth has found its way inwardly with us; and God is concerned as to having truth in the inward parts. And when I say Christianity involves refinement, I not only mean spiritual refinement, but refinement in the ordinary sense of the word. You would never expect the believer, one of the children of God, to be marked by uncouthness or lack of courtesy, such things would be foreign to the children of God. Christianity does change us; the truth changes us; the teaching of the glad tidings changes us; and oh, what changes have come about with some of us! Some of us can speak experimentally about that, as taken up in the ways of God, and our ways and manners changed through the teaching, the truth of the glad tidings. Sin and the service of sin hardens us and makes us uncouth, but the truth of the glad tidings refines us, and I am speaking simply when I say so. Some may take a certain amount of pride in being what they are, uncouth as they may be, but heaven takes little stock of that. There is nothing to boast of in that. Some of us, of course, may take pride in other things, in our naturally refined ways; there is nothing in that either, when we weigh it in the light of the balances of the sanctuary.
Saul is brought into view as one through whom we are to learn in relation to the advantages that are given to him. I need not remind you dear brethren, of the advantages that we have, especially the younger brothers and sisters. What an advantage it is to be in a meeting like this tonight, to be in an environment where heavenly refinement is known and expressed, where heavenly love abides and is circulating! What
{432}
a wonderful thing it is that God in His mercy should have allowed us to have part in an environment like this! I wonder if there is anyone who is thinking of leaving that environment? I wonder if there is anyone in whose heart love has grown cold; with whom spiritual joy may be on the wane? You are in an environment where God is, where heaven is near; there is no immediate distance between the environment that is in the assembly, and heaven. The Spirit of God who dwells in the assembly is not in the world, the world does not see Him nor know Him; He dwells in the assembly yet has first-hand contact with heaven. Indeed, being a divine Person, though He has taken up His abode in the assembly, we could not limit Him to that. And what He hears, He makes known to us; not what He has heard, but what He hears. He is in immediate touch with that wonderful realm on high where Jesus is as Man, Centre of the wondrous administration that is working out from that position, entering into this meeting tonight. I wonder if our hearts and our minds take it in, that what is entering into this meeting tonight is flowing from the blessed functioning of Christ as Man in heaven, working out in administrative service in the ministry, the work of the ministry, having in mind the edifying of His body! So that we have a wonderful advantage in being in this environment, where God is known. It says, "In Judah is God known," @Psalm 76: 1. It is a wonderful thing to take account of the way God is known in the assembly. Is He not known in creation? He is, indeed! His eternal power and divinity are witnessed and attested to in creation. But in the assembly, "In Judah is God known," -- not in relation to creatorial power and operation and activity, but the God whose heart has been made known in Jesus, the God who is revealed in Jesus, is the God who is known in the assembly.
{433}
I want to refer to the environment here, as to this change in a man -- Saul. In @1 Samuel 9: 27 it says, "As they were going down to the end of the city, Samuel said to Saul, Tell the servant to pass on before us (and he passed on), but stand thou still now, that I may cause thee to hear the word of God." "That I may *cause* thee ... " Now I want to stress in what I have to say as to Saul tonight, and his becoming changed into another man, that we are in an environment where everything is operating towards that end, that we all might be changed into better brothers and sisters. This portion of the Word is full of the thought of men, indeed in this book, while God has allowed Saul to come forward. He has in mind the man that is set out in David, whom Paul alludes to as a man after God's heart. And while God is thinking of that, He allows the people as it were, the advantage of making their own choice. God is infinitely fair in matters; we sometimes are very unfair. How humbling it is to see the injustice and unfairness that marks us at times But God is infinitely fair, and He is allowing the people a certain measure of latitude in regard to Saul, for He has important lessons to teach us, as He does in all these matters. He may allow a certain line of things a fair amount of latitude and scope; but as in Saul, it is only to bring out the *exceeding sinfulness of sin*, such as we have to learn experimentally in the analysis of good and evil in our souls in @Romans 7. God allows a certain latitude to a certain line of things, because He has in mind over against the dark background of the features linked with the man of sin and shame, to throw into bright relief the features of His own Anointed in all their excellence, set out in type in David, but supremely seen in the Christ of the gospels. God is infinitely fair in all these matters, and if we are unfaithful, He remains faithful. Have we not had that witnessed to in the vicissitudes of the testimony, in the recurring
{434}
crises in the years that are past, in recent times as well? Have we not had the attestation in a clear, unmistakable manner of the fact that God abides faithful? What a God we have!
And Samuel here is representing God. He is a wonderful man, Samuel; he comes into the Psalms, not as a prophet, but as a priest. I think that is a wonderful commendation of him. He was one of the greatest prophets who ever lived in Old Testament times, and yet when he is brought up in @Psalm 99, he is not brought up in relation to the prophetic side of his service, but what is stressed are his links with God in a priestly way -- "Moses and Aaron among his priests, and Samuel among them that call upon his name." Is that not an indication to us, dear brethren, as to what underlay Samuel's power in prophetic ministry? Is it not an incentive to all of us to pray, and to pray, and to pray again, to be men and women of prayer? The Books of Samuel stress the matter of prayer in women and in men; they open with a woman who is a praying woman, Hannah; a woman who can speak of her horn as lifted up in Jehovah. What a sister Hannah was; a woman who can say that her horn is lifted up in Jehovah, a woman who can put into poetic utterance her appreciation of the truth, her knowledge of God arrived at through anguish of soul as beset by the persistent persecution of her rival, Peninnah! Hannah was a woman who cried inwardly, despite the suffering and the persecution. And the more we are with God, the more we shall come out as Hannah, with a song which will celebrate God and His Anointed. And Samuel is mentioned in his priestly power in the Psalms. I have no doubt Samuel prayed for Saul.
It is a wonderful thing to be in an environment and to be linked with persons who pray for you; I would encourage the hearts of the young brothers and sisters as to this matter of being prayed for. If we could only
{435}
realise the value of prayer and what it has meant to our salvation! Some of us would never have been here tonight had it not been that we were prayed for. But we have been prayed for. Think of these meetings and how they have been prayed for in every part of the world! Oh, the *power of prayer*! Oh, that we should give ourselves more to it! We should be far greater assembly men and women if we knew what it was to spend time in prayer, in the hours of the night seasons, in the early hours of the morning; we want to have to do with God. How can we go through unless we have to do with God? Dependence becomes us, knowing what we are as creatures, knowing the vanity of our minds, the self-sufficiency of our hearts, the self-reliance and all that goes to make up the man of sin and shame. How we need to keep near to God that these features may be utterly renounced, judged in the light of God's Anointed One, as Paul says in Colossians, "As therefore ye have received the Christ, Jesus the Lord, walk in him, rooted and built up in him," @Colossians 2: 6, 7. How many of us have awakened to the fact that we have been rooted and built up in ourselves instead of the Christ, Jesus the Lord! That is the only Man that will do for God; and the sooner we are changed into another man, the better; the sooner we learn this great matter in the truth of the gospel of a *change of man*, the better it will be. In @Romans 6, we are brought in the experience in our souls to changing our man, reckoning ourselves "dead to sin and alive to God in Christ Jesus." The change of man is a real thing! It is not an academic matter; it is not a theoretical matter; it is not a matter of theology. This matter of the change of man is a real practical experience, and, as I hope to draw attention to in Saul, it involves being changed "into another man."
Samuel says, "stand thou still now, that I may cause thee to hear the word of God." It is a secret between
{436}
Saul and God, God's representative in Samuel. Oh, to have a secret with God, to have an understanding in our souls as to where we are in the testimony, through a word from God! God would give us each a word, a word from Himself, as to the positioning of us in the testimony. The difficulty with most of us in getting into one another's way is that we have never had the consciousness of a word from God, or being regulated by a word from God. Let us see what the word from God says and notice where it was given. It was given in "the end of the city," and the servant had passed on. It is not a word that someone else is coming into here, others will come into it later, but this is a matter of a secret between your soul and God represented in Samuel. And it says, "Then Samuel took the vial of oil, and poured it upon his head." That is, God is going to give Saul his day, just as He gives everyone of us our day. How are we going to shine in our day? Think of the princes in Numbers and how they had their day. Saul is going to have his day. Everyone of us has his day, and it is a great thing to be regulated in that day by a word from God. Then it says, "Samuel took the vial of oil, and poured it upon his head, and kissed him." Think of that! We often speak of Samuel and his priestly and prophetic power, but you know, Samuel was an affectionate man. He was a man who knew and understood love in the divine realm.
You remember when matters were affected in Exodus in Moses¬ relation with Zipporah his wife, and she was using the wrong kind of language, that God came in. While He was dealing with Moses, it is a salutary word for those who, like Moses, have any part in the service. Moses was going on without the circumcision. God says in principle *I won't have it*! And He will not have it in any of us; He will not have us go on making room for the flesh, allowing the flesh uncontrolled liberty! Circumcision must come in and especially
{437}
with the servants of God. There must be the inward cutting off of the flesh, not the external matter merely; the legal man is concerned about the branches, but that is not circumcision. Circumcision is the application of the death of Christ in the power of the Spirit to all that I am and have inwardly. Many of us would cut off the flesh outwardly, but have never had a right judgment of it inwardly. God says as it were, I am not going on with you, Moses, until this matter is faced. And God comes upon Moses to slay him! He is going to kill Moses. "Our God is a consuming fire." We cannot presume to have to do with the things of God and act in a fleshly way while representing God. God will not have it! But then, behind it, immediately behind it, God is thinking of His servant. We might have ruled Moses out altogether. We might have said, had we been listening, "That's the end of Moses." But what does God do? He gives Moses a word. He tells Aaron to go into the wilderness to meet Moses, and Moses meets him in the wilderness; and it says that Aaron kissed him. Think of that, dear brethren! I have said that God is infinitely fair. If He deals with us in severity in matters, as with Moses who presumed to go on ostensibly without the principle of circumcision in his house, yet on the other hand He comes in and provides the resource of love to stimulate Moses, and encourage him. Right in the wilderness where there was no resource, as it were, to strengthen and to encourage, the brother Aaron, the priestly man, the man of love, the man with affection, was there with a kiss. So God is infinitely fair; and let *us* be like God in *all* these matters; let us be careful lest we should take things into our hands and deal with Moses ourselves as we think he should be dealt with. It is God's matter! God says, "To me belongs vengeance; I will recompense, "@Hebrews 10: 30. Let none of us, in any shape or form, act retributively in *any* matter! Let us
{438}
leave what belongs to God in His own realm to Himself in the exercise of His own prerogatives.
It says here in @1 Samuel 10: 1 that Samuel kissed Saul. It is a good start. I would say to all the young brothers and sisters here, you have an excellent start; if you go out of fellowship as Saul did, you cannot blame your start. You have been surrounded by the love of the brethren; the brethren love you; we love you here tonight; God loves you, the Father loves you, the Lord Jesus loves you, the Spirit loves you, and the brethren love you. You are surrounded by affection in a circle of affections all divine, as the poet has said. What a start you have had! It is not an arbitrary realm, at least it should not be, it is not a realm which will repel you; it is a realm where you are going to have every advantage of a good start. So he "kissed him, and said, Is it not because Jehovah has anointed thee prince over his inheritance?" Samuel is moving according to the word of God. He is not saying, Well I have my own reserves, I have my own judgment about Saul. Samuel is with God, and we want to be with God in all these matters.
Then he says, "When thou goest from me today" -- notice that, today, not tomorrow or the day after -- "thou shalt meet two men by Rachel's sepulchre in the border of Benjamin at Zelzah." That is, things are operating immediately to help us all the way. Notice the stress on "two men by Rachel's sepulchre." Oh, what Rachel's sepulchre brings up in the minds of the saints! It was where death was experienced in relation to that which was so near and dear to the heart of Jacob; the natural tie between him and Rachel, all his natural hopes, as it were, buried when he buried Rachel. What a time it was for Jacob! He never forgot it! He brings it up to Joseph long after. When the matter of Ephraim and Manasseh was coming up (Joseph's seed) Jacob does not fail to tell Joseph in tender language
{439}
of how Rachel died by him. Rachel's grave not only brings up the matter of death to natural hopes and desires, but it brings up the thought of holy feelings, the feelings that belong to the testimony where God is known, because the testimony of God is bathed in the feelings of Jesus. Let us remember that, because the Manhood of Jesus, the incarnation, casts a retroactive glow on the whole of the Old Testament. And the tears of godly men in relation to the truth, and in relation to the testimony, are but the Spirit of Christ operating in them, as we are told -- the tears of a prophet too, for Jeremiah mentions Rachel. And Matthew, the administrative gospel, brings up Rachel. What a personality Rachel was, well-known above, well-known below! What a woman she was! And Saul has the advantage of this feature of education in this wonderful environment -- "two men by Rachel's sepulchre in the border of Benjamin." Oh, what Benjamin, little Benjamin, brings up, not the pretension that we see all around! Saul was head and shoulders above the people, but the first thing he has to learn is linked with the environment of a sepulchre and Benjamin, little Benjamin, brings up, not the pretension Benjamin -- and the prophets speak of Bethlehem. @Micah 5: 2, says, "little to be among the thousands of Judah, out of thee shall he come forth unto me who is to be Ruler in Israel: whose goings forth are from of old, from the days of eternity."
Then it says, "they will say to thee, The asses are found which thou wentest to seek, and behold, thy father has dismissed the matter of the asses, and is anxious about you." Look how Saul is being impregnated in his mind with this matter of care about him! We are to be reminded of this. Samuel goes on to speak of these three men who are going up to God to Bethel, and then the hill of God, then the company of prophets, and Samuel says, "And the Spirit of Jehovah will come
{440}
upon thee, and thou shalt prophesy with them, and shalt be turned into another man. And it shall be, when these signs shall come to thee, thou shalt do as they hand shall find; for God is with thee." That is, God is wanting to change us, from this viewpoint. He wants to help every one of us as having to do with the truth. That is the principle. Saul is having to do with the truth, and it is to act and react on him, and the Spirit of God coming upon him, he is to be changed into another man. It is a moral change. Dear brethren, is there not room for moral changes with us? Is there not room for change in oneself, and with each one of us? Oh, how we need to make room for the truth! Let the truth assert itself; let the truth have its way! Let the environment bear in upon us that we may be changed from the ways linked with the man of the flesh, the man of the world, for that is what Saul is; he represents the flesh that you positively cannot improve in any shape or form whatever you set it down in the midst of.
Now I come to just a word as to Abigail. What extrication she had to experience! What extrication some of us have had to experience! She had been linked with the folly of a Nabal. That speaks of a system which had no use for David, and would not want to make room for him. While Abigail morally gets disentangled in the working out of the truth in the chapter, there comes the time when the marital status is changed, and it says, "And when David heard that Nabal was dead, he said, Blessed be Jehovah, who has pleaded the cause of my reproach from the hand of Nabal, and has kept back his servant from evil"; @1 Samuel 25: 39. David realises what an influence Abigail was, and a change has come about -- Nabal is dead; that side of things is ended. David says, I want Abigail now; and the ministry goes out to attach Abigail (type of the assembly in its members) to the one to whom she
{441}
rightly belongs, David, type of the Lord Jesus Christ. What a change it is! It says, "she arose and bowed herself on her face to the earth, and said, Behold, let thy handmaid be a bondwoman to wash the feet of the servants of my lord." Think of this great personality, Abigail -- a woman of worth; a woman of dignity; a mistress who had young men and maidens! But think of the result of this change -- the lowliness that marked her! And how, lowliness becomes us! The truth of the assembly subjected to Christ -- how it should work out in the members -- lowliness, bond-service, committed in love to stand by the saints, the servants of Christ, as it says, "to wash the feet of the servants of my lord." What grace, dear brethren What refinement! What a change!
Abigail involves a changed outlook, no longer harassed by the unsympathetic feelings and lack of understanding with Nabal. She is linked now with David where her affections can find free flow, as under the spell and power of the ministry in the servants of David her lord. What a wonderful thing the ministry is, dear brethren -- the glory of it, the radiancy in it attracting our hearts to Christ -- the Spirit in obscuring grace behind it, serving -- and then Christ's love in relation to the assembly, that our hearts may be won over completely to David and his system, as Abigail's was!
Now this spiritual change in relation to the Lord the Spirit in @2 Corinthians 3. It says, "where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. But we all, looking on the glory of the Lord, with unveiled face, are transformed according to the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Lord the Spirit." What a change! This is a real change; it is not a fancied change, dear brethren. The word is 'metamorphose', a strong word employed to bring out the reality, the strength of the change, "from glory to glory." It involves liberty. The apostle has been dealing with the
{442}
ministry of condemnation, the ministry of death, the letter and not the spirit, and he is bringing in the brethren on to the ground of confidence. Over this whole second letter could be written, The promotion of confidence among the brethren. Time and again he speaks of it; he speaks in this chapter, of his confidence, and then the whole context is alluding to it. He refers to this matter of the change by the Spirit, not now by prophetic service and environment in Samuel, nor by David and his attractiveness exactly, and the powerful ministry of his servants in winning Abigail and communing with her; but it is now the Spirit, in His lowly, obscure but *authoritative* service. Let us not have minimised in our minds, the authority linked with the Spirit in this matter. It is as if the Spirit is gently, using His authority, (and what authority it is!) to bring about this liberty, this change among the brethren, "according to the same image from glory to glory." The Spirit only has *one* Man before Him, and that is Christ. The end will be that we shall all be like Christ, but we want to be like Him now.
Then the last change, as to our bodies. Oh, what a change, dear brethren, when the Lord shall take the matter in hand, linked with the Spirit in the light of @Romans 8, when He will come and will apply His power, that power that He has (not He will have) to subdue all things to Himself! He is going to apply that power to our bodies -- "the dead in Christ shall rise first; then we, the living who remain, shall be caught up ... " we shall be changed -- changed by His power. His operating power, and we shall have bodies like His own to enjoy with Himself in the realms above the unending bliss of part with Him! Oh, what a change, dear brethren!
May the ministry come home to us that we all may make room for change; that we may make better men and women, brothers and sisters, in the assembly.
{443}
SPIRITUAL POWER AS SEEN IN SAMSON
@Judges 13: 24 -- 25; @Judges 15: 9 -- 20; @Judges 16: 23 -- 31
It is in mind, dear brethren, to say a word on spiritual power. I have read these passages from the book of the Judges dealing with Samson's history, which, in the type, is a remarkable unfolding of spiritual power as linked with the presence and operation of the Spirit, and as linked with Nazariteship. I am sure that there must be a desire in every one of our hearts to know more of the power that is linked with the Spirit of God. We all want to be concerned, young and old, brothers and sisters alike, to make room for this divine Person, who has come to us and has taken His abode within us and has become available to us for use in the testimony of God, in which, through grace, we have part. It is a power that cannot be imitated. How the flesh would seek to imitate it! And Samson's history (from one viewpoint) shows us, in such a remarkable way, the history of the assembly publicly, and what has come into that history. You will notice that the enemy of the people of God which Samson has to do with is the Philistine, a feature of hostile power that each of us has to face in his heart, and to judge unsparingly; for throughout the history of the ways of God, the Philistine is set out as one who hinders the service of the Spirit of God (as we speak of it), for he stops the wells. And I am sure, dear brethren, that it is not without note that the closing days of the dispensation should have been marked by a peculiar ministry in relation to the Spirit; for it is not an ordinary touch that we have received in regard to the Spirit, but a distinctive touch; a touch which peculiarly belongs to the distinctive ministry through which it has come to us.
The brethren will note that everything that we go on
{444}
with in the service of God, every bit of light that governs us in the service of God, has come through that distinctive ministry in the past fifty years. How much we owe to it! How much we have to be thankful for! There are many others that have had part in the ministry, but it is in and through the distinctive ministry that I have referred to, in the last fifty years, that the light which governs us in the service of God, has come. And the last outstanding feature of it has been this matter as to the Spirit; a great matter, indeed, to close the dispensation with! For what a great Personage the Holy Spirit is, and how suited to divine ways is it, that, ere such a dispensation of glory, unsurpassed spiritually, should end, attention should be drawn to Him who was sent from heaven, and Who has served throughout the dispensation since the day He came in at Pentecost, through all the difficult times in departure from the truth, down through the dark ages, and awakening in the time of the Reformation, as He did, such choice and peculiar movements, to which we owe so much in deliverance and emancipation from the thrall and spell of that system of entrenched darkness, that affected so many and so much! And then the days of revival through the great and honoured servant, beloved J.N.D., his service in awakening the saints to the distinctiveness of Christ in heaven as Head, and the body here on earth. Then the wonderful ministry through beloved J.B.S.; so essential -- that we should know it and appreciate it. I would commend to the young men, that they should read J.B.S.¬s ministry. What a moral foundation it gives us! Then the remarkable ministry of F.E.R. in connection with deliverance, unique in itself. But the particular feature now, that we have alluded to, is the period of the last fifty years, when ray after ray of light has come in, in regard to the service of God, the spirit of God in it, dear brethren, His voice in the ministry, and yet He himself behind the scenes.
{445}
How needful it is, dear brethren, that that distinctive ministry, in which the Spirit has been so prominent, should have its full place with us, and that there should be no effort with any one of us (for our hearts are all prone to it, as the enemy finds a way through them) in any way to undervalue, or discredit, or undermine the distinctiveness of that ministry. And the Spirit of God has been drawn attention to, in the closing phase of it, in a unique way, as to His Person as an Object of worship; but I believe that, commensurate with that, there is now in this testing period the challenge to us, not just as to whether we honour that Person objectively in the honour and worship that is rightly His due, but as to whether we are habituating ourselves to communion with Him, and whether we know what it is to use Him, and to be used by Him. It is a very real matter. The only way to meet the Philistine element (which all of us are so prone to make way for, and to become characterised by) is by making room for the Spirit. We need to make room for Him more and more in all our faculties -- in our way of thinking, in our way of speaking, in our way of hearing! For it is important, in the calling of attention to the Spirit, in the closing moment of the dispensation, on the eve of the translation, that we should see what is in mind, and that we should learn that the dispensation is going to end in spiritual power. It may be in smallness; it may be in weakness publicly (for we cannot claim too much), but it is going to end with a definite known result, in the assembly. That enters into the history of Samson who delineates for us, in a peculiar way, the history of the church publicly.
So it says of Samson: "And the woman bore a son, and called his name Samson. And the child grew, and Jehovah blessed him." Notice, there is something said about this child that is unique. It says of Solomon when
{446}
he was born that Jehovah loved him, as if God would fasten our attention on Solomon, that there is something unique about Solomon, for Christ is in mind in the type; there is something said about him that is said about no other, that Jehovah loved him. And here it says of Samson, that Jehovah blessed him; as if God would help us to see the line that He is going to support, the line in Samson's history, which we can count upon in meeting the encroachment of the human mind in the things of God. It is all around us, and is working much havoc and departure from the truth, and introducing error in the public body around us. But coming nearer to ourselves, how we need, every one of us, to be delivered from the element of the Philistine, so that we may make room for the Spirit of God, and as making room for the Spirit of God, overcome this element. "And Jehovah blessed him." You will notice how the woman enters into this great matter; and I would suggest to the beloved brethren the great need of a right state among the brethren as to this great matter of the bringing in of this line, suggested in Samson, this effective line of Nazariteship, devotion to God without reservation, and making room for the Spirit of God. The woman has to do with it in a peculiar way; and I would desire to arouse the body of the saints, as suggested in the woman. Not the public side of energy; not the man side, as in Manoah; but heaven is interested in the woman. And I believe, that in this city and in other cities, heaven is interested in the woman, in the state of the saints, and arousing the state of the saints as to matters on hand, especially as to the bringing in of Samson! I am not thinking of Samson just as a person; I am thinking of him as an effective line, divinely supported, to meet the entrenched power of human influence in a mental way, suggested in the Philistine. And God is honouring the woman. Manoah comes into it; it is not that we are to leave the public
{447}
side out, the side of ministry, the side of gift, the side of operation; we cannot carry on without the man; we must have the man as well as the woman. But the woman represents the subjective state, in connection with which heaven is intervening in relation to this matter. The skill of the woman in bringing the man in, is to be noted, so that there is a side of mutuality which is important to notice, coming in in relation to the man and the woman. How important and essential it is that in our cities, in the local assemblies, the subjective state of the saints should be equal to this great matter as to what heaven is saying, what God is saying, in regard to the raising up of a line of deliverance, to meet an entrenched foe, as suggested in the Philistine, who reigned for forty years over them, as it says, "Jehovah gave them into the hand of the Philistines forty years."
Wonderful things come into the chapter (we have not time to dwell on them), but I just wish to stress this matter of how God comes into the position. The Angel has come into the matter, representing God, and wonderful things have occurred as the matter proceeds. We can expect, on this line, that things that we have never seen before, will take place, inculcating into us, and instilling in our hearts, a fresh desire to know more about the Person we are having to do with, as with Manoah and his wife in their enquiry in relation to the Angel. And you will remember as to the woman, how it says, "And Manoah said to his wife, We shall surely die, because we have seen God." Oh, how the masculine side, the side of energy, flinches here! Fear is entering in; and how we need to be delivered from that awful snare -- fear! "But his wife said to him, If Jehovah were pleased to kill us, he would not have received a burnt-offering and an oblation at our hands, neither would he have shewed us all these things, nor would he at this time have told us such things as these."
{448}
You can see that the secret lies with the woman; that is, the body of the saints are right in the matter. The woman suggests the subjective state of the saints, and it is a side that we are to make room for. Some of us may think, in our taking part and in our having to do things, that everything depends on us; but if we fall into that snare, we shall be like Samson as seen later. We shall come under the power of the Philistine, into captivity to the Philistine. We are to see how God is stressing the woman here; and He is stressing the woman tonight. He is stressing the *state* of the saints, the subjective state of the saints in this city, and in other cities that are represented here. And the state of the saints is to be equal to matters. We may blame the leaders (and of course the leaders are to be blamed, if they are to be blamed; there is responsibility attaching to those who lead in matters), but heaven is stressing the woman, stressing the state of the saints, as intervening in this matter. Manoah is giving up hope; he is receding, you see. He says, We shall die; it is the end! But not the woman! She knows where God is. The subjective state among the saints discerns where God is, and what God is going to do. She is an observing woman; she is putting two and two together; she is using, as we have often said before, and what is much needed among the saints -- spiritual commonsense. She says, "he would not have received a burnt-offering and an oblation at our hands, neither would he have skewed us all these things." She knows God, and that is a great thing to understand. The minister may think that everything lies on him, but we must not fall into that error! How essential the subjective state of the saints is for spiritual prosperity in all our cities! How important it is that we should not be governed by what is around in the profession, the hierarchy, with its use of power, keeping in captivity the latent wealth in the work of God, in the body of the people of God, the saints. It is essential that all
{449}
that, that is around us, should be overthrown! The Spirit of God will not have it otherwise! And the Spirit of God would stress tonight this matter of the woman, and arouse the subjective state with us, as to this matter of what God is doing, and where He is. So that Manoah is helped through the woman. And then it says, "And the woman bore a son, and called his name Samson." She is going right forward. Manoah says, There is no use in going forward; we are going to die! But not the woman! She says, We must go forward. *She* bore a son. A new line is coming on to view, and the power of God, spiritual power, is going to be linked with it, and it is the outcome of what she is constitutionally. Nazariteship is brought in in Samson, through what she was constitutionally, refusing what would stimulate and excite the natural mind, excite nature.
Then it says, "the child grew." We can expect things to grow on this line. "And Jehovah blessed him." It is not a question here of Israel, at this point, coming into the matter; it is not a question of those around in Zoreah and Eshtaol, and what they are doing at this juncture; it is not a question of what Judah is doing here; it is a question of what God is setting on, what God is supporting, discerning where God is. And it says, "Jehovah blessed him. And the Spirit of Jehovah began to move him at Mahaneh-Dan, between Zoreah and Eshtaol," -- not very easy territory, not the best territory, not the territory of Judah, but of Daniel And "between Zoreah and Eshtaol" -- that is, it is Samson's own local setting. That would be in the mind of faith as we read this. It is not a question of what the Spirit of God is doing with him at five thousand miles away, or five hundred miles away; it is a question of what the Spirit of God is doing with him in his own locality as we would speak of it. And how important it is that we make room for the Spirit (I know
{450}
the way it is presented here is sovereign) but, as we go back into it, it refers to our making room for the Spirit on this line. And it says, "the Spirit of Jehovah began to move him" -- the Hebrew word is "expressive of powerful emotion," (footnote 'g'). Oh, how we want to look for this -- where the Spirit of God is in matters; whether He is supporting what we say and what we do. It is a great thing in discerning ministry, to see where the Spirit of God is, because our hearts are stirred and moved, as the Spirit of God is in ministry. And he is moving Samson here at Zoreah and Eshtaol. We want to understand the local position better; and how the Spirit of God is honouring it. God is honouring the local position. Let none of us despise it; let none of us think that we are any bigger than the local position; let all of us, especially those who serve, remember the way that the Spirit of God is presented here as powerfully moving Samson in this geographical area, the local position.
Now I want to go on to speak of the next part, where the Spirit of God comes in. It says in verse 9 of chapter 15: "And the Philistines went up, and encamped in Judah, and spread themselves in Lehi." Now we come to a section where Samson is particularly helped. We want to understand Samson's history, we want to read it and re-read it; to see how we may be helped by divine Persons -- how we may be ensnared by the foe too, as giving up or exposing our secret. What a history we have in Samson, and what teaching there is in it for us! It says, "And the Philistines went up, and encamped in Judah." Now we come to territory that is choice, for Judah represents that. It is a territory that is well marked out in the word of God, a territory that faith knows, as having a peculiar place in the mind of God; and it peculiarly represents the area where the light of God is known and appreciated. We find that, even in this realm, much may come in
{451}
to impede the progress of the saints, and to bring the saints into bondage; but the prophets and the Psalms show us the great interest that God has in Judah. And it says, they "spread themselves in Lehi." There must have been some reason for them encamping in Judah. "And the men of Judah said, Why are ye come up against us? And they said, "To bind Samson" -- notice that! They are not concerned about Judah exactly; they are concerned about Samson. They want to defeat this feature of spiritual power operating in view of the liberation of the truth and of the saints. How the enemy moved against Christ in this light! Judah delivers Samson into the hands of the Philistines.
We think of how the Lord was delivered by those who were nearest to Him into the hands of the Philistines, into the hands of His enemies. What a tale it unfolds as we think of it; the betrayal of the Lord Jesus -- the betrayal of Samson by the men of Judah. And it says in verse 14, "When he came to Lehi, the Philistines shouted against him." Now notice the conspiracy in this matter! The men of Judah are bound up in this conspiracy. Oh, the conspiracy that Matthew draws attention to! Time and again Matthew, the great administrative gospel, speaks of the Jews taking counsel to put Jesus to death. Think of this awful conspiracy, the conspiracy against Christ! The conspiracy here is against Samson. And it says, "When he came to Lehi, the Philistines shouted against him." "When he came to Lehi" -- that is, he comes into the position where the Philistines had encamped. Notice this, because divine Persons are in this matter, moving strategically against this overpowering and ensnaring foe -- the weight of human intellect and human mentality in the things of God. Divine Persons are moving into this realm, through Samson, to take issue with it. And it says, "When he came to Lehi"; Samson does not go *around* Lehi. The point is that divine Persons are
{452}
in this matter, in the very place where the Philistines spread themselves. The more we are like Paul, in the secret of divine power, the power linked with what Christ is as the wisdom and power of God, and what the Spirit is, the more we shall be prepared to meet things, as they spread themselves on this line. We need not be afraid! Samson is not afraid here, and divine Persons are moving into the position. It says, "And the Spirit of Jehovah came upon him, and the cords that were on his arms became as threads of flax that are burned with fire, and his band loosed from off his hands. And he found a fresh jawbone of an ass, and put forth his hand and took it, and slew with it a thousand men."
Now I just want to refer, in passing, to how the ministry is taken up now in the fresh jawbone of an ass, wielded in a power mysterious to men. Men cannot understand the presence of the Spirit. The human mind cannot fathom the peculiar resourcefulness connected with the presence of the Spirit of God in ministry and service. And the Spirit of God comes in upon Samson. It says, "he found." Notice now, it is not the stress on the Spirit, but "he found." As understanding the movements of the Spirit of God and the importance of being used by, and making use of the Spirit of God, he takes up the fresh jawbone of an ass (wonderful type of ministry, as it is!) to wield it in a way that it had never been wielded before, not to meet the men of Judah, terrible as their sin was in delivering him over, but to meet the Philistines! And how they are to be met! It says, "And Samson said, With the jawbone of an ass, a heap, two heaps, With the jawbone of an ass have I slain a thousand men. And it came to pass when he had ended speaking, that he cast away the jawbone out of his hand, and called that place Ramath-Lehi. And he was very thirsty, and called on Jehovah, and said, Thou hast given by the
{453}
hand of thy servant this great deliverance, and now shall I die for thirst, and fall into the hand of the uncircumcised? And God clave the hollow rock which was in Lehi, and water came out of it," -- notice this -- "which was in Lehi," that in the very sphere where the Philistines had spread themselves, in the very sphere where their power was exercised over Judah. God brings in this fresh feature of resource, this renewal of Samson's strength. And I believe that divine Persons desire that as understanding the terribleness of the Philistine element in our hearts, and as judging it and calling upon God, we are to understand this fresh movement; as it says, "And he drank, and his spirit came again, and he revived. Therefore its name was called En-hakkore" -- that is, it becomes a landmark -- "which is in Lehi"; Lehi is stressed, as if we are to notice where it occurs. God brings about deliverance. Oh, how we should all be concerned as to falling into the hand of the uncircumcised, falling into the hand of what is linked with men in the strength of nature, in the strength and power of the arm of the flesh, which the Philistine suggests! Oh, the importance of the Spirit of God coming in, in the finish of the dispensation, a known resource, a resource that becomes, as we use it, a landmark in our history, so that in all that we do, in all that we have part in, we become more and more callers upon this unfailing Spring! I would encourage all of our hearts in resorting to the Spirit, calling upon Him at every turn, calling upon Him in everything we have to do, and everything that we say, habitually resorting to the Spirit, realising that it is the only means of salvation, and effective means, in meeting the pretentious element that is presented in the Philistine. And it says, "And he drank, and his spirit came again, and he revived." That is, it is a time for reviving, dear brethren! It is a time for being revived; but it is a time of drinking. The reviving follows
{454}
the drinking. And we are to take this model, Samson, and, as drinking into this fresh feature of divine resource, the blessed Spirit as available to us, we are to revive, so that the position might be held in power. "Therefore its name was called En-hakkore, which is in Lehi to this day."
Now, I want to finish with a word as to this final moment. What a portentous moment it is! What a moment, when Samson, through the government of God in the loss of the power of his Nazariteship, is grinding in the prison house. Oh, what a tale in church history it unfolds, as it brings in the result of the continual entrenching power of the Philistine foe, for they eventually succeeded through subtle means, in overthrowing Samson. They succeeded and Samson gave up his secret; he yielded himself, he sold himself to the Philistines through Delilah. Oh, let us remain firm in our souls! Let us hold the ground in firmness against this inveterate foe, always entrenching upon spiritual ministry, always entrenching upon spiritual activities, carried out in the power of the Spirit of God! And they call Samson up. Think of this, how Samson is made sport of! Think of things around us, the jokes and sport that is made of things publicly. We are to have a judgment of all that! And it says, "And Samson said to the lad," -- look at this now, a lad, some lad standing by. We might say, "Well, he is not of much account; we will rule him out, he will not help us, he will be of no use in this matter; the lords of the Philistines are here, what can the lad do?" But think of the lad in John's gospel! We need to be more aware of these varied features of resources that are subserving the position unpretentiously, without any officialism. "And Samson said to the lad that held him by the hand, Let loose of me, and suffer me to feel the pillars upon which the house stands." Samson gets to the basis of the matter, the *pillars* upon which the house stands!
{455}
That is what we want to come to in our souls -- the *pillars* upon which the house stands! He does not begin to throw down stone upon stone of the building; he gets the main support of the position and it is dealt with, and dealt with thoroughly. Oh, the spiritual power that will enter into the closing of the dispensation, as it has entered into the revival, through J.N.D.¬s service, and others! The pillars upon which the house stands have been brought down; that is, all that upon which the Philistine system rests, and in which Philistine glory and strength are entrenched, Samson brings down! How is it brought down? It says, "And Samson called to Jehovah, and said, Lord Jehovah, remember me, I pray thee, and strengthen me, I pray thee, only this once, O God, that I may take one vengeance upon the Philistines for my two eyes." There is the lad, there is Samson, there is the Lord Jehovah. What a three-fold cord entering into this matter of the overthrow of the house -- the system that the Philistines are entrenched in -- representative of what the enemy uses to hinder the free action and flow of the Spirit of God in all His distinctiveness in spiritual power in the activities of the saints.
Well, may the Lord help us, dear brethren! One feels the word has been laid singularly upon one's heart tonight, that everyone of us might be concerned that the Spirit of God may be in the ascendency in our souls individually, in our hearts and minds individually, and in our local gatherings, that there may be no weakening and overthrowing of the position by the advancement of human strength, the human mind, however keen it may be, upon the position. May God help us in regard to making room for the Spirit, so that we may know what spiritual power really is!
{456}
STANDING BY THE CROSS OF JESUS
@1 Peter 2: 21 -- 25; @John 19: 25 -- 27; @Galatians 6: 14 -- 18
The thought of the cross is on one's mind and heart to speak about tonight, and to draw attention to the outlook of three persons like ourselves in relation to it; Peter, John and Paul. These were great men in testimony, princes amongst the people of God, men who were ennobled in the testimony and rightly so, men divinely selected, selected by the Lord Jesus Christ. He always reserves the right, dear brethren, to set forward whom He will in whatever capacity it may be, whether in suffering or in glory or otherwise; and these men are remarkable examples of it. They are men who have served the saints well in their day, they are models for the flock, and we can be thankful that we have such models. And yet they were like ourselves, men of like passions; one a most learned man, and the others, according to public opinion, unlettered and uninstructed, as was said of them in the book of the Acts. But what enters into the testimony of these men, and what substantially lies at the back of their part in the testimony, is what they *were* through divine workmanship. We have always to allow room for divine workmanship to express itself. There may be many features in every one of us that do not appeal to some of us, but we have to learn to make room for divine Persons in Their operations and what They may make of any one of us. You remember that the word to some of them was, "I will *make* you fishers of men." As we read the second chapter of the Acts and see the spiritual boldness and dignity of Peter standing up with the eleven and preaching the word of God, we cannot but be impressed with the wonderful result in
{457}
a man like Peter of being under the hand of Christ. I would specially encourage the younger men and women in this regard, because oftentimes there is an enquiry, along with the desire, *how* can we get on better in the things of God? I know of no better way to prosper in the things of God than to submit ourselves to Christ, come under His hand, giving Him the right-of-way to take us as we are and to form us as He pleases, and to make us what He pleases, suiting us for our part in the testimony into which we have been called through grace. We cannot limit a divine Person as to what He may do, or what He can do. The material may be difficult, the material may be hard to work with, for Peter did not represent the easiest kind of person to take on and to operate in and with; and yet how successful divine operations were. I would say to any of us, that we do not need to be hindered by mistakes, although we may be ashamed and humbled by them; but let none of us, as it were, seek an excuse in the mistakes to hinder our usefulness in the things of God. Let us get the gain from them, as Peter got the gain from every mistake he made and became useful in the divine hand, under Christ, for the promulgation of the testimony; not that we would put any premium upon mistakes, but Peter is a case that is an encouragement, and one is encouraged to refer to him, lest there might be any, especially among the younger ones, that might think that things are a little beyond them. The Lord took Peter tenderly in hand and formed him and made him, as He can form and make any one of us, suitable for the testimony, to fill out a dignified part in it as having the Spirit. And he is the one who writes the letter from which we have read first; and while we make every room for what the Lord Jesus may take in hand with us and what He may make
{458}
of us, I want to stress the bearing of the truth upon ourselves responsibly, especially as to the cross; because I think we need to understand and appreciate the truth of the cross better.
The cross becomes a great dividing line, a great point of severance in regard to man after the flesh, and in regard to the world around us. Peter alludes to the cross in the language that he uses in this chapter. He calls it the tree, being Jewish, but nevertheless the cross is in mind, for Peter would aim in the ministry to help us as to the suffering position. We need to be helped in regard to the suffering position: we need to know, as Peter would help us to know, the value of suffering at the present time; so he says, "For to this have ye been called." That is, it is not coincidence in circumstances, but divine intent enters into the suffering. As Peter says, "To this have ye been called." He is alluding to the importance of doing good and suffering, bearing it as acceptable with God, and he says, "For to this have ye been called; for Christ also has suffered for you, leaving you a model that ye should follow in his steps." I think we would all have to own freely that the steps of suffering are not the steps that we would naturally choose; they are the steps that we naturally would avoid in every way possible, but we are to understand suffering from Peter's viewpoint, that we have been called to this position. I think it would help us to be more restful in the position. It would help us to take on the sufferings in a more peaceful way, especially desirous as we would be in this light, of going through things acceptably with God. You remember that Enoch had the testimony before he was translated that he pleased God. What a wonderful thing it is to be pleasing to God in suffering, to be acceptable to God in suffering, for Peter's letter is dealing with the scene of suffering;
{459}
the saints are in a scene and environment where suffering is the order of the day, where the government of God is operating, and the saints, the beloved people of God, are not immune from what transpires. If it be the government of God in relation to sin, sin having come into the world through man, the saints are not immune from all that has come in in the wake of sin's entrance through man -- disease, sickness, illness, all the working out of government in relation to man. But what is to men in the flesh, merely the operation of God's government in relation to sin, becomes to the children of God the divinely appointed process of discipline in suffering for the reaching of the divine end; so that being called to this position, dear brethren, involving suffering, it is not that we are called to it without being equipped in an essential way to meet it, and we need to understand suffering more from the standpoint from which one is referring to it.
Then we may think of the government of God operating nationally and internationally, nation against nation. What came in in @Genesis 11 in regard to the dividing of the nations. We suffer on account of that, but we can thank God for His government operating in these matters, because we can see the impetus that lawlessness would have been given had God not come in in His government and brought about international boundaries. Sometimes they trouble us, sometimes they may occasion difficulty with us, but the hand of God has entered into the matter governmentally in regard to international boundaries so that the testimony might go through. Then take another feature that stands related to the government of God in our time and day, what is linked with the ruin and break up of things publicly in the assembly. How we have to suffer on that account! The young believer goes into the town and tells his fellow man as it may be, that he belongs
{460}
to God, he belongs to Christ, he is linked with the people of God, and immediately he is ridiculed and taunted, because of the awful conditions of evil that exist in the public profession around us. How we have to suffer on that account, dear brethren, but we have been *called* to it, and Christ has suffered for us, leaving us a Model; so that we have to take full advantage of the Model, that we should follow in His steps. Then Peter says, "Who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth; who when reviled, reviled not again; when suffering, threatened not; but gave himself over into the hands of him who judges righteously."
I would just allude for a moment to what Peter speaks of, what is more in mind in these verses: the moral glory of Jesus. We have been speaking a good deal today about divine affections and their radiation amongst men, and now we have here in Peter another feature which is to affect us, which is to affect men, and that is, the moral glory of Jesus. It is important that we should understand what is linked with the moral glory of Christ, because of our getting the full gain of the model that He has left. It is a great thing, dear brethren, that we understand moral glory so that the testimony that we have part in through grace may be enhanced. We can understand the Lord Jesus moving here as the anointed Vessel, as Luke presents Him. How He adorned the position! He not only taught but He adorned the teaching, and I think, dear brethren, we need help on the side of what is moral, on the line of what is linked with moral glory. It says, "Who did no sin." Of course, He was the *sinless* One. There was no sin in Him; He knew no sin. But Peter specifically says, "who *did* no sin." We know He could not sin, for in Him sin was not. But why does Peter say He *did* no sin, if it was not to throw into relief the moral glory of this blessed
{461}
and glorious Man, in a world and a scene where every man was accustomed to doing sin, as the Preacher says in. Ecclesiastes, "There is not a righteous man upon earth, that doeth good and sinneth not." But think of Jesus, think of this way of moral glory; Who *did* no sin. Oh, the sin that we have done, it may be time and again; how we have sinned with our feet, sinned with our hands, sinned with our mouths, it may be, sinned in our thoughts; but here there is projected on to our view in this glorious Model, One who *did* no sin, as Peter says, "Neither was guile found in his mouth." Oh, the mouth of Jesus! I am "altogether that which I also say to you." How important it is that we should substantially support the truth by what we are in moral glory. I know that Jesus was unique; I know there was no other man like Jesus in the condition into which He came; but then Peter is impressing us with the Model that He has left us so that we should cease from sin. That is a word for the younger brethren, that we should cease from sin. Indeed the word is used later, that we should have *done* with sin. It says, "Neither was guile found in his mouth; who, when reviled, reviled not again; when suffering, threatened not." Let us measure ourselves with these great features of moral glory in Jesus. How often have we threatened when suffering; how often have we turned again when reviled, and thus have failed in reflecting the moral glory of the One who has left us a Model. It is not just in regard to teaching, but a Model in regard to this scope of moral glory that I am referring to, especially in regard to speaking. In His mouth there was found no guile, and when others sinned with their mouths, He did not reply. It says, "When reviled, reviled not again; when suffering, threatened not; but gave himself over into the hands
{462}
of him who judges righteously." What a word that is, the moral glory of Jesus as Man.
It is not that He gave what was being done against Him over into the hands of God. Oftentimes when oppressed and persecuted and suffering, we may give these things over into the hand of God and ask God to take care of them. But it says of Jesus, He gave *Himself* over. Not the reviling nor the threatening, but it says, "gave *himself* over into the hands of him who judges righteously." He left Himself in the hands of Him of whom it is said, "Will not the judge of all the earth do right?" How often we assert our own rights in matters; we try to defend ourselves, we try to save our faces and our reputations, asking God to come in and vindicate us in relation to these matters; but not Jesus, dear brethren. What a Model He is for us. We need to give ourselves over into the hand of God in this light, for God is infinitely fair. If He allows matters to come into our minds that search us to the very roots of our moral beings, is His hand not over matters? Does He not allow matters? Will He not be fair? Will He not do what is right? Has He not done what is right in the history of time in His ways with men? If we knew God, we would say He has, but we are more concerned about our circumstances being given over, and the things that persecute us given over for God to take up, whereas we should give *ourselves* over into the hands of God. You remember how David in the critical juncture in Samuel, when usurped as to his kingly place on the throne, was fleeing from Jerusalem, and there were those that carried the ark out with David, but David tells them to go back and carry the ark of God back into the city, as he says, "If I shall find favour in the eyes of Jehovah he will bring me again and show me it, and its habitation." @2 Samuel 15: 25. That is, God will bring
{463}
David again; but if not, he says, "let him do to me as seemeth good to him." David was giving himself over into the hands of God, and we need to do that, dear brethren. We are quite prepared to give our circumstances over, and the things that try us, and ask God to take care of them; but we need to give ourselves over, that God may be free to do whatever He wants with us. And God brought David back again, as He *will* bring us again, as He brought Jesus, I might reverently say, again. The scripture says, "Who *brought again* from among the dead our Lord Jesus, the great shepherd of the sheep, in the power of the blood of the eternal covenant." @Hebrews 13: 20. What does that expression mean? That God was true to His own thoughts in regard to man, in regard to His people, in bringing Jesus again from among the dead.
Now it says, "Who himself bore our sins in his body on the tree." That is what I want to come to. How Peter views the cross, how it affects a minister like Peter! How it should affect all of us, this pathway of moral glory! You might say, Well, surely God would vindicate Jesus, surely God would save Jesus from going the whole length; but oh, let it touch our hearts afresh that Jesus had to go all the way. We marvel at the lengths to which we may be allowed to go, but think of where Jesus went in order that He might take care of what was linked with us on our side, as it says, "Who himself bore our sins in his body on the tree, in order that, being dead to sins, we may live to righteousness." Peter views the cross in this light as the great means of separation from our sins, that we might live to righteousness. What a wonderful thought that is, dear brethren, living to righteousness. You might say, Well, it says, Living to God. Yes it does, but this is living to righteousness. We measure sins in the light of what they cost Christ.
{464}
The practising of my will and the practices of the flesh in me, the practices of an impure state brought Jesus this way; and the great thought in Peter's mind is that we should be affected by it, "In order that, being dead to sins, we may live to righteousness" -- that we should live to what is right. And what is right is the rights of God, His right to do with us what He pleases. His right to bring what He chooses, for righteousness would allude to what is right. It is a great thing that we should live to righteousness in this way. Then it says, "By whose stripes ye have been healed." Oh, this thought of healing, the way of the cross leading into healing, as we think of all that Jesus suffered. It had in mind healing on our side, as it says, "By whose stripes ye have been healed." Then it says, "For ye were going astray as sheep, but have now returned to the shepherd and overseer of your souls." Think of what Peter refers to here, not only the fact that the Lord has taken care of things on the cross, but the balance to that in what we have come to in Jesus as the Shepherd and Overseer of our souls.
Now I want to speak a word on John, the writer that we have been considering today, the one who tells us so much about divine love, the one who lay in the bosom and on the breast of Jesus. He is presented to us here, as the Spirit of God is using him to write this gospel, as standing by the cross of Jesus. It says; "And by the cross of Jesus stood his mother, and the sister of his mother, Mary the wife of Clopas, and Mary of Magdala. Jesus therefore, seeing his mother, and the disciple standing by, whom he loved." I suppose never was John more attractive to Jesus than at that moment, as He saw his preparedness to stand by in the face of the most unutterable sufferings that Jesus was passing through. Then the reference to the women
{465}
in relation to the cross. They have often been alluded to, and I believe the Lord would help the sisters more and more to understand what it means to stand by the cross, to stand by the principle of suffering and reproach that the cross sets out, to surmount every natural feeling, every natural desire, every social inclination and leaning, to surmount it all in view of being effective in the testimony on the basis of standing by the cross. Nothing gives us moral power in the testimony like standing by the cross of Jesus, because it means the utter refusal of all that expressed itself there without reserve in the man of sin and shame. As I stand by the cross of Jesus, I weigh over in my soul the teaching that is linked with the cross, and come to a judgment of all that brought Jesus there, and as coming to a judgment of it, utterly repudiating it. Thus standing by the cross, I am identified with the reproach linked with Jesus in that setting. It says, "Jesus therefore, seeing his mother, and the disciple standing by, whom he loved." It was one thing for the Lord Jesus to take account of John on His bosom and in His breast, but here he is in the most testing circumstances, at the most testing point. It is one thing to be near the Lord and with the Lord in the meetings, in a gathering like this where we are surrounded by all the protection that the realm affords, but in the public position how important it is that we should stand by the cross of Jesus, prepared for all that the reproach linked with the cross might mean to us. Jesus saw the disciple standing by, whom He loved, and says to His mother, "Behold thy son." Then He says unto the disciple, "Behold thy mother. "Now notice this. The Lord does not speak to John first; He does not ask John whether he would take the matter on. We are to be reminded in this position, of the Lord's rights to dispose of things
{466}
as He will, to dispose of us as He will. He does not have to follow the pattern of our thinking; we may well thank God that He does not, for the pattern of our thinking often leads us far astray from the truth. The Lord even in these circumstances where suffering is so acute, where reproach marks the position publicly, is reserving the right, with everyone of us, to do what He will.
Now these features of the truth lie at the basis of spiritual prosperity. Many of us are not prepared to give the Lord full room in our lives, to allow Him to do what He likes with any one of us, to put upon us what He likes, what He has in mind to put upon us. He says, "Woman, behold thy son." Had He asked John about the matter? He had not. The Lord commits things into our hands. He has a right to commit things into our hands, and the question is whether we are going to take on matters; because the woman here, the Lord's mother, would represent for the moment a feature of the truth that has a place in His thoughts. Are we going to take it on? How often we let our own likes and dislikes rise up in these matters, and prefer the pattern of our own thinking, where the Lord is wanting to bring us into His way of thinking. He says, "Woman, behold thy son. Then he says unto the disciple, Behold thy mother. And from that hour the disciple took her to his own home." No wonder, if I might say, speaking soberly, we have such a gospel written by a vessel like this. John the evangelist -- one who was prepared, as standing by the cross of Jesus, to take on whatever the Lord put his way. Now we all need to come into that in the local gatherings where we are. Many of us may be prepared for others to take on things, prepared for others to do things, but what are we doing? What is the Lord putting my way?
{467}
Let every brother and sister face that in their souls. What is the Lord putting my way? What feature of the truth is He stressing to me? What should I take on? It is not a question of my personal likes or dislikes. As aligning myself with Christ in the light of His cross in reproach and shame, I am to allow Him the full right to dispose of me as He will, to use me as He will, and to use what I have as He will. It is a matter of John taking her to his home. A remarkable thing, dear brethren, how the divine right is exerted in this hour of crisis! Often we desert the position in an hour of crisis, but the disciple whom Jesus loved, who lay in His bosom and on His breast at supper in chapter 13, is standing by the truth, cost what it may from the hands of men, and cost what it may in whatever the Lord may lay upon him. What is the Lord laying upon me? What is He committing to me? Let me take it on. Let not our business matters, our work, our homes, come in to interfere with this matter of what the Lord would commit to us in the way of a particular feature of the truth at any moment. And it says, "from that hour the disciple took her to *his own home*." Not to somebody else's home. It is easy to take things to somebody else, easy to put the responsibility on to somebody else. We are very good at that. But the whole point in this passage is that the lover of Christ, one who knows intimacy with Christ, is prepared to take on the truth, cost what it may, involving the readjustment of his circumstances, and perhaps of his outlook in regard to his home. It is now to be regulated by the truth, and the divine right in the testimony to dispose of what we are and what we have, as the divine will may be. We can well understand spiritual prosperity as it is set out in John from that viewpoint.
Now I just finish with a word as to Paul, the great
{468}
minister of the assembly. He says, "Far be it from me to boast save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom the world is crucified to me, and I to the world." What a lover of Christ Paul is! How he stands for the truth, in this letter, come what may! He knows where he is in the truth; he knows where his feet are in the truth; he knows what he has from God. We are to benefit from such as Paul and others, and the model that they have left us. Paul speaks of himself and others as models; we have the Model in Jesus, and we have the model in Paul; and what a place the cross had in his life, how it coloured his ministry. How he refused anything and everything that would give him distinction after the flesh; because the cross had not only entered his mind, it had entered his soul, dear brethren, and that is what we want. We want the truth of the cross to enter our souls, to affect our moral beings throughout, so that the world is completely judged. You can well understand the Judaiser saying, 'Paul, if you insist on liberty and refuse circumcision it will lead to looseness; it will lead to worldliness.' Think of them in their outlook in regard to a man like this. What is his attitude in regard to the world: "Far be it from me to boast save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom the world is crucified to me, and I to the world." If he was instrumental in bringing down the strongholds of Judaism, was he going to boast in his exploits in that regard? Far be the thought. He says here, "Far be it from me to boast save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ." We have nothing to boast in if we are employed in the testimony and if we come out on the side of victory, we have *nothing* to boast in but the cross of Christ. The cross of Christ puts every man out of court, and we want to boast in it more. It puts the world out of court. He says, "Through whom the
{469}
world is crucified to me, and I to the world." Then he says, "For in Christ Jesus neither is circumcision anything, nor uncircumcision; but new creation."
Now I want to finish with that word, dear brethren. They were making everything of circumcision, everything of what the law could do, what the law would do, but Paul says, "Neither is circumcision anything, nor uncircumcision; but new creation." He would bring before us an extended view in regard to the whole realm of new creation. "And as many as shall walk by this rule." What a rule it is, the rule of new creation! As we think of new creation which has begun now in the saints of the assembly, how it dignifies the saints in our minds, as it says, "If any one be in Christ, there is a new creation." Have we ever thought of that, the reference to the fact of one person being in Christ "there *is* a new creation?" Think of the dignity of the saints in the light of new creation, that the saints are the first fruits of new creation. Wonderful thing to take account of! It will soon extend, involving the heaven and the earth, but think of the glory of it now in the assembly, where there is no Jew nor Gentile, bondman nor freeman. What a wonderful realm we have in the assembly in new creation! It says, "As many as shall walk by this rule." May we be helped, dear brethren, in accepting the truth of the cross in the light of Peter's and John's and Paul's ministry, and be helped to walk by the rule of new creation, and to know what peace and mercy is on that line. May the Lord bless the word.
{470}
THE ACQUISITION OF MORAL POWER
@Genesis 43: 1 -- 15; @Genesis 44: 14 -- 34; @Genesis 49: 8 -- 12
I have on my heart to speak a word on how moral power and moral weight are acquired. You will notice that in the passages we have read there is constant reference to Judah; and Judah, as we know, particularly emphasizes this side of the truth. We are told in Chronicles that Judah prevailed among his brethren, and of him was the prince. I am sure that there would be a desire with all of us to acquire greater weight and power morally with God and with men. The prince suggests that idea. And I might say that there is no royal road to acquiring moral power, as men speak of a royal road, there is no short cut to it. It involves much heart searching, but God is ready to help us if we are desirous of acquiring power morally with Himself and with men. The whole bearing of the teaching in Romans has in mind that the believer should learn how to acquire moral weight and power. We can never acquire it if we do not begin in ourselves. It is important with every one of us in regard to the truth that we begin with ourselves. We must let the truth have its way in our own souls before we seek to bring it to bear upon others, and the teaching in Romans is to help the believer towards this end. Not exactly to acquire power officially, but to acquire power morally, as with the help of God we learn to deal with sin -- sin as it bears on us externally, and sin as it is in us internally. No one is of much moral weight in the testimony unless he learns how to deal with this great matter of sin in himself. The exercises of @Romans 6 and 7 are essential to this end. Many a believer has been crippled morally by never judging the principle of sin as in @Romans 6, operating in the world around
{471}
us, and affecting us too in the way in which it sometimes does. But through our baptism the moral door out of the world has been found, and we are to hold ourselves free from it. I would say to the young people that it is especially needful for us to hold ourselves free from the operation of sin upon us in a damaging way, as @Romans 6 says, "Should we continue in sin that grace may abound? Far be the thought." We are to learn to take up the teaching linked with our baptism. All here, I suppose, would be baptised, and we have to learn how to take up the teaching linked with our baptism, for it involves salvation from the world in all that is around us. We will be effective in the testimony and acquire moral weight and power, as we give full room in our souls to the truth of deliverance from the world as presented in @Romans 6. Paul could say, "Thanks be to God, that ye ... have obeyed from the heart the form of teaching into which ye were instructed."
Then I may briefly allude to the teaching of @Romans 7. It is a difficult chapter, but it is a chapter that is a great help and a great advantage in the working out of matters in our souls, in view of the acquisition of moral weight and power, because we must understand and learn how to deal with sin in ourselves. We are never called to die to sin in us. We die to sin outside of us as an operating principle in the world. The teaching of the glad tidings involves that we are to be set free, delivered from the power of sin working in us. Many a young person is detained by the difficulties of the teaching linked with deliverance as in @Romans 7. We set up a standard for ourselves, and maybe we feel we have fallen short of it, and distress comes into our souls and darkness comes into our minds, and we begin to wonder whether we have any appreciation of the truth at all; we begin to wonder if
{472}
we have had any link with God. I know what I am speaking about; I have gone through it. I know what it is to wonder whether we should go out of fellowship, whether we have any link with God at all, the enemy working in the midst of the darkness linked with deliverance. But on the other hand, there is all the strength and support of the new husband, the Lord Jesus Christ, standing by us, so that we might be carried through on the strength of the bond of affection between our hearts and Himself. I would say to the younger brothers and sisters that if you are having a struggle within yourself, if there is darkness in your mind as to your state of soul, remember to keep your eye fixed on the new husband, the one to Whom we have been married, free from the law as we have been made through His death, "Dead to the law by the body of the Christ, to be to another, who has been raised up from among the dead in order that we might bear fruit to God." I feel that what is being said in this regard is important for the younger ones, because we wonder sometimes where we are. We wonder just how we stand in these difficulties of soul, and divine Persons would help us to face the matter thoroughly, because it is on these lines that we acquire moral power and moral weight. If I can deal with the matter in myself, then I have gained the advantage of being thus equipped to deal with it, not only in myself, but to deal with it as it may come up in circumstances around me.
I now come to @Genesis 37 where our attention is focused on Joseph, as the centre of Jacob's love. "These are the generations of Jacob. Joseph, being seventeen years old," and then we are told that his father loved him. In the passage that we have read we also see Benjamin coming in on this line; there is a link of affinity between Joseph and Benjamin. They are of
{473}
the same mother, and they are both the objects of Jacob's love. But following chapter 37 where Christ is so distinctly brought upon our view, in chapter 38 Judah develops a link, as alas, many do sometimes, with an Adullamite called Hirah. He goes down, as it says, and what a going down it was; for in the sin, the shame, and the degradation linked with that path, there was no moral weight acquired by Judah. It may have started with just a little thing, just a little friendship, just a little association with an Adullamite. It may have seemed all right to Judah, but it was not in the line of the testimony. I would earnestly appeal to our hearts to eschew every form of wrong link and association that would lead us on a path that morally would take us into the depth of sin and degradation. Judah has to learn, as all of us have to learn, the depth of sin and degradation in our own hearts. It is on this line that we acquire power, and moral weight. We do not ignore sin; we do not say that we have no sin. Judah has to come to it, he has to come to it the hard way; and we have had to come to things the hard way; but God helps us. It is a hard road for Judah, and it is a hard road for the brethren of Joseph, but, thank God, they come to it eventually; they come to it, but the way involves much heart searching, much testing and trial.
I suppose that the brethren wondered why they could ever have allowed their hands to become involved with the matter of the delivering over of Joseph; but there it was. And God has to teach us, through all these matters, that sin by the commandment might become exceeding sinful. You ask, Is not sin sinful? Yes it is, but in @Romans 7 we are told that sin by the commandment might become exceeding sinful. Some times persons are allowed to go into the world to taste sin, in all the depth of the shame and degradation
{474}
linked with it. God has to pass some that way in order that we might know what it is to avoid it, not that there is to be any premium put upon it; but these matters are real and we know that they are real, but we need to be with God about them. Whatever came into the history between @Genesis 38 and @Genesis 43, something had happened in Judah's soul, something had come about. He is getting right as to the truth. He had been involved with the others in the matter of the delivering up of Joseph to the Midianites, but something has occurred, and we are reminded of the work of God as it goes on in our souls, its mysterious operations working along with the moral side in discerning between good and evil in our souls. The work of God, basically underlying everything, helps us to come to a right judgment of things, and Judah is coming to a right judgment of things. What I desire to stress in this passage that I have read from chapter 43 is that Judah is holding to the truth. The truth was that everything was to be regulated, as we heard today in prayer, by Joseph's commandment, and Judah holds to that; he will not give up that thought. It is not what Reuben says; it is not what some of the others say; it is not even what Jacob says. It is what Joseph says. So Judah is governed by the light that God has given in regard to the position. He says to his father, "The man did positively testify to us, saying, Ye shall not see my face, unless your brother be with you. If thou wilt send our brother with us, we will go down and buy thee food; but if thou do not send him, we will not go down." Notice the moral power in Judah. You see, things have gone on. Judah was involved with the others of his brethren in what had happened, but not any longer; he is not drifting along with the many now. He is standing out and making the thing a moral issue. It is a moral issue now. The truth is that
{475}
Joseph's commandment must regulate; and that is the truth today, dear brethren, the Lord's commandment must regulate. "He that has my commandments and keeps them, *he* it is that loves me; and he that loves me shall be loved by my Father." Oh, the blessedness in this wonderful day of the assembly of being regulated by the word of Christ, being regulated by the commandment of Jesus. How important it is! We all know what it is to allow men's words to regulate us, but the point with Judah is, Joseph has spoken the word and that word must prevail.
You will remember that the same thing happened in 2 Samuel in the crisis when David was dethroned. Joab wanted to slay Absalom hanging in the terebinth, but there was a man there, unnamed, who said to Joab that the king had commanded a certain thing, and that Joab heard it, and others had heard it; and the man would not yield his ground. It was a question of the word of David, the word of the King, the true King, and he was holding his ground and would not let go. I think that is important in every matter in all our lives, that we be regulated by the word of Christ. You young people as you go to school, what is going to regulate you -- what the teacher says? No! Not a bit. What the Lord says must regulate. They may tell you to do what is wrong, but as you acquire moral weight you say, 'No, this is what the Lord says, and this is what I am going to stand by and stand to!' As it says of the noble in @Isaiah 32: 8, "to noble things doth he stand." Nobility acquired in this way on moral lines is a great matter. You stand to noble things, you stand to your confession of Christ. You have come under His saving grace, you have been relieved from the consequences of your sins and you are enjoying peace of conscience, and you are committed to the fellowship and fully in line publicly with the rejected
{476}
Lord. Stand to that. Stand to your confession of Him through thick and thin, whatever may come in. As to those of us who are older, our businesses may be affected, and our opportunities of getting on may be affected, but these are to be regulated by the commandment of Jesus, the commandment of Joseph, and that is what Judah is insisting on. He says, "If thou wilt send our brother with us, we will go down and buy thee food; but if thou do not send him, we will not go down, for the man said to us, Ye shall not see my face, unless your brother be with you. And Israel said, Why did ye deal so ill with me as to tell the man whether ye had yet a brother? And they said, The man asked very closely after us, and after our kindred, saying, Is your father yet alive? have ye a brother?" Note all this. They are conscious that Joseph was getting near, Joseph was getting under things, They had that sense in their conscience. In all that the Lord is doing He is aiming to get us right on moral lines. He wants us to be right on moral lines, and the whole issue now is focusing on the brother in Benjamin.
What does Benjamin represent? Benjamin represents the work of God in the family of God, untouched, untainted by sin. He had no part in the crime, he had no part in what was done; he does not speak; he does not act; he is just there, Benjamin. It is the work of God basically, according to John's ministry; and Joseph says, in the solution of the moral question in regard of his brethren and the relations with himself, that we must make way for Benjamin. It is important to see the place that this family feature has, the place that the brother has. The brother, according to the truth, is not established by ecclesiastical privileges. Our relationship as brethren according to the truth in the New Testament is established according to our place
{477}
in the family of God. We have the work of God abstractly in the family of God according to John's ministry, in type in Benjamin. It is important to bear that in mind, that ecclesiastical privileges do not constitute us a brother. We come into the family of God, not on the basis of ecclesiastical privilege, but on the line of generation. Children of God is what we are to God. Brethren is what we are to one another as belonging to that family. I know that the thought of the brother works out in the way of practical support in other matters, but in the family of God our relationship as brethren is linked with generation, divine generation. We are begotten of God. It is a great thing to realise that, so that a person who is withdrawn from does not cease to be one of the family of God. He is still carried in our thoughts, abstractly, as a member of the family of God, although deprived of the privileges of fellowship; and we should pray for him, speak to God about him, in that light, for his recovery. It is important, dear brethren, that we should understand that it is a day of recovery. The Lord Jesus has died to gather together into one the children of God who were scattered abroad. We must have that in our minds according to John's ministry.
You will remember in @Deuteronomy 25, if I may speak of it as it comes into one's mind, it says, "If there be a controversy between men, and they resort to judgment, and they judge their case; then they shall justify the righteous, and condemn the wicked. And it shall be if the wicked man," notice this, "it shall be if the wicked man have deserved to be beaten, that the judge shall cause him to lie down, and be beaten before his face, according to the measure of his wickedness with a certain number of stripes. With forty stripes shall they beat him; they shall not exceed." Now notice this, "they shall not exceed, lest, if they
{478}
continue to beat him with many stripes above these, thy brother become despicable in thine eyes." It is important that we should understand that setting of the truth, that whatever comes in, our brother in that light is not to be despicable in our eyes.
Now Joseph insists on Benjamin being brought, and Judah holds to the word of Joseph. In our language, that is the word of the Lord, and we are going to be regulated, not by what men say, but by what the Lord says. They say in chapter 43, "The man asked very closely after us." I love that thought. The Lord does not operate at a great distance. I suppose we have all proved that however deep our sorrows, the travail and anguish and distress of soul we have gone through, the Lord has been very near. He has been asking us very closely about matters because He loves us so well; He does not want us to get into sin; He does not want us to lose the joy in our souls of uninterrupted communion through the activities and operations of sin. He loves us far too well for that. Think of Joseph's love for his brethren, even though they had committed such a dastardly crime; think of his love for them. And it says, "Judah said to Israel his father, Send the lad with me, and we will arise and go, that we may live, and not die, both we and thou and our little ones. I will be surety for him." Look at the moral weight this man is acquiring, for he is speaking to Jacob his father. He says *we will not* go down. Jacob's word should have regulated Judah in the ordinary matters, but this is not an ordinary matter; and if it comes to Christ, His word must come first. His word must regulate us. Judah has come to that. He is standing by it. He will not give up the ground. The Lord helps us as we stand by that. That is the line on which we acquire moral power. He is not only going to stand by Joseph's word, but he is
{479}
prepared to take all the consequences. We have to be prepared to lose our lives. We should all be prepared to lose our lives for the interests of Christ. That is the line on which we acquire moral weight and moral power. Then it says, "Of my hand shalt thou require him." And then it says in verse 11, "And their father Israel said to them," -- notice the delightfulness of this. Jacob is brought into this movement in a dignified way as "Israel" suggests. If you stand by the truth you will always find that the Lord will give you someone else to stand with you in it. The truth will assert itself; that is what it is doing here. It is asserting itself, and Israel says, "If it is then so, do this: take of the best fruits in the land in your vessels." Thank God they had not lost their vessels. They still had their vessels. We may say we have not lost our vessels, dear brethren, we have vessels to carry things in, we have got sacks to carry corn in, and vessels to carry the best fruits of the land in. The work of God furnishes us with these great matters, carrying capacity, a wonderful thing. Often we say in regard to meetings and to ministry, 'I cannot take all that in.' Well, we are not expected to take all that in. None of us is expected to take all that in, but we can carry things, even supposing we cannot eat things. We can carry them. There is carrying capacity as well as appropriating capacity, a great thing to notice in the type here.
Now in chapter 44 Judah goes up, and they take Benjamin with them. That is, they have taken on the truth, the regulation by Joseph's commandment. Joseph is dealing with them a step at a time. He gets Benjamin up, and he operates now on the high level of the silver cup, the glory of redemption, to detain Benjamin. This precious feature is too great, Joseph would say, to be lost. I want to retain it. He wants
{480}
to detain Benjamin. This great system of service is set in operation to retain this precious feature. Divine persons are interested in the work of God in all its unsullied character, identified, it may be in the public position, with all that is around. Just as Benjamin was identified with his brethren whose hands were stained with the guilt of the crime of delivering Joseph up, yet he was apart from it morally, and Joseph says I want that feature, I want that side; and he wants to retain it. The Lord begins to operate, and how the Lord operates in ways that are difficult to describe. He has means, He has a house here under His hand. Thank God for that house, Joseph's house, the holy affections that radiate in that realm, and the holy feelings that that environment is replete with. Oh! dear brethren, think of the feelings of Joseph, pent up as they may be for a time; but when the time comes, their release comes into view. What feelings lay behind all the rough speaking, all the treatment of the brethren; it all comes out in the disclosure of his heart based on Judah's intervention. Joseph operates to have Benjamin returned. He wants to bring the brethren back to Benjamin, he wants to bring them in their thoughts to Benjamin, to the work of God in all its basic uncorrupted character. The Lord would like to bring us to that -- so it says Judah and his brethren came to Joseph's house.
I do not desire to go into the detail, but I refer to the continual acquisition of moral power on the part of Judah, seen in the way he takes up the matter and does not excuse himself. You might say, 'Judah, you have some right to excuse yourself, you stood by the commandment of Joseph; why not tell Joseph that?' Well, he does in effect. But the point is that Judah sees there is no use for excuses. He says, "God has found out the iniquity of thy servants; behold, we
{481}
are my lord's bondmen, both we, and he in whose hand the cup has been found." And then it says, "Judah came near to him." There is something more than coming to the end of ourselves; there is something more than coming to just a judgment of sin as in these few verses. What comes out from verse 18 to the end of the chapter, is the full expression of the holy feelings of the family of God compressed in a vessel like Judah. What a wonderful thing to have in our localities, dear brethren, a Judah who can express the feelings of the family of God, that can bring love into the matter. Notice how it says of Benjamin, his father loves him. John's ministry stresses love. It is the secret of the whole position in the working out of the truth. Love. The love of the Father in committing the administration into the hands of the Son, and the love among the saints. "By this shall all know that ye are disciples of mine, if ye have love amongst yourselves." Let us make room for love -- love that would think the best and speak the best. Not that sin is ignored, Judah fully acknowledges it, but then he makes way, as it were, for the work of God to come out. He makes way for what he has acquired morally with Joseph and with God, as I might say in our way of speaking, to express itself. He speaks in one of the most moving passages that we have in all the word of God. Even the higher critics and secular writers say that there are very few passages in the canon of the scripture to compare with this one, with all its moving appeal. But we are not thinking of the human side; we are thinking of the work of God and the family of God, and we are thinking of divine Persons. How the Lord delights to see those that can supply what is needed. Paul says of certain in Corinth, Stephanas, Fortunatus and Achaicus, "*they* have supplied what was lacking on your part." Think of
{482}
brethren like that in a locality. Think of what these brothers were in Corinth; they supplied what was lacking. The most of us are on the line of demanding what is due to us. We ought to be more concerned about supplying what is lacking. The more heavenly we are, the more we are in the enjoyment of the family of God, whether as children, or in sonship, the more we will be on the supplying line, supplying what is lacking; and that is just what Judah does. Judah makes way for the disclosure of Joseph. Joseph comes into the matter and there are affections freely flowing as Joseph releases all that was pent up in the way of love towards him.
Now I come to this last passage which shows us clearly the great moral power in Judah. Judah becomes the sanctuary of God. When God takes the children of Israel out of Egypt later, Judah was His sanctuary, Israel His dominion. Judah has the nearest place, the sanctuary. It is an interesting thing too, in regard to Benjamin, that the house was in Benjamin's territory. "The beloved of Jehovah -- he shall dwell ... between his shoulders." There were these two great links in the chain of events that lead to the full disclosure of Joseph and what a place of honour they come into. Judah becomes the sanctuary, and Benjamin becomes the house in principle. The beloved of Jehovah, he shall dwell between his shoulders, meaning Benjamin's territory, where Jerusalem was. "Judah -- as to thee, thy brethren will praise thee; thy hand will be upon the neck of thine enemies." That is what the line of acquiring moral power gives us, that is where we are brought to. Would the young brothers and sisters like to have their hand on the neck of their enemies -- sin, and the world, and all the principles of the flesh that operate to bring us into bondage? Would you like to get your hand on the neck of your enemies? It is
{483}
reached along the line that Judah travelled, that is, in coming to a right judgment about yourself and your own heart in all its nakedness -- coming to God's judgment about matters. You remember when Tamar's sin came to light Judah said, "Bring her forth, that she may be burned." Many of us are like that, you know. David, whose ancestor he was, was incensed and indignant when the parable came to him as to the sin, and he was ready to put the man to death, just like Judah, "Bring her forth, that she may be burned." But Judah got right. Then it says here, "Thy father's children will bow down to thee. Judah is a young lion." Then in verse 10, "The sceptre will not depart from Judah, Nor the lawgiver from between his feet." Now notice this, that the man that held to regulation by Joseph's commandment is the man with whom the lawgiver is now linked. I think it is a beautiful touch, dear brethren, as to the acquisition of moral power. It does not drop on us as a mantle out of the air. It is developed in a hard and difficult way, but it is developed in our relations with Christ and with God, and as making room for the Holy Spirit.
So it says in verse 11, "He bindeth his foal to the vine, And his ass's colt to the choice vine; He washeth his dress in wine, And his garment in the blood of grapes. The eyes are red with wine." I believe that in our language, that suggests one who knows what it is to make room for the Spirit -- the holy stimulating features that are linked with the Spirit's activities. What moral power Judah acquired; and the door is open to every one of us, brothers and sisters alike, to acquire power likewise.
May the Lord help us to take this way.
