{#The Knowledge of Christ in Relation to the Gospel and the Assembly}
{1}
THE KNOWLEDGE OF CHRIST IN RELATION TO THE GOSPEL AND THE ASSEMBLY (1)
@Romans 3: 21 - 26; @Romans 5: 8 - 21; @Romans 6: 1 - 5
S.McC. One is thinking of how our souls are built up in the knowledge of Christ in relation to the gospel and the assembly, particularly thinking of current conditions and how the truth would meet such in our souls. In referring to the current need, one has especially in mind the need that exists in the souls of the younger believers. We are living in an age that is marked by peculiar superficiality, when so much appearance is put on and becomes crystallised with many and the foundations are not right. Younger believers are very prone to be carried by this superficial character of things because it is developed in the schools in a peculiar way. It is incumbent upon us to see that our foundations are right, so that there is stability inwardly underlying all that we are outwardly, and that stability is developed and acquired as our souls are built up in the knowledge of Christ. Christianity involves the knowledge of divine Persons, and if our souls were built up more in the knowledge of Christ in the gospel, there would be far less ebb and flow in our spiritual experience. We have to own that there is a good deal of ebb and flow with us; some days we are all right and the next day we may be all wrong. God would have us repair, in our thinking, to this matter of what is foundational. There is a great need amongst us for the understanding, apprehension and establishment of our souls in the basic teaching of the gospel, and these meetings have in mind that, as current conditions are felt, the truth may open up in relation to it. It is always so that when current conditions are felt and there is a desire in relation to
{2}
the truth, the truth will open up. We should therefore be very concerned about this matter of our foundations in relation to the gospel, as to redemption, salvation, deliverance, because in this superficial age, the character of which may be taken on by believers, the tendency is to take things on externally without being established internally in relation to the truth; and therefore when we are tested, it may be at work or elsewhere, we are not able to stand. I am sure the basic weakness is in the teaching of the gospel, because it has not had the place in our souls that it should have had; and therefore we appear to be something we are not. We may be breaking bread, we may be going on and talking about the meetings, and yet not solid rock in our souls; if that is the case, then the slightest wind that comes along moves us.
Now these passages are suggested, to begin with, because they bring Christ before us in a peculiar way in relation to the truth of the gospel. First, one wishes to refer to His mediatorship in the matter of sins, and then to speak of His headship. In @Romans 5, it is not headship in relation to the body, but headship in relation to man. Then in @Romans 6 we have leadership in relation to salvation, for baptism to Christ Jesus in @Romans 6 involves that we come under a new leadership. Christ is the leader of our salvation, that is @Hebrews 2. Those who are baptised unto Christ Jesus come under His leadership in the wilderness; baptism introducing us into it.
We have in the mercy-seat, how God has mediated this great matter of sins and it is presented in @Romans 3 in an affecting way in regard to Jesus in the mediatorial position. It says in verse 25: "Whom God has set forth a mercy-seat, through faith in his blood". Notice the link with Christ personally, through His death: "Through faith in his blood". In @Romans 5 there is another link in
{3}
that relation, for it says (verse 10), "for if being enemies, we have been reconciled to God through the death of his Son, much rather, having been reconciled, we shall be saved in the power of his life". Salvation by Christ's life is not exactly His life in the gospels, it is His life in glory as risen from the dead and glorified. That life acts in the way of salvation as the believer experiences the working out of it in his soul in the power of the Spirit. But this link of the mercy-seat with the blood is very important in our basic relationships with God. The mediating of the great matter of sins is brought on to our view in this way. In no other way could the matter be mediated, and Christ is the mercy-seat. If only that could get a firm grip of our souls, what effect it would produce in the appreciation of how sins have been met and dealt with to God's glory. I do not think, speaking for oneself, that we have a sufficient sense of mercy.
J.A.K. What do you think the Lord had in mind when He says: "But go and learn what that is -- I will have mercy and not sacrifice", @Matthew 9: 13?
S.McC. I suppose He was pointing to the greatness of what was coming in in Himself and in the new dispensation. The Jews, to whom He spoke, were under the law and keeping themselves under the law and did not have much sense of mercy, because they did not realise what great sinners they were. The greater the understanding of our sinnership the more appreciation there is of the thought of mercy. We see sometimes in relation to our children, growing up in households where the truth is known, that the thought of sins and how they have been dealt with by God, does not sufficiently lay hold of them. Whereas if they had been delivered from a life of sin, there may have been more effect on them. Not that we put any premium on living a life of sin.
C.A.H. The great model seems to be the righteousness of God now.
{4}
S.McC. This is the way it is coming out. The righteousness is being revealed in the gospel, as it says, "for righteousness of God is revealed therein", @Romans 1: 17. It is a new kind of righteousness; not righteousness by the law, but righteousness that is to be imputed on the basis and ground of free liberal gift. @Romans 5 enlarges our thoughts in regard of the liberality of divine gift and our souls are to be built up in the knowledge of divine giving, so that we can acquire property and much substance in view of the tabernacle and the service of God.
W.B.G. You have something in mind in relation to "his blood".
S.McC. It is important that we should see the place the blood has, because the blood brings in the death of Jesus. The question of sins could not be mediated apart from the death of Jesus, and God has met them on that ground. Think of how long God waited for this! It says, "in respect of the passing by the sins that had taken place before, through the forbearance of God; for the shewing forth of his righteousness in the present time, so that he should be just, and justify him that is of the faith of Jesus", @Romans 3: 25. Think of the long time that God waited, all down through the Old Testament that He should be justified in the forgiving of sins, such as David's sin was! You know, we are so unlike God; we cannot wait. We have got to have things done immediately, especially if it is a question of being justified. But God waited all these centuries, down through the ages, before He was justified by the death of Christ and the blood on the mercy-seat, as the types set out.
Rem. So the shallowness that marks many of us who are younger is due to not understanding, in a feeling way, what the cost has been.
S.McC. That is what I am thinking of in relation to the blood. The blood brings up the judicial side,
{5}
the death of Jesus. The matter of our sins could not be mediated in any other way, in regard to finality, but by that way. Think of the infinite cost that it was to God, that it was to Jesus, that that should take place!
Rem. Would Paul show the great appreciation he had of mercy in speaking of himself as the chief of sinners?
S.McC. He speaks of himself as being a proud, insolent, overbearing man. Some of us were reading a psalm this morning in relation to the proud. We are very careless in our use of words. A believer should never take that word on his lips about being proud of anything. Sometimes persons say they are proud of their work, proud of their children, proud of the way they have come into things and the way they are shaping up at school. Pride does not come from God; pride comes from the devil; we should be proud about nothing. God abominates pride. It says: "God sets himself against the proud, but gives grace to the lowly", @James 4: 6. If pride is working in my heart, it is a solemn thing to think that I come up against God and He resists it. That is, God fights against pride in my heart. If I am too proud to acknowledge anything, too proud to go down and own where I have been wrong, God is fighting against me; He is resisting me.
Rem. That is seen with the publican and sinner who went up to the temple to pray.
S.McC. Just so. The point is. Where do things find their origin? Where does pride find its origin? It finds its origin in him, who in the place of power and glory, sought to exalt his throne above God, namely, Satan. Surely, we do not want to take on that feature.
Rem. Peter could say: "and all of you bind on humility towards one another; for God sets himself
{6}
against the proud, but to the humble gives grace", @1 Peter 5: 5.
S.McC. Yes, it should affect us, that He sets Himself against pride, showing how terrible it is in God's sight. We may not be proud outwardly, but we may be very proud inwardly -- we may feel very insulted when anything is said about us or against us that would affect our reputation. But God sets Himself against that.
J.A.K. When Aaron and Miriam spoke against Moses. Moses does not say anything, but the Spirit of God brings in that he was the meekest man. The Spirit of God took pleasure in calling attention to Moses, did He not?
S.McC. He did. We need to remember that it was to Moses that God says "keeping mercy unto thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin, but by no means clearing the guilty", @Exodus 34: 7. We should particularly note that word, that God by no means clears the guilty in that sense; that is, sins must be taken into account and they have been taken into account in the blood of Jesus. But the blood, figuratively speaking, is on the mercy-seat, and God has set the mercy-seat forth. That is, the mercy-seat of old was in the holiest, both in the tabernacle and the temple, but the glory of our dispensation is that God has moved the mercy-seat on to the full public view of man, showing how His righteousness is manifested.
Ques. Was Moses forbearing in that incident?
S.McC. I suppose he was. He realised what we all need to realise, that when it comes to ourselves we can leave things in the hands of God. When it comes to what affects God, we must stand with our backs to the wall and defend the truth at all costs.
Ques. Would you say a little more about forbearance for us today as referred to here?
S.McC. Think of God forbearing in regard to the
{7}
matter when man was on trial! That is the point, man was on trial, under the law and, too, in different ways before He was on trial under the law. While the offerings on the altars pointed in type to what was coming in, these sacrifices could never take away sins, neither could they perfect the worshipper who approached. And God forbears with all that, for He waited for the coming of Jesus. It is very affecting, dear brethren, to think of that, how long God had to wait for the coming of Jesus. It was a few thousand years, but His forbearance was there. It is a lesson to us, for we have to see how sins are dealt with. We might rise up in indignation because the standards of human propriety, which we have naturally, have been impugned, or transgressed against in something. There is nothing in that. What should affect us in regard to sins, is God's holiness. But our dispensation shows that the righteousness of God is now manifested in regard to the passing over of sins.
J.W.H. The setting forth of the mercy-seat was something that God had looked forward to for a long time. First of all it was in the holiest, where the cherubim looked down upon it and guarded it, but now it has been brought forth for men.
S.McC. The cherubim are symbols of God's government and what is in keeping with it. Their looking down upon the blood would point to how that government has been satisfied. Now we come to the full and complete thing in the blood of Jesus, so that God should "be just and justify him that is of the faith of Jesus".
Rem. "There will I meet with thee", @Exodus 25: 22.
S.McC. That is it; we have a meeting place there! That brings up in our souls the question of what we know about this meeting place, which reminds us of how sins have been dealt with. It necessitated that a divine Person, coming into manhood, would be found in death, in the place where He
{8}
is made sin and where He has to say: "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" Sins were being mediated in that regard; they were being met by God on that principle, through the Mediator, "the mediator of God and men one, the man Christ Jesus", @1 Timothy 2: 5. The redemption is in Christ Jesus, and that blessed Man, is the Man in whom the question of sins was met, when He said, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?"
J.A.K. What do you think of the expression "the power of his blood"? You referred to the power of His life.
S.McC. You mean in @Romans 5. You will notice that 'the power of' is interpolated. It is added to give force to the expression in both sections. The blood bears on the negative side, for all that stood against us morally has been met by the blood. We shall be saved from the wrath which would rightly come upon us in regard of our sins through the blood. Wrath is not being executed at the present time, according to the truth of the gospel. It has been revealed from heaven, but it is not being executed in the present dispensation. It *will be* executed, but as justified through the power of the blood, we are saved from it. It is the marvellous effects of the death of Jesus in the great mediation of this matter of sins which stood between us and God.
Ques. Does the idea of what is efficacious enter into that?
S.McC. Of course it does. That is, blood is the only means of efficacy in regard of cleansing from sin.
Rem. In @Exodus 25 it is not only "There will I meet with thee", but "and will speak with thee".
S.McC. It is important that there is not only this matter of our basic relations on the ground of sins being dealt with, and where the claims of the throne have been satisfied, but opening up these wonderful thoughts in regard to us and the blessedness
{9}
of our relations with Him. So that ought to help us to see that nowhere is it contemplated that relief is the great end in the gospel. The blood, of course, does bring in relief, but it has in mind these uninterrupted relations with God where His mind is opened up, His thoughts unfolded.
W.B.G. The epistle is written to Christians, which would just enforce what you are saying as to the need of this in our souls in a foundational way.
S.McC. That is the point. I think there is a great need in our local gatherings (at least I would presume here as in our own), of establishment with the young, and with those of us who are older, too, in regard to the glad tidings. You take the woman in @Luke 7, what an appreciation she would have of the mercy-seat! I should think we should far less easily fall into sins if we were more conscious of this meeting place, and what Christ is to us as the mercy-seat. God setting Him forth, and then faith in His blood. The setting forth is God's active side; but faith in His blood is our active side, how we come into the matter.
W.B.G. So that the conditions are not impossible. In spite of all that is set out in the early chapters of Romans, this is the way God meets it.
S.McC. That is the point, and it is very interesting to see the reasoning in @Romans 5, because so often the negative side is brought up. So often we enlarge on negative conditions. We say, Modern conditions are so bad! Well, they are, but what @Romans 5, in its reasoning, shows is that if that is so -- much rather what has come in in Christianity would help us. It says in @Romans 5: 15: "For if by the offence of one the many have died, much rather has the grace of God, and the free gift in grace, which is by the one man Jesus Christ, abounded unto the many". And then verse 17: "For if by the offence of one death reigned by the one, much rather shall those
{10}
who receive the abundance of grace, and of the free gift of righteousness, reign in life by the one Jesus Christ". That shows that we cannot bring up the negative side as an argument for our getting into difficulty and remaining in difficulty because the truth of the gospel shows us that if the negative side is so, then, in the "much rather", the grace side, the positive side, abounds in the means of help for our salvation.
W.B.G. So that this was really written for us "upon whom the ends of the ages are come", when all these difficulties will be multiplied.
S.McC. Romans was written to those in a city, in a metropolis that was renowned, not only then, but it is renowned now as its fame has been handed down through history. We see how salvation comes in in the midst of that, that believers might be completely saved from a system of things where death reigns, as attached to a Person who has mediated the great matter of sins between God and men. He has mediated by means of His death and His resurrection; we must not forget that, @Romans 5 brings it in.
W.B.G. Is the power of His life being ministered to us now by the Spirit?
S.McC. Well, it enters into this great matter of our salvation in that way. It says in verse 10: "For if, being enemies, we have been reconciled to God through the death of his Son, much rather having been reconciled we shall be saved in the power of his life". Now salvation from wrath as linked with justification in the power of His blood and also reconciliation are both faith matters. That is, they are complete matters, there is no progress in them or development in them. They are absolute, complete. We come into them through the liberality of divine gift as presented in the gospel. But salvation by the life of Christ is not absolute in that sense. Salvation by the life of Christ, in its present form.
{11}
involves what is wrought in us. It is what we experimentally enter into and participate in by the Spirit, not exactly by faith but by the Spirit.
Ques. Should that have a place in our gospel preachings?
S.McC. It should. That is, the life of Christ has great saving effect in this sense to the believer. The meaning of it is, that as the believer in his affections is held in relation to Christ, in the power of His life, he is saved from the influences of sin around. There is nothing like the power of attachment to a Person, and immediate spiritual contact with that Person, to save us. Why is it that we are not saved? Why is it that young believers and old believers get into sin, and get out of fellowship? Why is it? They may give all kinds of excuses, all kinds of reasons, they may blame the brethren, or blame this and that; but the real point is that they have lost touch with Christ. That is the whole point.
C.A.H. Would you say the power of His life was expressed in resurrection? The apostle in @Philippians 3 speaks about his seeking to attain to the resurrection from among the dead. That would not be actual in his experience, but it was what he had before him, that he might be, at the present time, in the power of His resurrection.
S.McC. Well, it involves His resurrection, but @Romans 5 involves what is actual, in a spiritual way, not in a physical way. Through the Spirit, the believer has contact with Christ and the power of that life in which Christ lives, saves him.
C.A.H. Yes. I understand that, but I thought "the power of his life" was already expressed in Christ in resurrection and that we enter into it as brought into it by the Spirit.
S.McC. That is what we are saying. The life we are speaking of is the life that comes on to view in resurrection. It is miraculous. The life that was in
{12}
Jesus in the gospels is presented in testimony in the glad tidings. So the word by the angel was: "Go ye and stand and speak in the temple to the people all the words of this life", @Acts 5: 20. That is life in testimony in Jesus, but that is not exactly what we have in @Romans 5. There it is the character of indissoluble life, life that death cannot touch, life that has come on to view in resurrection and glory. And it is life that the believer, by the Spirit, can participate in spiritually.
C.A.H. It came into expression in Christ's resurrection from the dead.
S.McC. Yes. During the forty days, for instance, they were in touch with a Person in whom this life was seen. How wonderful it was! There it was tangibly before them, they could handle it! The Lord says, "Handle me and see". This kind of life is not like that of the Greek philosophers -- something we have a lot of platitudes about. It is life that has come on to view in a divine Person, in manhood, and the believer is to participate in it by the Spirit. We can only come into it by the Spirit, because the Spirit is the great means of contact between the soul and Christ.
C.A.H. It is worked out in us.
S.McC. That is the point. It is what is worked out in us -- whereas reconciliation and salvation from wrath are not worked out in us. Salvation from wrath and reconciliation have been wrought outside of us in Christ in His death. Salvation from wrath is linked with being justified through His blood and reconciliation is through His death. That did not happen in us. That happened in Christ, outside of us. But salvation in the power of His life is something that is worked out in us, by the Spirit.
C.A.H. So that we have not yet come to resurrection; when we do, we shall be in the same life that Christ is in, shall we not?
{13}
S.McC. We have not come to it literally. Colossians says: "in which ye have also been raised with him through faith of the working of God who raised him from among the dead", @Colossians 2: 12. We come to it by faith in our souls, but literally we shall come to it at the rapture.
Rem. His life before death was a testimony to us.
S.McC. In His life here God rendered testimony to men of the character and kind of a life that He was going to bring men into. But the life that is referred to here, where it says, "we shall be saved in the power of his life", is a life that is out of death. It is not exactly the life that was before death, but the life that is out of death. We are saved in the power of it. As the efficacy of it, in the power of the Spirit, works out in us, there is salvation for us.
Rem. At the present moment, do we apprehend it by faith?
S.McC. Well, not this. Salvation in the power of His life is not a matter of faith. It involves the Spirit. Reconciliation is a matter of faith. Salvation from wrath as justified through His blood, is a matter of faith. It is presented in the gospel and we can accept that by faith. But -- "we shall be saved in the power of his life" -- is a continuous present matter that works out in the believer in his contact with Christ through the Spirit.
Ques. Does this link with @John 6, the eating of the flesh and drinking of the blood of the Son of man?
S.McC. What is to be noted there, is that it is *eternal* life. The life in @Romans 5: 10 is not eternal life, although the one merges into the other. The life that is referred to in verse 10 is life in an *active* form in the soul of the believer. It is active in Christ and it is active in the believer in the power of the Spirit in his contact with Christ. Eternal life is objective in Romans. It is positional and fixed. Life
{14}
in @Romans 5: 10, is active and operative in the soul of the believer.
W.B.G. Would John touch this in his epistle, when he says: "as he is, we also are in this world", @1 John 4: 17?
S.McC. It involves that. The Song of Solomon would show us how it works out. It says, "Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth". Well, how wonderful that is! That is immediate contact with Christ, and this life works out in that contact. So that, if contact is lost with Christ, you lose desire for prayer -- for reading -- for the meetings -- and you gradually drift and drift and you may get out of fellowship. The whole secret is contact has been lost with Christ and you are not saved. In other words, instead of being saved through contact with Christ in the power of that wonderful life, you are in bondage and you come under the power of sin.
Ques. Would you say something about the thief? What part had he in this kind of life you are speaking of now?
S.McC. He went to be with Christ. He did not need the salvation in the power of Christ's life that we are speaking of.
Rem. Whereas he had full part in the former life you were speaking about.
S.McC. The testimony of that life was borne to him, but salvation in the power of His life has to do with present circumstances. The thief went out of them right into glory, into paradise, so he did not need salvation in the power of Christ's life. He was justified in the power and efficacy of Christ's blood and Christ's death.
Rem. He had every right and title to accompany Christ.
S.McC. Certainly. So has every believer on that ground. It is important that we should see the
{15}
absolute side of the work of Christ. There can be no advance on it or progress in it. Salvation from wrath is complete. I cannot do anything to add to that. Reconciliation is complete, outside of me. I cannot do anything about that. But of course, I can grow in new creation. I do not grow in reconciliation, although I may grow in the appreciation of it, but there is growth in new creation. So you have "a *man* in Christ" (@2 Corinthians 12: 2), which shows a developed thought.
C.A.H. How about Judas? Judas knew all about the life of Christ before He died, but he did not partake in this life at all.
S.McC. Oh no, he was an apostate. He comes under the category of @Hebrews 6; he was enlightened and had tasted of the heavenly gift, but he had no part in these matters vitally. There was no vital link with Christ. That is very solemn. We may be in these meetings and we need to search our hearts as to the work of God in us. Can I search myself and put my finger, figuratively speaking, on the work of God in me? If I cannot, I may be a Judas. We must be able to discern the work of God in us, otherwise we may be a Judas and be carried in the wave and current and stream of apostasy leading on to the man of sin.
C.A.H. He was even an apostle.
S.McC. He was, it shows how far persons can go. Every person who goes out of fellowship, *in principle* is moving in the stream and current of apostasy. Apostasy really means giving up things. You give up the truth, you give up Christ, you give up Christianity. Persons who go out of fellowship are giving up things; they are moving in that stream.
J.A.K. You think then that when failure comes in with us, it is because of the lack of our conscious link with Christ?
{16}
S.McC. I am sure it is. What will hold us is where our foundations are fixed in stability through contact with Christ. You take that woman in @Luke 7 as she approached, as we would speak of it, the mercy-seat. Do you think she would ever forget it? Do you think when some allurement would come up in the world, some temptation come along, that she would forget that contact with Jesus or when He said: "Thy sins are forgiven"? Think of the tears! Think of how she felt about her sins! Think of what she felt about the Saviour, about Jesus! Do we appreciate our Saviour, Jesus, in that light? We shall not readily fall into sin if we do. We shall not readily get cold. Why we get cold is because we have lost contact with Jesus.
Rem. It is the love of the Christ that constrains us.
S.McC. So this matter of salvation in the power of His life is very important. It means that I have to keep near to Christ. If I do not keep near to Christ I shall be lost. When I use the word 'lost', I am not speaking about being lost eternally, but I will be lost in the world, lost to the testimony. You see brothers and sisters who lose interest and get cold; they blame the attitude of the brethren or something else, but the whole point in the matter is that they have lost contact with Christ, and the enemy has got room to put the wedge in and to bring in the distance.
Rem. You do not hear John, who leaned on Jesus¬ bosom, complaining; we would not either, if we were near to the Lord in that way.
S.McC. The place in the bosom of Jesus was unique to John, but it illustrates what we are talking about, and the importance of being near to Jesus, near to the Son of God, for salvation is in the power of His life. That Person is our life as it says in Colossians -- "Christ ... who is our life", @Colossians 3: 4.
{17}
Salvation in the power of His life means that He is everything to us as we keep in contact with Him spiritually.
W.B.G. Would the rest of chapter 5 show the way this Person has cleared the ground for us?
S.McC. The rest of the chapter opens up the truth of the headship of Christ. Up to verse 11 of chapter 5 the subject is sins, the plural, relating to our guilty acts and the mediation of Christ stands related to it, through the mercy-seat and the blood on it and His death. Now when we come to verse 12 another subject is opened on our view, not sins, in the plural, but sin in the singular. It is the active root principle of sin which is never forgiven and never will be forgiven. Sins are forgiven, but sin is never forgiven. God has expressed His utter condemnation of it at the cross, in the forsaking of Jesus. There was only one thing that could be done with it. God condemned it. Jesus was made to be sin -- the very thing -- as it says, "Him who knew not sin, he has made sin for us, that we might become God's righteousness in him", @2 Corinthians 5: 21. Now this matter of the headship of Christ in this setting is very affecting because we want to see that if we are going to be saved in the end of the dispensation, we need to understand Christ's headship in this relation, because what the man of sin and the antichrist open up to our view is headship in another relation. The world will choose a head, and the moment that takes place, the apostasy breaks out in full bloom and not until then. It is when the world appoints a rival head that the apostasy extends itself publicly. But through the gospel the believer is introduced to God's appointed Head of man, the one Man, Jesus Christ. Notice the prepositions here in this chapter the 'throughs' and the 'bys'. It is not exactly what we are coming into now, but the greatness of what is toward us, the liberality of divine giving in order
{18}
that our souls might be built up in spiritual substance in view of the service of God.
Rem. The contrast is between the one Man and the one man.
S.McC. That is right, the two men. The first man, and the second man out of heaven, the Lord Jesus Christ. He is God's appointed Head for man. It is very affecting, and Luke would help us as to it, how the Lord in coming into humanity, as the Son of man, has come on to the side of humanity to take up all that stood against humanity, the liabilities that humanity incurred through the failure of its first head. The new Head takes them up and discharges the liabilities, that we might go free and come into the abundance of grace and the free gift of righteousness. Notice the gratuity and liberality of the terms in this chapter!
Rem. It is remarkable how God can gather up so much in Christ to bring out the favour of God.
S.McC. It is. It shows the triumph of God in that way over all that opposed Him, over all that stood against God in the scene which His own hands had created. He has come into it, and mediated this great matter of sins and taken up the great matter of the principle of sin itself that has ruined the world and marred the world for His pleasure. He has taken it up in the one Man, the divinely-appointed Head, and the gospel presents that Head. We should see to it, in the gospel, that this new Head is presented to men, because there is forgiveness in this new Head, justification in this new Head, the gift of the Spirit related to this new Head. Satan is about to introduce the rival head. Well, there will be nothing but condemnation and disaster, ruin and chaos, through him. God has met the dislocation and the chaos and the ruin that sin has brought in, by this divinely-appointed Head. So that if believers are attached to Him, they are attached to Him in
{19}
righteousness. It is not only that righteousness is imputed, but they are constituted righteous. They are moving in the orbit of this glorious Centre, the divinely-appointed Head. They are not lawless. They are moving as the stars in relation to the sun in the astronomical sphere; they are moving in relation to Christ and held in righteousness.
W.B.G. It is affecting that the apostle Paul should bring this forward for us, he knowing to the full what it was to be under another head.
S.McC. Just so, and how it should affect our souls and affect the young believers, because they say so much is against them, but what we want to see is how much more is *for* us. That is the great point that everything is for us, so we get the expression here in verse 17: "For if by the offence of the one death reigned by the one, much rather shall those who receive the abundance of grace, and of the free gift of righteousness, reign in life". Now it has often been noted, and will bear repeating, that there are three ideas of life presented in @Romans 5: Salvation in the power of His life -- reigning in life -- and justification of life. Reigning in life means that I am superior in my circumstances, superior to all that I am naturally. So many just give in to themselves, and go under the power of what they are naturally, saying, What can I do about it? You can do everything about it, on the basis of the free gift of righteousness and the abundance of grace. You can be dominant or superior in yourself, through grace and by the Spirit, in your circumstances. Think of what the idea of reigning brings up now: my business does not control me; my family does not control me; men in the world do not control me. I am in control, through divine grace. I am reigning in life. You are dominant in your circumstances. They are not controlling you, you are controlling them. But then the matter of justification of life means that I am what
{20}
I say. If I say I am a believer, I live and act like a believer, on the lines of righteousness. My life justifies what I am. I do not tell people: Well, the work of Christ has set me free -- I do, in a sense -- but then my life shows that I am justified; that is justification of life.
{21}
THE KNOWLEDGE OF CHRIST IN RELATION TO THE GOSPEL AND THE ASSEMBLY (2)
@Romans 6: 1 - 6; @Romans 7: 1 - 4; @Romans 8: 31 - 39
S.McC. In view of the fact that a number were not with us this morning, we might refer to what we considered. Our subject is how our souls are built up in the knowledge of Christ in relation to the gospel, and in relation to the assembly. We shall come to the subject of fellowship and the assembly tomorrow, but we are dealing today with the gospel in Romans, and this morning we looked at chapter 3 and the end of chapter 5, noticing how Christ is presented as the mercy-seat. We are told that the Mediator of God and men is one, the Man Christ Jesus, and we often think of His mediatorship entering into the service of God. But we need to think of how His mediatorship enters into the matter of the sin question; how the great question of sin between man and God has been mediated. The mercy-seat thus in @Romans 3 brings Christ personally on to our view, in a peculiar way. It was noticed that God set forth the mercy-seat and that it is through faith in His blood. That is where we come in, for faith in the blood brings us in in regard to the matter of our sins being dealt with. Then God's righteousness enters into it. God's righteousness is not presented in our dispensation, on the line of demand, but on the line of supply. Then forgiveness of sins comes about through it. We also noted in chapter 5, the headship of Christ. It is important that the believer should apprehend Christ's headship in relation to man, as over against Adam, the first head, who failed and brought such sorrow and disaster into the human race. Christ has come in, on the side of the race, as the divinely-appointed
{22}
Head, so that over against the negative conditions which came in through Adam, we have the "much rather" referred to, on the positive side, in connection with the new Head, Christ. It was remarked that apostasy is about to be manifested, when the world will set up a rival head to Christ, in the man of sin, the antichrist. It is important, as believers, that we should be established in our souls in the fundamentals of the gospel so that we should see what Christ's headship means to us, and our attachment to Him as constituted righteous, so that we are not lawless, independent persons, but we are held in righteousness in relation to Him, who is the Centre of God's world. We referred too to the fact that @Romans 5 brings in the wealth of what is toward us, so that we get salvation from wrath as justified through blood and we have reconciliation to God through the death of His Son. These are matters for faith to lay hold of, involving a work done outside of us. But then there is what is wrought in us, which of course, in its teaching, goes beyond @Romans 5, but it is brought in there to impress us with the wealth of divine giving, and to help us in view of our souls being built up, morally and spiritually. We are not to be in spiritual poverty, but in wealth. Salvation by Christ's life involves what is wrought out in the believer. In contrast to eternal life, we referred to life in an active and operative way, consciously in the believer by the power of the Spirit. Eternal life is presented in Romans in an objective way, as something to be reached, referring to what is fixed and positional. Salvation by the life of Christ in @Romans 5 is not exactly a realm or sphere into which we are introduced, but it refers to what is operating and active in the soul of the believer. Participating in the life of Christ involves immediate contact with Him, and this means our salvation from things here.
{23}
Now this afternoon, Christ comes before us in relation to the wilderness position. In chapter 6. He is the great Leader -- "the leader of their salvation" as referred to in @Hebrews 2. It is a matter of leadership in the wilderness. We need leadership. The young people are very much in mind in our subject, because of the felt need of the cardinal truths of the gospel laying hold of their souls. So that instead of being superficial, we should be marked by inward stability, as there is the digging deep and our foundations being laid on the rock. If that is so, we shall not yield easily to the principle of sin as it operates. Now the Leader of our salvation comes before us in chapter 6, for "baptised unto Christ Jesus" involves Christ's leadership in the wilderness. In type it is seen in Moses; they were all baptised unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea. The leadership of Christ in the wilderness involves that the believer is brought into newness of life. He is no longer walking according to the flesh, but, as identified with Christ in the likeness of His death, newness of life comes into view. Our souls are to be built up in the knowledge of the leadership of Christ in that way. Then, in the opening of chapter 7, we have the new husband, and Christ as the Deliverer at the end of chapter 7. Then Christ as priest comes in at the end of @Romans 8. These are cardinal features of Christ's mediatorial service in the truth of the gospel, and are brought forward in order that our souls might be solidly built up in the truth. This section links with the type in the Old Testament, which involves the covenant, and the tabernacle system; it involves the use that is to be made of the property and the material that is available, because God's intent is that our souls are to be built up substantially in the knowledge of Christ in view of the tabernacle and His service. @Romans 7 brings in the law, the covenant, and the truth of @Romans 7 adjusts us as
{24}
to the truth of the covenant of old, the death of Christ coming in to bring about the termination of the bond so that we should be to another. But @Romans 6 brings up this great matter of the wilderness and life for the believer in the wilderness, and into this life in the wilderness enters the glory of the Father. We are to note that it says: "even as Christ has been raised up from among the dead by the glory of the Father, so we also should walk in newness of life". That is, the glory of the Father that entered into the act of raising Christ from the dead enters into the fact of newness of life in the believer. It is important thus that we should take full account of this position in the wilderness. The wilderness is what the world has become for the believer. Egypt is not the world exactly for the believer; Egypt is what the world is for the unconverted, for the unregenerate. It is man's world, the enemy's world, but the wilderness is what the world becomes to the believer as baptised unto Christ Jesus. The brethren will notice now the change in the preposition, as we were alluding to this morning. Then it is was 'by' and 'through', now we have 'unto' and 'to'. That is, the chapter is contemplating what we are entering upon, in our souls¬ experience, in the truth of the gospel in our relations with Christ. What we had this morning is more what is towards us, save for the reference to the participation in the life of Christ, which is experimental, as we have contact with Christ through the Spirit. One has been feeling very much of late, especially as things come so near in regard to the working out of the truth amongst us, that there is a good deal of superficiality and there needs to be more help in relation to the solid foundations in the gospel, so that we are more firmly held in our souls in relation to Christ, and thus the principle of the virgin daughter of Zion will be built up. That suggests what is impervious
{25}
to the approaches of the world and the power of Satan working through Amalek, through the flesh.
L.E.S. That is just what I have been thinking. Your reference to the virgin daughter of Zion would stress the great need of our roots being looked into. It says: "shall again take root downward, and bear fruit upward", @Isaiah 37: 31. You feel there cannot be any real taking on of the substantial glory of the assembly and the service of God, apart from this basic matter being looked into.
S.McC. I am sure that is right. We were referring this morning to the need of having a real apprehension of the Person. Being justified by the blood should affect our souls as to how our sins have been met and dealt with. Sometimes, when we are discovered in sin, there is a good deal of remorse and a good deal of bitterness because we have been found out, but we want to be with God about the matter and take it up, not just superficially, but in the light of how God has dealt with it in the death of Christ as the early chapters of Romans stress.
Rem. You have sinned really against God.
S.McC. Well, that is where it is. It is independence of God and the whole matter of sin has been mediated by the coming into manhood of a divine Person; and more than that, for it necessitated the abandonment, when He was made sin, and His actual entrance into death and the grave and then the resurrection, showing how great a matter it is.
Rem. Is that the reason why the apostle Paul tells the Corinthians, "Ye have been bought with a price"? Is it to bring them back to these things, that they may be basically sound?
S.McC. That is interesting, because it would remind them (although it is referred to there in connection with our bodies being the temple of the Holy Spirit) of the infinite purchase price that has been paid. We have been bought with a price; we
{26}
are not our own, therefore we cannot act as we like. One has been impressed a good deal of late with that chapter to which you refer and @Romans 12 and other sections as to the close link between what is physical and what is spiritual. We try at times to make the physical entirely separate from the spiritual, as if the physical is one department of life and the spiritual another department of life. But @Romans 12 and @1 Corinthians 6 show that the physical is allied to the spiritual; the physical merges into what is spiritual. That is, our bodies are to be presented a living sacrifice. It is our bodies, not our souls. These actual bodies of ours are to be a living sacrifice and then in @1 Corinthians 6, the apostle says, in regard to the great matter of the sin there: "Do ye not know that your bodies are members of Christ? Shall I then, taking the members of the Christ, make them members of a harlot?" That is our bodies (not our souls, nor our spirits), but our physical bodies are the members of the Christ. What we are in public and what we are in the meeting cannot be divorced. We cannot put our ordinary life into one department, and our life in the assembly into another department with no link between them. The one merges into the other; the one is linked with the other.
Ques. In that connection would you say something as to holiness?
S.McC. The chapter we begin with brings it up as an objective. As our souls are built up in the knowledge of Christ, as presented in @Romans 6, it eventuates in holiness, as it says, "ye have your fruit unto holiness and the end eternal life". Holiness is essential for our relations with God and the service of God. But the remarkable thing here is that is says "your fruit"; in the next chapter we shall see it is "fruit to God".
J.A.K. We might do a matter because of righteousness, but is not holiness something further? Holiness
{27}
is more abhorrence of that which is contrary to God.
S.McC. Righteousness is linked with the attributes of God, holiness with the nature of God. Holiness is never imputed, whereas righteousness is.
J.H.S. Is it interesting in that connection that it says: "let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body", @Romans 6: 12?
S.McC. The mortal body is an allusion to our physical bodies. The Lord Jesus Himself was not any different when He was with men than when He was with God. He was the very same, in His relations with men and in His relations with God, and we are to be the same.
L.E.S. So the working out of these great matters involves what we are here in relation to our bodies, and the "perfecting of holiness" in 2 Corinthians would have this in mind.
S.McC. The Lord is aiming at that. There has been a good deal of exercise in the years that are past, for well nigh thirty years or more, as to trade union matters, that as believers we could not have part in them. But then the issue has been raised as to the other side, namely those who may be in authority and in positions of influence. It is just as much an unequal yoke for a brother to be vice-president of a worldly corporation as it is for a brother to be a member of a trade union. It is an unholy association. You could never think of the Lord Jesus being secretary or vice-president of a worldly corporation. Why, the thing is the furthest from your mind to entertain the thought! But there are some amongst us who have no compunction about these matters.
W.B.G. Does the apostle then bring in this very matter in the beginning of chapter 6: "Should we continue in sin that grace may abound?"
S.McC. That is, the dispensation is one of grace, but then shall we continue in sin that grace may abound? Now sin here is not so much the acts of
{28}
sin, as in the early part of Romans up to chapter 5: 11, but it is more sin as a principle outside of us. It is a principle that is operating in the world and believers are to take account of themselves as having died to it; that is, it should find no reaction in them. They cannot count on grace to help them, and to abound, if they continue in sin. If they continue in sin, virtually speaking they may go into apostasy.
W.B.G. I thought it became a challenge to us at the beginning of this chapter.
S.McC. It does. To continue in sin would be making little of grace. But the knowledge of Christ, as the Leader in our salvation in these matters, makes a difference in our lives. "For if we are become identified with him in the likeness of his death", which would involve our baptism, then it is right to look for newness of life.
L.E.S. Does this involve an inward, basic state of soul in our experience with God? The footnote helps, it says: "Lit. 'grown up with' and so thoroughly one".
S.McC. It shows that our baptism is not a superficial matter, and life as entering into our souls in @Romans 6, as to the truth of our baptism, involves this matter of identification with Christ. "Grown up with", it is no light matter. It is not just a matter of taking on the ways of the brethren; it is our identification with Christ and taking on His ways, and the glory of the Father enters into this matter.
J.H.S. Would the verse in Galatians link on with this, where Paul says: "For ye, as many as have been baptised unto Christ, have put on Christ", @Galatians 3: 27?
S.McC. That is what baptism involves. Persons who are baptised have "put on Christ". It is their whole profession and position. So that a person who is not baptised, is not rightly in Christianity.
L.E.S. Do you think we are being tested as to
{29}
whether we know practically and vitally our intimate links with the Holy Spirit? Does not what we are speaking of involve that? We have had much ministry as to this great matter, yet one feels how little we know in regard of the intimate links in our real history with God.
S.McC. While the Holy Spirit is not formally alluded to in @Romans 6 and 7, the Holy Spirit underlies the teaching of that section. In the type the Holy Spirit is given in the light of @Romans 5, for at Rephidim the rock was smitten and the water flowed. The Spirit is given, as it says "the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit which has been given to us", @Romans 5: 5. The Holy Spirit underlies all this matter, so that @Romans 5 is the way in which our souls are to be built up in the knowledge of the wealth of divine giving. That is a great matter. The believer, thus, has an advantage to begin with, for everything is toward him on the ground of divine gift. But when we come to @Romans 6, it is not what is toward us on the lines of divine gift, although it is there objectively, but it is what we are now in the responsive movements of our souls towards the truth of that giving.
Ques. Is that why the apostle starts chapter 6 by way of a question as though there is something there to call upon?
S.McC. He says, Are you ignorant? He talks to persons who should know these things. In connection with our baptism, it says first we have been "baptised unto Christ Jesus", that is the Person. Then it says "have been baptised unto his death". Thus we have the Person and His death. We were noticing this morning, the mercy-seat and the blood, in @Romans 5. Now, in @Romans 6, it is the Person and His death.
L.E.S. Say a little more as to the great bearing of the blood. One has felt that we have had very little conception as to the greatness and glory attaching to
{30}
this great matter. We can never know anything of the yearnings, the groanings, connected with deliverance, unless we know something of the value of the blood.
S.McC. It is important to see the side of the teaching that is connected with the blood, because it is intended to affect our souls. It brings in the judicial side, that sins could only be dealt with on that line; there is no other way. The blood brings in the great thought of the tremendous cost that was involved for God to mediate this question of our sins. Some may sometimes say in the gospel that after the hours of abandonment were over matters were finished, but where do we get that in the word of God, except in an anticipative way when Jesus said, "It is finished"? In the matter of atonement it was not only necessary that sins should be dealt with vicariously in Jesus on the cross, but it was necessary that the life to which *in us* sin attached should be laid down and the blood stands related to that side. The blood of Jesus flowed from Him after He had died. That is, the blood flowed from a dead Christ. Death had come in. Death is the penal sentence of God against sin. So that the question could not be fully met, until vicariously, in Jesus, the life to which, in us, sin attached, was laid down. Sin did not attach to Jesus; He knew no sin, did no sin, and sin was not in Him, but vicariously the life *to which in us* sin attached was laid down.
J.H.S. The completing of the matter required, speaking reverently, the burial.
S.McC. It did and it required His resurrection. It says, "Jesus our Lord, who has been delivered for our offences and has been raised for our justification", @Romans 4: 25. That shows the great vicarious import of the resurrection of Christ. It was essential to complete the matter. Before God, in the abandonment, the claims of the throne were met in the
{31}
righteous administration of wrath, against sin. But then on our side there was necessary all that we have referred to.
J.H.S. So that in the gospel where He says, "It is finished", it involved anticipatively the carrying through of the whole matter.
S.McC. Exactly. Sometimes that is referred to as if it was a backward reference only. But it involves the Lord's entrance into death and His burial and resurrection and ascension into glory. In the type and according to Hebrews, the blood must be carried within. Not that that is physically and materially so now, but the type would show that the blood had to be carried within.
L.E.S. I think what you are saying is most important, because we are sometimes clear so far as to the matter of our sins, but we are not dealing with the matter of our sins here, it is a question of sin, "Knowing this, that our old man has been crucified with him, that the body of sin might be annulled, that we should no longer serve sin".
S.McC. That is a great matter. Our salvation according to @Romans 6 involves our deliverance from the active power of sin as a principle that governs the world. People might say as they do: Well, there is not much after all in taking on worldly ways and worldly things. Is there not? If we do, as believers, we are living in sin, because the whole principle of the world's living is sin, and that is what @Romans 6 is dealing with. The believer is to take account of himself as dead to that principle as identified with Christ in His death through baptism. We do not die to sin in ourselves; when it comes to sin in the believer, as in @Romans 7 and 8, it involves experimental deliverance in the power of the Spirit. But when it is sin outside of ourselves, as a motivating principle of the world, we die to that.
{32}
W.B.G. "Sin shall not have dominion over you". That is the great end, is it not?
S.McC. We are to become bondmen to righteousness and have our fruit unto holiness. The prepositions 'to' and 'unto' are very fine in this chapter, because it is all a question of movement towards. We are moving towards principles as well as persons. There is not only the leadership of Christ, but there is the leadership of principles. That is we are bondmen to righteousness unto holiness and the end is eternal life. Eternal life is thus viewed as an objective in regard to this matter of our deliverance from sin, as a principle in the world.
J.A.K. This morning you were speaking of our link with Him. Hebrews speaks of the Lord as having passed through the heavens, is that the finishing of the matter?
S.McC. The Lord carries the tokens of His finished work right into the presence of God. Of course we are speaking typically and figuratively; but the completing of the matter involves that the tokens of the finished work be carried right into the presence of God.
W.B.G. Why are the titles of the Lord changed in this chapter? It is Christ Jesus and Christ.
S.McC. It is important to see the change in the titles. When it is 'by' and 'through', as in @Romans 5, it is Jesus Christ. When it is 'to' and 'unto' it is Christ Jesus. The 'by' and 'through' is the administration of divine wealth, through this Person, and Jesus Christ is what He is from God towards us in the administrative position. But Christ Jesus brings up the responsive side on our part, how we are responding to the light objectively presented in the truth of our baptism.
Rem. It is not only dead to sin, but "justified from sin".
{33}
S.McC. That is the whole thing, that we are completely cleared from this principle of sin. Not only saved from it, but justified in relation to it, so that no charge can be laid to us. The figure of course is employed of one who has died, "he that has died is justified from sin". That is, you could never lay sin to the charge of a dead man. That is what the figure would have in mind.
L.E.S. The note says, "'Free' is ambiguous. It is justified, cleared, discharged. From sin, note, not sins".
S.McC. It is this great principle, that we are speaking of, of independence and lawlessness in the world. The young brethren amongst us should see the need of eschewing the great matter of independence and lawlessness. In our teens, we want to do what we like, we do not want to do what our parents tell us to do; we do not want the brethren to tell us what to do. We want to be left on our own to assert our own personality and it leads into disaster. We want to see the great value -- let us compare values -- of dependence upon God and obedience to God.
Rem. Independence is the spirit that marks the world and it may affect us who are parents, and be transferred to our children.
S.McC. It has often been said that we try hard to stamp out in our children what we have never judged in ourselves. The lessons we have to learn are salutary lessons in that regard, and God would help us to give a right lead in the matter of dependence. But that as to which the chapter is flooding our souls with light, is all that is on our behalf. Christ is our Leader in the wilderness and we want to get our eyes on Him. Sometimes we get our eyes on the wilderness, or on difficult circumstances, on things we do not have, the things we have had to deny ourselves, but Christ Jesus is the Object that is to engage us.
{34}
Rem. Having our eyes on Him, every obstacle would be met.
S.McC. The Spirit's power and the activity of faith all help us in relation to having Christ before us. The glory of the Father is very important here, because we have been inclined to link it entirely with the raising of Christ from the dead, without seeing sufficiently that the glory of the Father enters into our walking in newness of life. It says, "even as Christ has been raised up from among the dead by the glory of the Father, so ..." the adverb 'so', " we also should walk in newness of life". The glory of the Father, in the raising of Christ from among the dead, is to act and react on our walking in newness of life.
Rem. That involves another world.
S.McC. It involves that there is another world. We are not in a vacuum, we are not in any empty position, but our souls, in walking in this path of newness of life, are bathed in the glory of the Father. It is the glory that belongs to another world and another order of things.
Ques. Do we glorify Him?
S.McC. The net result would be in mind, that God should be served. Because in @Romans 6, 7 and 8, mount Sinai, the tabernacle, and Horeb, are all in mind. It is the whole wilderness position. In the first part of the wilderness, when the tabernacle was set up, the children of Israel, when moving forward, were governed by the tabernacle, that is like @Romans 6 and 7. They are governed by something outside of themselves. God was in relation to a system, which He has set up, in which He dwells on the ground of redemption. But when you come to @Numbers 21, you have, "Rise up, well! Sing unto it". From then on they are governed by a spring and source of energy within them. @Romans 8 is not exactly that we are governed by what is outside of us, as in
{35}
@Romans 6 and 7, but, "as many as are led by the Spirit of God, these are sons of God". The leadership now is an inward matter, involving the Spirit's presence and power in us, going on to the inheritance and the purpose of God.
Rem. Do we see that in the one in @Luke 17 that returned to give God glory? How the Lord valued that!
S.McC. He did. That brings up this great matter of what can be expected in the service of God, and when we say the service of God, we are not just thinking of Lord's day morning.
Rem. "Were not the ten cleansed? but the nine, where are they?"
S.McC. So that the Lord looks for a net result. If brothers remained continually silent in the testimony, there would be something seriously wrong. In fact, for a brother who has been affected by the grace of God's delivering power in redemption, to remain always silent and never to open his mouth, is almost tantamount to sin.
Ques. What are you connecting that with?
S.McC. The service of God, and that is a very full thought. Life, as we were speaking of it this morning, as we reign in life, and the justification of life, and now we take account of life as it is presented in @Romans 6, "alive to God in Christ Jesus", all enters into our meetings, our gatherings. It is active and operative life. As we assemble, we know for example that a hymn has to be given out. We do it; we do not ponderously wait for some unique movement from heaven. Life involves that we know what to do and do it. The same with prayer. The time is valuable, assembly time is costly, and we do not want to waste it, but to fill it out as it should be filled out, as life would fill it out, and life is a normal thing.
Rem. The Spirit comes in to support.
{36}
S.McC. As has often been said, the Spirit does not help you exactly on your seat; He helps you on your feet. We may sit on our chairs waiting for something to help us up, but we have got to get up. That involves physical movement on our part. Then as we get up, and are on our feet, we find, like Ezekiel, the Spirit entering in. On that principle, we shall get the Spirit linking on, as Ezekiel says, "the Spirit entered into me". You will always notice, in ministry honoured by God, that the power of the Spirit comes in as the teaching proceeds and you will find that also with any part that may be taken by any one of us in the service of God, power enters into it as we proceed.
W.B.G. So faith and the power of the Spirit go together.
S.McC. If I have faith to get on my feet, I shall find the power of the Spirit entering into me, and supporting me, because the Spirit is there. I am using an Old Testament figure, but as we get on our feet we find a divine Person helping us to fill out the service in power.
C.A.H. The Spirit lifts us up.
S.McC. That is the thought in Ezekiel. He says "the Spirit entered into me" (chapter 2: 2) and he also says "the Spirit lifted me up", chapter 3: 14. That is the trouble with most of us; we get occupied with ourselves, and our expressions, and the formulation of them. We should not think of the formulation of our expressions exclusively, we should be concerned that we give expression to what the work of God is in us however small it may be in its formation.
E.G. We often think 'So-and-so' can do it better than I can.
S.McC. That is very true. We are often occupied with how well other persons can express their thoughts, but what is to be noticed is that they do not express the work of God better. They may express their
{37}
thoughts better, but they do not express the work of God better, because the work of God is the work of God, whether it is typified in a turtle dove or in a bullock. It is the same work of God wherever it is expressed. If a young person stood on his feet on Lord's day morning and said, 'Lord Jesus, we thank Thee for dying for us on the cross' -- surely we would say a hearty 'Amen' to that! It would rejoice our hearts to see the work of God breaking through. Where there is affection, the intelligence will come.
W.B.G. Does the glory of the Father then attach to the work of God expressing itself?
S.McC. That is what I am thinking of in this matter of newness of life. The glory of the Father is in connection with the work of God in us. This 'to' and 'unto' involves that we keep right principles before us. Sometimes you hear (you hear it in your house as I do in my house). Well, what is wrong with this? Why can we not go here? Why can we not do this? Well, the whole point is, What principles have you got before you? Have you righteousness before you? Have you holiness before you? We should see that we are bondmen to these great principles and we are bound to serve them. That would help us as to what is right or wrong in a matter.
J.H.S. Christ is both "the leader and completer of faith", @Hebrews 12: 2.
S.McC. That is very important. He not only sets the matter on, but He completes the matter. @Romans 6 is a wonderful chapter! Would to God that our souls were bathed in the light of it and the experimental deliverance it involves! Life in @Romans 6 is not exactly in us, for the believer, in @Romans 6, is "alive to God in Christ Jesus". When we come to @Romans 8, it is not the believer alive in Christ Jesus, but the Spirit being life in the believer. @Romans 6 is the great objective view of the believer, as regulated in his mind by the truth of the gospel.
{38}
He is one who can take account of himself as alive to God in Christ Jesus. He is no longer going on with the man that God has set aside in the death of Christ. He has changed his man, he has Christ Jesus before him, and governing him. That brings us to @Romans 7, where we have the great thought of the new husband. @Romans 7 brings up, in figure and type, the great thought of the covenant; only that we are delivered from the Sinaitic idea of law, and we come under God's law, spiritually according to the inward man. The chapter opens with the thought of a marriage bond, which was linked with Sinai and the covenant given at Sinai. But the believer is delivered from the law in its Sinaitic aspect as made dead to it by the body of Christ that he should be to another. That is in principle, the marital bond in a new way, in order that we might bear fruit to God. Christ as the Husband is thus before us, the knowledge of it helping us in deliverance from the law. The truth of the gospel adjusts us now in relation to the law as given at Sinai.
L.E.S. "Thou shalt abide for me ... and I will also be for thee" (@Hosea 3: 3) -- a wonderful allusion to this!
S.McC. Yes, it is indeed. How God and the Lord Jesus affectionately appeal to our hearts and to our souls in that light! If we are not for another, He will be for us. We may allow alien objects to come on to our view and to control our thoughts and our affections and God is concerned about it. He would say to us this afternoon, in regard to the current condition of our souls, "thou shalt not be another man's, and I will also be for thee".
L.E.S. "And shall turn with fear toward Jehovah and toward his goodness at the end of the days", @Hosea 3: 5.
S.McC. God betrothing them to Himself in righteousness involves the truth of the gospel in
{39}
Romans, because it brings up the thought of the bond of righteous obligation as affected by God in the manifestation of His grace.
J.H.S. Does not the passage suggest what God is prepared to be to us in Christ?
S.McC. It is what God is prepared to do for us. This chapter opens up our response to that and how Christ, as Husband, is going to sustain and support us in this new position of deliverance from law, as committed to Himself.
W.B.G. God allures into the wilderness because of this. It says, "I will allure her, and bring her into the wilderness, and speak to her heart", @Hosea 2: 14. Conditions are only right as we face the world, in the wilderness character.
S.McC. How God would speak to our hearts! @Romans 7 helps us greatly as to the hearts, as well as the mind. In fact it is very interesting to see that, as the chapter opens, it is a moving appeal to the heart: "So that, my brethren, ye also have been made dead to the law by the body of the Christ". The instrumentality of the body of Christ, effecting our deliverance from the law, is a moving appeal to our affections, because the body of Christ enters into the Lord's supper and *the principle* of the Lord's supper is here. It is the love that would have us free and delivered from what would detain us and hold us so that we might be wholly for Him.
J.H.S. Does the new Head of chapter 5 become the Husband of chapter 7?
S.McC. That is it, exactly. He is the Leader in chapter 6: the Husband and Deliverer in chapter 7; and the Priest in chapter 8. The new Head is a great general reference to Christ in relation to humanity, but these other references as to Christ bring out the detail and application of what He is to us in His service toward us.
L.E.S. So the great principle of sin in chapter 6
{40}
is really what is in the world, whereas chapter 7 is what is in our members.
S.McC. Some of us may not be so much troubled with what is around in the world; indeed some of us may be very devoted and have very great interest at heart in regard to divine things and be desirous of being wholly for the Lord, but we are greatly bothered and troubled by sin in us. Our minds get filled with the most terrible thoughts; we dream the most terrible things, and we are upset and troubled about it. @Romans 7 is to bring about deliverance as to that side, involving what is inward and it is effected in the power of the Spirit. Deliverance is not exactly by faith, although faith enters into it, apprehending the Deliverer, but the power of the Spirit underlies it. That is, the power of the Spirit is a positive power effecting our deliverance from the power of sin in us -- not exactly sin in the world, but sin in the believer. That is the truth of @John 4, the fountain of water springing up within the believer.
L.E.S. "For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has set me free from the law of sin and of death".
S.McC. Paul does not say, Set *us* free. He speaks about the plural in verse 1 and in the verses that follow, but in that particular verse he brings in the singular, personal, side. "For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has set *me* free". The bearing of that, on every one of us this afternoon as we read it, is -- What can I say? Am I free? Has the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus set me free? That involves the Holy Spirit in relation to what is in Christ Jesus. It is extremely experimental, in this sense.
Ques. In deliverance are we set free?
S.McC. That is what deliverance is, because we get all tied up. The reason why liberty in serving God is not there, is because we are all tied up within.
{41}
We may not be tied up without, although some persons are so tied up without, in business, for example, that they are not free either. That would be @Romans 6, but @Romans 7 refers to believers that get so tied up within and so occupied with themselves. Devoted as they may be, they are in bondage; whereas, "the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus" is operating to set me free from "the law of sin and death". "The law of sin and death" is these evil thoughts that fill our minds. You say to me, or I to you, What can I do about it? You cannot do anything about it! That is the whole point. You see I am trying all the time to get rid of these thoughts and I will never get rid of them; they will be with me until I die! You say, What am I going to do? Well, ignore them; it is the only thing to do! Ignore them! That is, you are not regulated by them, they are a stranger to you. They belong to a nature that is not proper to you as a believer. The believer has not got two natures. He has only one nature and that is the nature answering to the work of God in Him. The other nature we refer to is the nature of the flesh and that does not belong to the believer.
G.F. The Spirit will help you on that line.
S.McC. We want to see the lines on which divine Persons will help us in this great mediatorial service. The Spirit will not help us on the line of being occupied with evil, whether it is evil thoughts in ourselves or evil in others, but He will help us as we are occupied with what is good and right.
L.E.S. The Lord Jesus died for my state as well as for my sins.
S.McC. That is a great matter. I realise that my sins have gone, and God will not demand payment twice; the payment has been met by Jesus and His precious blood. But what is troubling me is my *state*.
{42}
I may have set up a standard that I will read the ministry, devote time to prayer, keep at the meetings, but then things have not gone as I thought they would, and my soul is down! I am disappointed in myself; I am full of grief inwardly over the things that I even thought about, that I never dreamed I would ever think. Well, that tunnel of darkness is @Romans 7, and the standard I have set up in seeking to devote myself, may be the law and I thus put myself under bondage instead of having my eye on Christ. By the Spirit's help I get my eyes on the new Husband and the Deliverer and that is my salvation. I see that God now is no longer looking to me, and I am no longer to look at myself in this light; I am to look at the new Husband, at Christ.
G.F. Does that work out in regard to service and other matters?
S.McC. Certainly. That is what we should do all the time, and especially as to this matter of deliverance. It is a wonderful thing to be in the presence of a person who is free. There is something very contagious and infectious about a person who is free. You feel a lift, and it introduces something into the meeting that is very fine.
L.E.S. The actual difficulty is that we seek to attach Christianity to the wrong man.
S.McC. And the wrong state. We get into the Psalms, and we feel like the psalmist. Well, Christianity is not in the Psalms. Oh, you say, That is a terrible thing to say. What are you saying? It is the truth. Christianity is not in the Psalms. We carry Christianity into the Psalms, of course, and apply the Psalms in the light of Christianity, but, in the Psalms, you have a man under the law, and believers are not under the law, in that sense, but under grace. Grace is the spring and power of separation in our souls, not the law.
{43}
L.E.S. The presence of the Holy Spirit right from the outset brings about a sanctified person in relation to another Man.
S.McC. Deliverance in this sense is a very important matter. It is affecting to think that both the Lord Jesus and the Holy Spirit are on our side to help us in getting free. And if They have come into such a subordinate position to help us to get free, surely we should be concerned to make full room for Them, so that we *are* free -- free in ourselves and free in the assembly.
C.A.H. In chapter 7 it says, "For when we were in the flesh" and in chapter 8 it says "But ye are not in flesh".
S.McC. That is the truth. All the time that I have been spending, occupied with myself as in flesh, God tells me I am no longer in flesh, and I have right and title to take account of myself now as a believer, as God takes account of me, no longer in flesh, but in Spirit, as it says, "if indeed God's Spirit dwell in you". That is, it is contingent upon the dwelling of the Spirit. Evil thoughts do not spring from the Spirit, they spring from the flesh. Why should I be occupied so much of my time with what God has set aside and does not regard any more? Let me be occupied with my new state before God, in which there is no condemnation.
Now just a reference to the Priest in @Romans 8. Perhaps we have not thought enough of the Priest in @Romans 8. Because the expression is not used, we may not have thought of it as being there. The whole point, in the end of @Romans 8, is that in the light of the early teaching of the chapter, in the light of the calling and purpose of God. Christ is on high in priestly office and service, interceding for us to sustain us and maintain us in the light of these glorious things. So that nothing shall separate us from His love and nothing shall separate us from the love of
{44}
God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. It is a beautiful reference to the mediatorial position. The love of God has come into the mediatorial position in the Man Christ Jesus, and nothing is going to separate us from it, and that is contingent upon the priesthood of Christ.
J.H.S. Would that be the connection in @Exodus 17 where you have Moses and Aaron and Hur?
S.McC. That is it; you have the system. What @Romans 8 unfolds and develops so wondrously before our souls is a great divinely-devised system of help involving the priesthood, and involving personal purity in the believer.
Rem. So the word says: "Who also intercedes for us". That is His present priestly service.
S.McC. That is it. And the 'also' is very noticeable and affecting, is it not? Beginning with verse 30 it says, "But whom he has predestinated, these also he has called; and whom he has called, these also he has justified; but whom he has justified, these also he has glorified". And then verse 32: "He who, yea, has not spared his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not also with him grant us all things?" Then verse 34: "It is Christ who has died, but rather has been also raised up, who is also at the right hand of God; who also intercedes for us". The truth of the gospel is flooding our souls with the light of what is additional; the repetition of the word 'also' is like God adding blessing to blessing in view of our being maintained triumphant and in overcoming. We are more than overcomers through Him that has loved us!
{45}
THE KNOWLEDGE OF CHRIST IN RELATION TO THE GOSPEL AND THE ASSEMBLY (3)
@1 Corinthians 1: 9, 30, 31; @1 Corinthians 2: 1, 2; @1 Corinthians 6: 15 - 20; @1 Corinthians 10: 15, 16; @1 Corinthians 11: 23 - 32
S.McC. In our two readings yesterday we considered passages in Romans, bearing on how Christ is presented in the truth of the gospel, in such a form and manner in view of the building up of our souls in that knowledge. Now we come to how our souls are built up in the knowledge of Christ in relation to the assembly. This morning we shall consider it in relation to the local position and perhaps, if the Lord will and we should live, this afternoon we shall consider it in relation to the general position. It is important that we should understand that the local position of the assembly is not merely a doctrinal and ecclesiastical position, but it is a position that involves persons, who are the subject of divine operations or divine attention. They are persons who themselves are built up in the knowledge of Christ. I am sure this is a source of weakness amongst us, for failure largely stems from lack on this constitutional side. Many of us perhaps come into fellowship because we have so grown up in an environment where the fellowship is talked about and the principles of the fellowship are gone over and we feel it is right to follow in the path of our parents. That is very good and very important, but it is equally important for each one of us to see that we shall never be preserved and sustained in the position on that ground only. The whole intent of the ministry in these epistles is to correct what was existent at Corinth by a powerful presentation of Christ so that the brethren in that city might be affected by it. Therefore the passages we have read, especially the latter
{46}
three, particularly speak of faithfulness, fidelity to Christ. But the first passage brings on to view the thought of the fellowship we are called into, the bond of which is God's Son, Jesus Christ our Lord. It is an important thing that we should understand and see the dignity of the fellowship from this standpoint, involving our collective relations together as believers. We cannot go on in isolation however blessed we may be; and wondrously blessed we are according to the truth of the glad tidings in Romans! These letters show that we are morally bound, as the work of God proceeds, to find ourselves linked with others in a common bond in the enjoyment of the great things of God. The end of the chapter shows how Christ personally as Man is everything to us in this position. We do not have to take on anything else. Why would we want anything else? "But of him are *ye* in Christ Jesus, who has been made to us wisdom from God, and righteousness, and holiness, and redemption", @1 Corinthians 1: 30. I think it is important to see that it is the Person of Christ, not just principles. *He* has been made this unto us. We are thus fully furnished from God's side, to fill out our part and place in this fellowship, that works out practically in our position in the local assembly. Then in connection with the knowledge of Jesus Christ and Him crucified, Mr. Darby points out, in the Synopsis, that, 'it is not, as some generally make it, the knowledge of the cross'. Sometimes the passage is quoted as if it were the cross that was the crux of the passage, but it is not. It is the Person. "For I did not judge it well to know anything among you save Jesus Christ, and *him* crucified". It is the Person of Christ that is referred to, in such lowly conditions of reproach as the crucifixion alludes to. All that is to affect the local personnel, so that we should be stripped of pride and of all ideas of self-sufficiency which belong to us naturally, according to the first
{47}
man, and that we should have a greater sense of the dignity of the fellowship.
L.E.S. Does the great matter of the faithfulness of God suggest that on our side there are the affinities to that faithfulness manifested in our relations one with the other?
S.McC. I should think so. By presenting it in this way, he would have in mind that they should be challenged as to their ways, because he immediately begins to speak of what was existent among them -- their bad behaviour. The stress on 'God is faithful' should strike a note in their souls.
J.A.K. Do you think we are tested as to whether we are able to present Christ in such a way as He is presented in the Corinthian epistle?
S.McC. We want to see that the principle on which we are bound together in this fellowship is by common attachment to and affection for a Person, and that Person, God's Son, Jesus Christ our Lord.
W.B.G. Does being in it rightly involve the call by God into it?
S.McC. The call involves, not exactly a call from heaven (Ephesians would give is the heavenly calling), that is not the point here, but God, on the ground of redemption having taken up His abode by the Spirit in the assembly down here, speaks out of that position and calls us. "Jehovah called to Moses and spoke to him out of the tent of meeting", @Leviticus 1: 1. The call is out of that position into the fellowship "by whom ye have been called into the fellowship". It is not exactly called *to* it, but called *into* the fellowship of His Son, Jesus Christ our Lord. Now this applies to every believer, for the fellowship of God's Son, rightly and normally and abstractly speaking, involves every believer on the Lord Jesus Christ. Of course the question would arise as to whether he has responded to the call, but the call bears on every believer.
{48}
Ques. Would that be in view in preaching on the street?
S.McC. Well, I would not think so much on that line. It is for believers, and as we have said in @Leviticus 1. Jehovah spoke out of the tent of meeting, not in the open air. This links with the assembly position.
Ques. The Lord says: "But the nine, where are they?"
S.McC. The principle of it would be there. That is, they had been affected by grace in the service of Christ, so they should have been normally found together in the appreciation of that grace. We need to think of this matter of God calling out a little more. God is in this position, involving the assembly. We speak of ourselves as being in it, but then God is in it, and He has called us into it, as speaking out of it. The calling into it involves the fellowship of His Son, Jesus Christ our Lord.
W.B. As being a divine calling.
S.McC. Of course; it is God's calling, therefore it must be divine.
W.B. We are a divinely-called company.
S.McC. So there may be young believers waiting for the brethren to say something to them, but what about God? Have they heard God saying something to them? Have they heard God's voice speaking out of the assembly, in testimony here, calling them into the fellowship? It is a wonderful thing that it is God's call, God's speaking.
W.B.G. How would Abraham link on with your thought, and Lot being only nominally in it as following Abraham?
S.McC. In the fullest sense Abraham's was a heavenly calling, having the inheritance in mind, the land that God was to give. This is not exactly calling us into the inheritance; it is the assembly in the wilderness before the eyes of men in testimony,
{49}
and God in that position is calling us to it. But still the call out of the world is there. God, in the assembly position, as seen in the type in the tent of meeting, is calling us out of the world, to come into it. The question would then arise with each one of us as to whether we are like Abraham or like Lot; whether, in the selfishness of our hearts, we are putting personal advantage foremost in our thinking, or whether, as with Abraham, we are characteristically obedient and subject to the divine call, come what may. Whatever the sufferings, whatever the cost may be, the attitude of our souls is to be obedient to the divine call.
E.G. Is it seen with Cornelius? He hears the divine call and then sends for Peter.
S.McC. The principle of it is there too, how the Gentiles are subjects of the work of God and come into the assembly position.
L.E.S. "The assembly of God which is in Corinth" is really the position out of which God is calling. It involves our position publicly in this world.
S.McC. It is not our position in heaven. The three positions defined in this epistle are: the Jewish position, the Gentile position and the assembly position -- Jew, Gentile and assembly of God. Now you, of course, have come out of the Jewish position, the rest of us have come out of the Gentile position; and we have come into this realm and sphere in the presence of evil and adversaries, but where God has His testimony and is setting out His testimony in an ordered way, both in regard to the gospel and in relation to the assembly.
A.B.M'N. Does the expression "God is faithful" suggest what is originally in God's mind in relation to the assembly and the calling into the fellowship of God's Son, the bringing to light and development of the personnel that composes it?
{50}
S.McC. I think "God is faithful" is like an added touch of grace to affect our souls. It is remarkable how God goes out of His way to assure and confirm our hearts. Being God, He does not have to do so, but you take @Hebrews 6 -- the chapter has been dealing with the apostasy and the danger of getting into it -- it says in regard to the heirs of promise, "Wherein God, willing to shew more abundantly to the heirs of the promise the unchangeableness of his purpose, intervened by an oath, that by two unchangeable things, in which it was impossible that God should lie, we might have a strong encouragement", @Hebrews 6: 17, 18. Of course it is speaking to Jewish believers, but the two unchangeable things are the promise and the oath. Think of God promising, but think of Him adding to the promise the oath, as in @Genesis 22. God makes certain promises to Abraham, but then He interposes by an oath, swearing in regard to the matter. God would affect our souls that whatever our unfaithfulness may have been or may be. He is going out of His way to confirm our souls in regard to where He is and where He stands.
J.A.K. When the Lord says in @John 17 "the men whom thou gavest me out of the world", does that link on in any way?
S.McC. I would think it would, only @John 17 would bring us on to a more elevated plane, involving eternal life and sonship; Corinthians does not take us as far as that. But the fellowship is like that, for God has called us out of the world morally. Soon we shall go out of it physically, but now He has called us out of it morally, into this realm where the bond is His Son, Jesus Christ our Lord.
H.S. Would it be anything like the place at David's table?
S.McC. Yes, it would involve that. There are privileges that are linked with the position, as we
{51}
shall see as we go on in the epistle. The great point for Mephibosheth would be that it was *David's* table, and the great point in the fellowship for us is that it is the fellowship of God's Son, Jesus Christ our Lord. It is not a fellowship of ideas, or hobbies, or mutual improvement; it is the fellowship of God's Son, Jesus Christ our Lord.
L.E.S. It would govern every position in which the thought of being in the Lord would be involved. There is nothing greater from the public side of the testimony.
S.McC. No, exactly.
Rem. The presentation of Christ in the Corinthian epistles not only helps us to find our place in the fellowship, but would make us available as vessels through which the call may go out through the preaching on the streets or speaking to persons privately. There would be something there to make way for God to say to that person in relation to the fellowship through what we are.
S.McC. I suppose so. The call of God would come into the gospel too, but the stress is on the assembly position in this letter, "The fellowship of his Son, Jesus Christ our Lord" is not mentioned in Romans. We do get the reference to the "one body in Christ", without any opening up of it, but when we come to Corinthians we get the stress on "the fellowship of his Son, Jesus Christ our Lord". The point before us now is the knowledge of Christ in which our souls are to be built up, and the knowledge of Christ in this relation is that He is the bond of the fellowship into which we have been called. The brethren are not the bond, nor what the brethren hold. The bond is God's Son, God's best we might say, because God's Son is His best. He is the bond of the fellowship, and that challenges us. I mean, What am I in Gothenburg in relation to in the fellowship? What is before my soul? What is holding
{52}
me? Is it a young man, a young woman? Is it an employer that I want to get on with, someone whom I might get a job from? What is it that holds me? That is what this passage would search us as to. In the fellowship Christ is the bond objectively, and the Spirit is the bond subjectively.
J.H.S. Thinking of Korah's rebellion in Numbers, was it a lack of appreciation of the bond, typically, that gave rise to the rebellion?
S.McC. Exactly. It was because they thought that the whole matter lay in the assertion of personality amongst themselves, forgetting that the whole matter lay in divine sovereignty. So God's answer to the rebellion is this Person, typified in the rod that budded and bloomed and yielded almonds. That is, God's Son, Jesus Christ our Lord. The priesthood is based on His sonship as well as His eternal personality.
Rem. Mary, at the feet of Jesus, had an Object. It was the Person. I was thinking of her affection for the Person.
S.McC. We are all tested as to that and especially in the local position, where our temperaments and our make-ups are such a trial to one another naturally. What is it that holds us together? Is it because I like you and you like me? That will not go on very long if that is the only bond, because something is sure to come in that will arouse feelings against one another. The bond cannot be social; that would never do. But when we have entered upon the fellowship with a true apprehension of the bond being God's Son, Jesus Christ our Lord, then we shall not very readily go out of it if something happens that goes against the grain. The bond is the Person of Christ.
J.H.S. He is the One who is Son over God's house.
S.McC. Is it not interesting to see how His sonship is made so much of in that relation? He is over the
{53}
house as Son, "but Christ, as Son over his house", @Hebrews 3: 6. Then the bond of the fellowship is God's Son; that is, God's affections are entering into the matter of providing that which would hold us together. It is not an arbitrary matter; it is a matter of attraction. Persons are brought together in this circle of community of interests, that the fellowship suggests, by mutual attraction to Him who is the bond of it.
J.H.S. Then is it right to link on the word, "The Father loves the Son, and has given all things to be in his hand", @John 3: 35?
S.McC. The fellowship is one of the things. J.T. very aptly said once, and I think it is very important to see it, that sometimes things lose their force with us without careful attention. When it says, "The Father loves the Son, and has given all things to be in his hand", it is not that the Father has given them away. We perhaps think of that as if the Father has put them out of His hands and into the hands of Christ, but that is not the sense of that passage. The Father still retains the things, but He gives them into the hands of Christ for administration and the fellowship is part of the administration, and the expression "God is faithful" would show us how the Father still retains His link with the things. What community of interests in this world could give you the advantages that the fellowship of God's Son gives? Think of the dignity of it and how it would help us to be careful in linking on with anything or anyone that would detract from this circle of community of interests!
C.A.H. Is it not illustrated in Joseph under Pharaoh? Pharaoh gave to him the administration of matters relating to the need and the supply. Pharaoh did not give up the possession of things, but what Joseph did was to bring all into the possession of Pharaoh.
{54}
S.McC. That is how administration works out. In John's gospel the things are given into the hands of Christ, but they still are the Father's things, and the Lord operates to bring all these things in the return flow back to Him, from whom they came. Even in regard to the persons it says, "They were thine, and thou gavest them me" (@John 17: 6), but then He brings them back to the Father.
L.E.S. "But if any one love God, *he* is known of him", @1 Corinthians 8: 3. And "to us there is one God, the Father, of whom all things, and *we* for him; and one Lord, Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him", @1 Corinthians 8: 6, 7.
S.McC. That helps in regard to what we are saying. The Lord Jesus is the great Administrator, the Father is the source and the Spirit is the power by which the things are enjoyed or made effective in our souls.
When we come to the end of the chapter (he has had many things to say especially as to the divided conditions among them) he says, "But of him are ye in Christ Jesus". Now the truth of the glad tidings as in Romans has taught us that we are in Christ Jesus. That is our true state according to God, but then we have more here, for it says: "who has been made to us wisdom from God, and righteousness, and holiness, and redemption; that according as it is written, He that boasts, let him boast in the Lord", @1 Corinthians 1: 30, 31. The point is that, over against philosophy which was so rampant in Corinth (learned men moralising in regard to things). Paul is seeking to impress the Corinthian believers with the fact that we have everything in a Person, and that Person is made of God all to us that is necessary to fill out the position here. It is not exactly the position in heaven, because redemption will not be needed in heaven, but it is the Person who is made to us redemption here. You may say: Well, it is the work
{55}
of the Person, but that is not how it is put here. It says, "Christ Jesus who has been made to us ... redemption".
L.E.S. His Person governs every sphere that He is in, and every feature of the whole testimony is governed by the knowledge of His Person.
S.McC. Just so. As we proceed into the great thought of the local assembly and the working out of things practically, we are tested as to how our souls have been built up in the knowledge of this Person. Take the matter of wisdom; we all know that the need for it is constantly rising in matters amongst us. Where do we derive our wisdom from? Have we derived it from the world, or from what we are naturally; or, are our souls so built up in the knowledge of Christ, that we are deriving it from Him, as made by God wisdom unto us? The same with righteousness and holiness and redemption. The standard of separation is not exactly principle in this passage, it is a Person. He is made unto us holiness. The divine standard is Christ.
Ques. Would you enlarge a little on the word 'made'?
S.McC. I think it is very affecting to see how the Lord Jesus, as in manhood, has become this to us by God, "Christ Jesus, who has been made to us wisdom from God, and righteousness, and holiness, and redemption". The 'made' would involve that Christ has thus become available to us, through the divine will, in regard to the furnishings that are necessary for the local position, because we can all see that wisdom, righteousness, holiness and redemption are needed in the local position.
J.H.S. Does it mean that all of these are personified in this Man?
S.McC. That is right. The qualities that the philosophers moralised on and drew up and set out were without any pith and power; nothing was
{56}
effected through them. But when we come to Christianity, all these qualities are in a Person; the Person embodies these qualities and He is made from God these qualities unto us. It brings out the great advantages of Christ's humanity. His humanity has not only been the great instrumental means for our clearance from the moral question, but His humanity becomes the means of our being furnished with all that is necessary to hold and to fill out the position to which we have been called according to God.
L.E.S. "Let the whole house of Israel know assuredly that God has made him, this Jesus whom *ye* have crucified, both Lord and Christ", @Acts 2: 36. I was thinking of the whole position being filled out and secured in the glory of the manhood of Jesus whom God has made both Lord and Christ.
S.McC. It is very affecting to think that He is everything to us. We say, He will be everything to us in glory and eternity. Of course, He will. But He is to be everything to us now in the local position. When a matter thus arises that calls for wisdom, the great thing would be: How did Jesus do this? What would He have done? How would He have acted? And the same with righteousness: How is righteousness seen in Him? And the same with holiness: How is holiness seen in Him? He is apart from everything. And then redemption: the Person is made unto us redemption. We know how every person was set free that came into the Lord's presence with a sense of their need; the Person became redemption to them, and that is to help us in dealing with one another. Our prime thought is not how we are to fasten guilt upon one another; that should be the last thought with us. Our first thought is, according to @John 20, how persons can be forgiven and set free. That is the great force of Christ being made redemption to us.
{57}
W.B.G. So we are to be regulated by these features as seen in perfection in Jesus?
S.McC. Exactly. It furnishes us fully to meet them substantially.
A.B.M'N. And that this Man is the Son of God adds a great deal of authority and glory to it.
S.McC. It involves another order of things, an out-of-the-world order, because God's Son is linked with another world and the fellowship is morally linked with another world. As we are rightly affected by God's Son, Jesus Christ our Lord, the bond of the fellowship, we would never think of taking on the features of this world.
J.A.K. When Balak wanted Balaam to curse the people, he was brought to see them from God's side. Is that the principle here, to see them from God's side, not only the assembly, but also the personnel?
S.McC. This epistle speaks of the members and we are not to forget that. I think that Christ being made redemption unto us involves that we would go to the utmost limit to save a member, one of the personnel of the assembly. Sin has to be taken account of, for we cannot pass over sin lightly. Redemption involves that sin has been fully measured and taken account of, but then God has gone to the utmost limit, in redemption, to secure persons, and Christ being made redemption unto us, as viewed here in the local position, would affect our minds and our souls in that light.
J.A.K. In connection with what you said, we are not to try to fasten something on an individual. We would try and help them to repent.
S.McC. That is what redemption has in mind, that we should come to a sense of our need and see how God has dealt with sin in order that persons might go free. It is not that sin is ignored. God has not ignored it. Redemption shows that God has measured the question fully and dealt with it, and,
{58}
if we are to deal with sin, we must see and learn how God has dealt with it at Calvary.
L.E.S. It is very interesting how Paul confirms and brings it in in the second epistle in relation to what has transpired in the first. "But to whom ye forgive anything, *I* also; for I also, what I have forgiven, if I have forgiven anything, it is for your sakes in the person of Christ; that we might not have Satan get an advantage against us, for we are not ignorant of his thoughts", @2 Corinthians 2: 10, 11. It is as if the apostle was in the fullest gain of Christ as redemption.
S.McC. What dignity attaches to his outlook there as he refers to the Person of Christ! It brings out the high level of his movements and his outlook; he did not stoop to anything petty. He was moving on this high level, that if forgiveness was to be extended, it would not be with a grudge. It would not be on a 'fifty-fifty' basis -- forgetting some things and remembering others. Forgiveness in the Person of Christ would mean that the thing was full and complete. Forgiveness is forgiveness. If a person is forgiven, in an administrative manner by the assembly, you do not bring matters up again. The matter is finished.
L.E.S. The word is in the perfect tense. He has done it and it is continued as a present thing.
J.A.K. Is that why Mr. Taylor drew our attention to the fact that one is restored to what he was before?
S.McC. Yes, exactly. @Galatians 6: 1 has that in mind, "if even a man be taken in some fault, ye who are spiritual restore such a one in a spirit of meekness, considering thyself lest *thou* also be tempted". The word 'restore' has in mind the thought of mending, a person is fully set up again, as he or she was before. That is a great test, dear brethren, because it is very difficult for us to forget things.
{59}
Rem. The butler forgot when he was restored to his former position.
S.McC. Yes, he did, but the trouble with him was the opposite to what we are referring to. It was not much trouble for him to forget, and he forgot about Joseph. But what we are referring to is that the things we should forget, we do not, and the things we should not forget, we do.
J.A.K. Would what the Lord said to Peter fit in here: "and *thou*, when once thou hast been restored, confirm thy brethren", @Luke 22: 32?
S.McC. That would be the point. Think of Peter in the opening of the Acts, the greatness and dignity and power that enters into his service! Could there be any question or doubt as to that man, as to his relations with God, with Christ, with the Spirit, with the brethren? It says that he stood up with the eleven. What a wonderful thing grace is! Ours is a dispensation of grace. It is an important thing that when persons are forgiven by the assembly, they *are* forgiven. The matter must be complete. You do not forgive them and carry over something, saying, There is some matter we will take up again. There is no kind of forgiveness in the assembly like that. Forgiveness is complete and, if there has been a right dealing with the matter, there can be no going back on it.
A.B.M'N. How can it be called forgiveness otherwise?
L.E.S. You referred yesterday to new covenant ministry. Is that not involved in what you are saying now?
S.McC. It is, but we all have to admit humbly that when persons fall into sin (and it is a humbling thing how persons *do* fall into sin) we do not find it is easy to forget it. But God forgets. Where there is true repentance, and a true judgment of sin. God forgets about the matter. And the marvellous thing
{60}
is that we have the same power as God to forget, for we can forget things if we allow His work to come uppermost with us.
C.A.H. Speaking of the new covenant the word is: "I will pardon their iniquity, and their sin will I remember no more", @Jeremiah 31: 34.
S.McC. That is what we are thinking of. It is active in God. It does not say, 'I will forget'. It says, "I will remember no more". It is an active matter with God that they are put out and put out for ever.
C.A.H. It is a question of His will.
S.McC. That is the point I am making in its being active.
Ques. Does what is of grace overpower the law now? In the old dispensation it was the law, but grace comes in now.
S.McC. Ours is a dispensation of grace. Under the law there was no hope although it is a remarkable thing that under the law you get the interposing of grace at intervals, and it was allowed. Grace would come into the position. Take David for instance; according to the law, death should have been his portion, but grace came into the position and he was forgiven. When we come to the dispensation we are in, we could not say that law comes into grace. The dispensation is the dispensation of unmixed grace. You cannot mix law with grace.
Now we have this reference: "For I did not judge it well to know anything among you save Jesus Christ, and him crucified". Think of the attitude of Paul and the ability he had to eliminate everything but what was necessary for the gain and benefit of the Corinthians! The Corinthians were proud and making much of man in the flesh, boasting carnally in their own efforts and results; whereas Paul emphasises with himself in his service among them, that he did not judge it well to know anything save
{61}
Jesus Christ. You can see that it does not actually refer absolutely to Paul's knowledge, because he had wonderful knowledge, but it is a determination of mind in regard to a peculiar set of circumstances and conditions. He would not know anything else for the moment but Jesus Christ and Him crucified, in view of their gain.
Ques. In regard of complete forgiveness, is it important to see that there has been a complete dealing, by God, with sin? It is not a partial matter.
S.McC. Just so. If we are to deal with sin we must learn how God has dealt with it. That is where we get help. We are to be like God in dealing with sin, whether it is in the judging of it or the remitting. Some of us would like to make much of the forgiving and little of the dealing, but both sides are involved in redemption. Sin was fully dealt with according to the standards of divine holiness. The cross brings in reproach and lowliness, over against the boasting Corinthians and their reigning as kings.
J.H.S. The woman in the gospel, in the sense of her own need and approaching the Person of Christ, desired to touch Him, which would afford help to us personally in view of the whole matter. He perceived that virtue had gone out of Him, laying the basis for not being overcome by evil, but overcoming evil by good.
S.McC. She is a very good illustration of what enters into our subject, as to how we are to be built up in our souls substantially in the knowledge of Christ. It is not just by mere theoretical knowledge of the truth, but by practical contact with the Person of Christ. The Lord says: "power has gone out from me", @Luke 8: 46. That is the basis of the assembly, the basis of the body. What formed the body is what is out of Christ. That is, the body is
{62}
not a theoretic or academic idea, it is a living substantial idea that is formed of what is out of Christ.
J.H.S. So that the power with any one of us to discriminate rightly is bound up in that idea.
S.McC. It is. So that brings us to the next passage that we read, where the basis for union is referred to, although of course we do not get union in the full sense in @1 Corinthians 6, "But he that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit". Now think of our souls being built up in this knowledge of Christ, that we are joined to Him! Union, in the full thought in Ephesians, deals with privilege, but 1 Corinthians is dealing with responsibility and we have the germ of union in that statement, "he that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit". The same Spirit that in its fulness is in Christ, is the Spirit that is in us, so there is a binding power between believers and Christ that doctrine could never afford.
Ques. Is that seen where the Lord breathed into them?
S.McC. It is pattern there, of course. It is a unique transaction but the whole point is that the life that was in Christ is the life that is in the saints.
W.B.G. The link is in that very thing, is it not?
S.McC. Just so. We were referring yesterday to the important link of our bodies physically with what is spiritual, and perhaps we have not sufficiently realised that; as if our physical bodies were a different department and had something to do with our life in this world, but had nothing to do with our spiritual link with Christ. Whereas, this passage says: "Do you not know that your *bodies*" -- not your hearts, or minds, or souls, but your *bodies*, these physical bodies -- "are members of Christ?" That is a marvellous statement! Think of our souls being built up in that knowledge of Christ.
A.B.M'N. Is that the new order of man, that you spoke of?
{63}
S.McC. It would involve that, although Corinthians does not develop the thought of the new man.
Ques. Would what the apostle is saying here flow out, in any way, from the words of the Lord to him: "Why dost thou persecute me?"
S.McC. It is the germ of the body there. You have the germ of the body and the germ of union here. The more we ponder the verse the more marvellous it becomes, because how could a believer marry an unbeliever, when his body, or her body, is a member of Christ? You would be linking Christ on with an unbeliever. He or she perhaps has only thought, Well, I am only linking on myself, but you are linking on Christ. Of course the passage is dealing with the extreme case here. It says: "Do ye not know that he that is joined to the harlot is one body?" And that is the point of: "Shall I then, taking the members of the Christ, make them members of a harlot?" So that a believer, who joins an association that is outside the fellowship of God's Son, is joining the members of Christ to that association.
J.H.S. So that the present testimonial position requires our bodies.
S.McC. This clearly shows that we cannot divorce Christianity from the thought of our bodies. We cannot make what we are in the assembly one thing and what we are in our houses and our businesses another thing. Because the bodies we use in our business are the same bodies that we use in the assembly. It is one idea.
Rem. Expression comes through the body.
L.E.S. The verse in @Romans 6 enters into this "For even as ye have yielded your members in bondage to uncleanness and to lawlessness unto lawlessness, so now yield your members in bondage to righteousness unto holiness".
S.McC. The germ of it is there. It would help us
{64}
as to greater care in our public lives in the testimonial position. We have to work in factories or offices with other men, but that is not being joined to them. But if I get into any position where I have to join, that involves my taking the members of Christ and joining them to what is unholy and what is not in keeping.
J.H.S. We should therefore be careful of being caught in things insidiously which may involve us, like co-operatives and shares and dividends and that kind of thing.
S.McC. All that would involve joining. The point in the passage is what is *joined*. "Shall I then taking the members of the Christ, make them members of a harlot", but the positive side is put over against it: "he that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit". Think of being joined to the Lord! It is a marvellous statement. It does not say 'joined to Jesus' or 'joined to Christ', but "joined to the Lord".
L.E.S. The footnote says: "It is not 'shall be one spirit'; but 'he is'. The spirit which is in the Lord Himself dwells in us, and is the living power of the new life".
S.McC. It may be someone wants you to join a club, which may be a good thing in the world, but as you have to take account of your body as members of Christ, would you think of the Lord as joining it? Would you think of the Lord as joining a political club? Or, joining any association in the school? You could not think of it. Well, how could the believer with his body -- as members of Christ -- join? That is the point.
J.H.S. Would you make clear please what is involved in giving to the Red Cross? Are you not free to give to the Red Cross?
S.McC. Yes, because it is a humanitarian institution supported by the government. Giving to it is not a matter of joining.
{65}
J.H.S. They call you a member.
S.McC. They may do that themselves as they do in some factories where you are all called members of the company. Some manufacturing concerns allude to their employees in that light, but the believer has nothing to do with that. You would support a humanitarian cause insofar as you can go, where help is provided for human need. You would therefore be free to give to the Red Cross because of that. It is free from religious trammels, and it is supported by the Government. The head of the Red Cross is appointed in Washington, by the President, which gives it a different colour from other associations.
J.H.S. Is your exercise to put us on our guard against anything that involves a substantial, tangible link?
S.McC. That is it.
U.G. Would you say more as to the matter of co-operatives?
S.McC. It is a matter we have to consider. I have been noticing lately and wondering about it. There is a great rage of trading stamps and I notice on some of these stamps that 'Co-operative' is stamped on them. That is a very subtle thing and we have to look into it, as to whether these stamps do not amount in principle to what a Co-operative is. Certainly a believer never would have anything to do with a Co-operative. There has been a judgment as to that for years in the old country, that as believers on the Lord Jesus Christ we could have nothing to do with Co-operatives because it involves an unholy link and association. We have to look into it. What does it mean, the word 'Co-operative'? You want to find out what it means and what enters into the charter linked with these trading stamps. I am not saying they are wrong, because I have not looked into the matter sufficiently to say, but that word 'Co-operative' arrested me.
{66}
THE KNOWLEDGE OF CHRIST IN RELATION TO THE GOSPEL AND THE ASSEMBLY (4)
@1 Peter 2: 1 - 8; @Colossians 1: 18; @Ephesians 3: 14 - 21
S.McC. The brethren will note how full and great this subject is. In @Ephesians 2 the assembly grows to a holy temple in the Lord. That is not an arbitrary position. The assembly will be a holy temple in the Lord, in the millennial world, because it is composed of persons who have been built up in the knowledge of Christ -- not in any meagre way, but in a rich and full way. Any matter therefore that arises as to the knowledge of Christ -- the personnel of the assembly, the holy city, will not be lacking in supplying the knowledge that is necessary, for the temple means that. The expression, "in the Lord", means that there will be an *administration* of knowledge in the millennial world through the assembly. That knowledge is not acquired in heaven exactly; it is being acquired now. At the rapture we enter upon final conditions and there will be no growth in the knowledge, we have referred to, after the rapture. In between the two great events, the rapture and the appearing, there will be the judgment seat of Christ, or the judgment seat of God as Romans refers to it, in which our place in the kingdom will be determined, according to our faithfulness now in the time of suffering and reproach. Then the Lord will come out *with* the saints. He comes, as we know and have been taught, *for* us at the rapture, and He comes *to* us at the Supper, but He comes *with* us in the appearing. It will be a wonderful manifestation, because God is going to bring in knowledge, and the glory of the Lord is going to cover the earth as the waters the sea. Now what we are considering all enters into this, because the knowledge that will be disseminated
{67}
in the millennial world is not a knowledge that is arbitrarily imparted when we get to glory, it is a knowledge that the souls of the saints are built up in now. It is now or never! We want to see, therefore, and especially those of us who are younger, that the present time is the time. The millennial day, wonderful as it will be, will not equal the present time. While God's triumph will be displayed over evil in a public way, and sin will be held in check (although it may break out) yet the glory of the millennial world will not equal the glory of the present moment. We want to see the advantages of the present moment, and lay ourselves out in relation to them. We never get anything unless we lay ourselves out to reap the gain of the advantages that are present in our day. The passages we have read bear upon the building up of our souls in the knowledge of Christ in relation to the assembly in a general way, and in a spiritual way. It is not so much in a local or testimonial way -- although there is a close link in Peter with the testimonial position in our localities, but it is a *spiritual* house. The world certainly does not understand, nor can they see a spiritual house. They may see the fruits of it. All these passages refer to the spiritual and inward side of the assembly and Christ comes on to our view in a very distinctive manner. The first passage presents the structural side, where Christ is presented as the "living stone"; in Colossians it is the organic side, Christ as "the head of the body". That is a wonderful feature of knowledge in which we would want our souls built up. In Ephesians it is "the Christ". Ephesians gives us what is official. Colossians is not official. Ephesians is official in its teaching and therefore you can understand that in the great domain, referred to in the passage we read, the title "the Christ" is employed. That is the official title of the Lord Jesus in regard to the operative side. Then we have the agricultural
{68}
thought in relation to ourselves in that we are "rooted and founded in love". Christ acquires a place in that kind of environment, so that He dwells in our hearts. He is contemplated, in the prayer, as dwelling in our hearts. Then we have His love -- the love of that wonderful Person, who has consummated the great operations of God in regard to the spiritual realm of which we are in the very centre with Him; as it says: "To know the love of the Christ which surpasses knowledge; that ye may be filled even to all the fulness of God". Now, it is very interesting that it does not say, 'To know the power of the Spirit, the love of Christ and the knowledge of the Father, that ye may be filled to all the fulness of God'. The stress is on "the Christ", that *He* may dwell in our hearts, and that we may know "the love of the Christ". The love of the Christ is the mediatorial thought and we are in the presence, in that passage, of the full result of mediatorial operations, so that there might be "glory to God in the assembly in Christ Jesus".
This passage in Peter is a very affecting one: "To whom coming" -- that is the Person we are speaking of -- "a living stone, cast away indeed as worthless by men, but with God chosen, precious", The writer is Peter, Peter who left the boat, Peter, who said, "Lord, if it be thou, command me to come to thee upon the waters". Peter is the one who is writing.
L.E.S. "The latter glory of this house" (@Haggai 2: 9) is greater now than it will be in its literal setting in the coming day, because it is clothed today with all the fullest and most glorious thoughts of God that have been unfolded. The place that the saints have in the heart of Christ, according to divine counsel, and the place they will fill in the millennial day and in the day of eternity, is to be understood now in the fullest way of understanding, in the power of the Spirit.
{69}
S.McC. The presence of the Spirit, in the days of recovery, and the way in which Christ makes Himself known to the assembly in the word to the Philadelphians, would show what you are saying. Philadelphia is introduced into the greatest things possible for the creature.
L.E.S. "Do ye not then know that the saints shall judge the world?" @1 Corinthians 6: 2. Does that not confirm what you are saying as to how the millennial setting will be filled out? How we need to understand fully the position now!
S.McC. Yes, it is remarkable. It says: "Do ye not then know that the saints shall judge the world? and if the world is judged by you, are ye unworthy of the smallest judgments? Do ye not know that we shall judge angels?" Where does that come about? Think of that! Think of the greatness of the angels, having been created long before man and their higher rank in the created order of things. But think of what has come about through redemption and the exaltation of man in Christ so that we shall judge angels as well as the world!
W.B.G. That would not be so apart from redemption.
S.McC. No, because redemption has made a great change. Man has always been God's greatest thought. The angels were not God's greatest thought. In creation the angels were higher in rank than man, but Christ having come into manhood and redemption having been accomplished, that is changed. Man, in Christ, takes precedence of the angels. I think there is a lingering thought with some that when we get to glory, we will have a wonderful knowledge that we never had here, but our knowledge in glory will not be any different from our knowledge now.
W.B.G. Why does Peter introduce the thought as to the kingdom and the government of God?
S.McC. I think it is important to see that while
{70}
he is writing about these subjects, he brings in the thought of the assembly as the spiritual house. He does not develop it, because it was not his ministry; he was given the keys of the kingdom, but the administration of the dispensation of the assembly was not his, it was Paul's. The same with John. The dispensation of the assembly was not John's, it was Paul's. Nevertheless, John gives us things that Paul does not give us. Thus Peter here would leave, in our minds, something to look into as to the spiritual house. He would impart a touch as to it, that would enliven our interest so that we might look into it more.
W.B.G. As being of the dispersion, in principle.
S.McC. You can see that the dispersion in the government of God did not alter spiritual thoughts. However much they were suffering, as dispersed of God through the persecution that arose at the time of Stephen, this remains. Jerusalem literally may go, but the spiritual house and the living stones remain. But before Peter speaks of this, the reference to the constitutional side is very important, "Laying aside therefore all malice and all guile and hypocrisies and envyings and all evil speakings, as newborn babes desire earnestly the pure mental milk of the word" -- notice the reference to knowledge -- "the pure *mental* milk of the word". It comes into our subject that we are to desire this side. The *mental* milk is a reference to knowledge that we have before us, in which we are to be built up.
J.A.K. So that salvation seems to be connected with it.
S.McC. As the mind is built up in spiritual knowledge and the apprehension of Christ, it becomes a means of salvation. We all know that if you are ignorant about a matter you may fall into it. I mean, for example, if you are ignorant that there is a hole in the middle of the road you may fall into it.
{71}
To transfer that to what is moral and spiritual -- it means that as your mind is enlightened by the mental milk of the word and your soul is built up in knowledge, you learn to avoid the pitfall.
L.E.S. What you are saying is really very wonderful because it shows us something of the constitution of a Christian. In his mind, through the workings of divine grace, there are affinities to the Logos.
S.McC. That is the point. We want to see the practical bearing of desiring the pure *mental* milk of the word. We use this word so carelessly. Sometimes you hear a person being written off by this word: 'Oh, he is all mental', or 'It is all mental with him'. But we want to see that this is a prime word in Christianity, and that the mental is a very important side in Christianity. How are our young people going to be saved, except by the pure mental milk of the word and growing by it? They go to the drug stores and they go to the shops and they look at the novels and they look at the fiction magazines, especially those with sexual appeal, and corrupt lusts are aroused that belong to the flesh, and they do not read the Word, and do not desire the pure mental milk of it. How can they grow? Novels and fictitious literature are destroying to their minds and to their souls.
Rem. It puts special emphasis on these kind of gatherings that our minds may be instructed in the way of truth.
S.McC. That is it. You take a person who goes into the low company where the most corrupt and filthy subjects are dwelt upon. He is bound to become affected by it, it could not be otherwise; his mind becomes saturated with that kind of thing. Whereas the assembly is a means of salvation, where we get the mental milk of the word ministered, where growth is taken account of, and where we get
{72}
the pure streams that are spiritual and heavenly in origin and character.
U.G. "I *myself* with the mind serve God's law", @Romans 7: 25.
S.McC. Never was there a time when there was so much literature around and especially of a corrupt nature and character. Our minds are to be in control. We are not to allow them to flow loosely and carelessly. We know what the flesh is and how it is drawn out by these things that are of no value whatever. We need therefore to see the importance of our minds being controlled, so that the Scriptures have a great place with us and what divine Persons say has a great place with us.
A.J. It says in @1 Corinthians 2: 16, "*We* have the mind of Christ" -- the thinking faculty of Christ. Would that link with what you are suggesting now as to the renewed mind?
S.McC. Yes, it shows the value of the assembly in that way, for that is a collective reference, meaning that amongst the saints there is this kind of thinking faculty and a very important thing it is.
Rem. In our scripture it says: "grow up to salvation" as though there is advance in it.
S.McC. That is it. The believer thus, especially in the tender stages, would go towards the mental milk of the word. Some of us were commenting the other day out on the farm, that the young animals, without instruction, know where to draw sustenance from. Well, the young believer, in a much greater way, should know where to draw sustenance. The "pure mental milk of the word" bears on what is constitutional and the instincts are in the believer, if they are not suppressed.
A.B.M'N. In @Psalm 119, there is an excellent phrase: "Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his path? by taking heed according to thy word" (verse 9).
S.McC. A very important passage! @Psalm 119
{73}
is a wonderful psalm in that relation, bringing out the importance of the word, as he says in another verse, "Thy word have I hid in my heart, that I might not sin against thee" (verse 11). Think of a person hiding God's word in his heart! He is going down to the shop and instead of looking around on what would damage every spiritual instinct, he hides God's word in his heart (or her heart) that he might not sin against God.
Ques. Does the renewing of your mind come into this?
S.McC. It does, because our minds have to be renewed, so that there is constant freshness maintained.
A.B.M'N. Why is the idea of the newborn babe introduced in that setting?
S.McC. Peter has in mind normal Christianity. Paul could not speak to the Corinthians as unto spiritual; he had to speak to them as babes. It was a question of stunted growth with them, for they were carnal. 'Carnal' is a remarkable word. An unconverted man cannot exactly be carnal; it is only a believer who can be carnal. It is the believer turning to things that engage the unconverted man that makes him carnal. Peter has in mind the normal growth and development of our souls by the pure mental milk of the word. Oh, how we want to go in for what is pure! The ministry brings before us what is pure. We shall not get impure thoughts from it. We go into the shops and other places, and there are all kinds of things available, magazines with lurid illustrations to appeal to us, and if we are not girt about in the loins of our minds by the truth, we shall allow ourselves to settle on them in our minds and become damaged and defiled. We then become impure.
Rem. As well as going in for what is positive, he mentions here things to be laid aside.
{74}
S.McC. We all know that if a young man or woman is going in for something in the world, some position for example, there are certain things that must be laid aside until the end is reached. It is the same in Christianity. If we are going to grow up to salvation, through the pure mental milk of the word, we have to lay certain things aside. Now look what they are: malice, all guile, hypocrisies, envyings, evil speakings! How much damage has come into local positions by these five kings, on the necks of which you might say, we have to put our foot, as in the days of Joshua!
Rem. By these things we are preserved.
S.McC. The instincts are in us by the incorruptible and abiding word of God. The right instincts are there, but we sometimes ignore them. We all know that instinct tells us that we should not read certain books, yet sometimes the more corrupt suggestions in them the more we are driven towards them by the enemy, through the flesh. It is Satan working as he did through Amalek. We do not want to drown or suppress our instincts; let them assert themselves.
W.B.G. So the suggestion is very strong: "desire earnestly".
S.McC. None of us gets anywhere without earnestness.
L.E.S. The Holy Scriptures and the ministry cover the need of what is constitutional in relation to manhood. Our minds need not be diverted. There are certain features that might be necessary for the filling out of matters, but in general the Holy Scriptures and the ministry are sufficient for the completing of everything. The @Psalm 119 covers every letter of the Hebrew alphabet.
S.McC. Therefore the importance of the Scriptures. It is really painful, to a spiritual mind and heart, how little the Scriptures are read. We may read them in a family way, but we should addict
{75}
ourselves to the reading of the Scriptures, so that our minds are coloured by the reading of the Scripture, for therein is our salvation.
Rem. Do we get a similar thought in @Proverbs 5: 15, "Drink waters out of thine own cistern, and running waters out of thine own well"?
S.McC. We do not want to go to the world's cisterns or wells. They are corrupt.
J.H.S. Is not this matter of tasting a challenge as we contemplate it?
S.McC. And is it not remarkable? It says, "If indeed ye have tasted" -- not 'that the word is good' but, "that the Lord is good". Notice the interchange of the expression now, for after all, the Lord is the living word, as our brother was referring to earlier. He is referred to as the Word; the Lord Jesus is the living Word. And notice how when speaking about the pure mental milk of the word, it immediately turns and says: "if indeed ye have tasted that the Lord is good".
L.E.S. Would you say a word now as to our households, as to our children? Paul says to Timothy, "from a child thou hast known the sacred letters", as if the Holy Scriptures became his food in his youthful days. One speaks feelingly but one feels that our children are often nursed up on literature that is not of any real value to them.
S.McC. That is right. We need to see to it that the Scriptures have their proper place. I find, from experience, we do not have so much difficulty with the children when they are babes and when they are children as regards the Scriptures. It is the teenage that presents the difficulty and even after the teenage. It is then they think that they have a right to assert their own personality and a right to choose What they should read, as they think, and there is nothing more damaging. Whereas it is that time of life that the gain of the reading of the Scriptures is to be
{76}
valued, because in our tender years there is, through the work of God, a peculiar ability to take in and be impressed by, the Scripture.
J.A.K. Paul says to Timothy: "Till I come, give thyself to reading ... Occupy thyself with these things: be wholly in them", @1 Timothy 4: 13 - 15.
S.McC. It is a humbling thing to say, but there may be reproach among the brethren in relation to it. If a young brother or a young sister sets himself or herself to be devoted to the truth, they may come under the reproach of other young brethren in the locality. It may be said: 'Oh, you think you are better than we are!' and they may ridicule them. That is a very humbling thing.
W.B.G. In principle is that not what Joseph carried on with?
S.McC. I was thinking of Joseph. That was the attitude his brethren took towards him. They would not even greet him with friendliness, because he exposed them. It is very humbling how young people think they have to observe a certain code of honour amongst themselves. They do not tell on one another. We are not speaking about ordinary things, but about sin. If young people know that sin exists and they are a witness to it and they do not speak of it, they are held responsible by God. They are guilty according to @Leviticus 5.
U.G. I was thinking of Isaac dwelling with his father. It is something that is affecting the young; they do not want to dwell with the older brethren.
S.McC. That is the modern age. We need to see the value of Abraham dwelling with Isaac and Jacob. Now this passage goes on: "To whom coming, a living stone, cast away indeed as worthless by men, but with God chosen, precious, yourselves also, as living stones, are being built up a spiritual house", The "coming" and the "living stones" here bring out the vital side in our souls in relation to the work
{77}
of God. It is not 'to whom ye came', but "to whom coming".
Ques. Is the 'coming' an initial thought, or is it the believer coming to the Lord in this way?
S.McC. It is coming to Him, a living stone; the whole context is to be taken into account. It says "cast away indeed as worthless by men, but with God chosen, precious". That is, it involves the death and resurrection of Christ, meaning that we are coming to Him in relation to a new order and new condition of things. It is not exactly our relief, but coming to Him as the great focal point in the new system, that is established for God, "a spiritual house ... to offer spiritual sacrifices".
J.H.S. Is Nathaniel in John's gospel, one such? He is taken account of as coming.
S.McC. He is. It shows there is movement in our souls toward Christ, because we are living stones. There is affinity in our souls with Christ as on this line and it involves that we have to leave things. If my mind is to go on with certain things in this world, well, the Lord says: 'If that is your mind, let it be your mind', That is a terrible thing. It says "And let the filthy make himself filthy still", @Revelation 22: 11. That is the Lord's word. If I consent to go on with what is filthy, then the Lord says, 'Let him be filthy still', It is like the word in Hosea, "Ephraim is joined to idols: leave him alone", @Hosea 4: 17. What a terrible thing that is! If we only got a realisation of that in our souls -- to be left alone!
J.H.S. Does it really amount to us having as much as we want spiritually?
S.McC. It is a question too, of our reactions to the way Christ presents Himself. In @Matthew 14 the Lord came to them on the water in the fourth watch of the night. He did not go to the boat and take
{78}
Peter out of it, but Peter had to come out of the boat himself, and he did.
W.B.G. So the whole section is very important, the early part providing the desire for this kind of food.
S.McC. You can understand therefore the bearing the food would have on living stones, because the wording is anomalous. Whoever heard of living stones? But that is what we are, and constitution lies behind that.
L.E.S. Are these stones taken out of Jordan, and now moving rightly they have had to do with the Lord?
S.McC. He is the great Centre of attraction, like the ark going through the Jordan. The Person of Christ is the great centre of attraction here involving movement. What will happen at the rapture is on the great principle of attraction. We know that we cannot go up now at our own bidding, but we will go up then without any difficulty. What will be the difference? It will be the great law of attraction.
L.E.S. The great, mighty, magnet, the Person of the Lord Jesus.
S.McC. That is what it will be at the rapture and that is what it should be now in the assembly. We should be held to Christ in spiritual movement in our souls in relation to the structure in its present form and setting.
Ques. Would it help us to get away from looking at things as 'worthless', but rather to see them from God's side -- "chosen ... precious"? Then further down it is "spiritual sacrifices acceptable to *God*".
S.McC. What value attaches to the position in that light! What apprehension do we have of this? Are our souls being built up in the knowledge of Christ? Have we the experience of coming to Him as the living Stone?
{79}
L.E.S. "To you therefore who believe is the preciousness".
S.McC. This was said to believers who were dispersed, in the government of God. Despite their suffering, and the reproach of their circumstances, Peter is seeking to impress them with what abides. So he uses expressions like, "an incorruptible and undefiled and unfading inheritance" in chapter 1 of the epistle. We want to see what is incorruptible and unfading.
W.B.G. That comes to us as accepting the government of God.
S.McC. Christianity does not take us out of the sphere of the government of God. It leaves us there, but helps us to reign in life in that sphere. So that instead of being under the circumstances, and turning aside through them, we are reigning in life in them -- not grieving, but superior to them through grace.
L.E.S. What could be more dignified than what Peter says in chapter 1: 2, "Elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, by sanctification of the Spirit, unto the obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ: Grace to you and peace be multiplied". What a position to come to in our souls!
S.McC. These great thoughts should affect us. The world little knows what the saints are. You take Gothenburg; the brethren are looked upon with contempt by some, but think of how God looks upon them! We want to get that into our souls. God looks at them as corresponding with Christ, the living Stone. They are living stones "being built up a spiritual house, a holy priesthood, to offer spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ".
Now in Colossians, we have the hidden position. It is the position of mystery and that is a great test to many of us. Colossians corresponds in a certain way with Philadelphia. Philadelphia has accepted death to the world and Christ has become everything,
{80}
and that is what Colossians really means in its teaching. We are content with a hidden, secret position. The world does not understand, know or see it. But the believer knows, understands and sees it. So the Person of Christ is before us in the section in a peculiar way. We have not time to refer to the different things that are alluded to, but this verse 18 says: "And *he* is the head of the body, the assembly; who is the beginning, firstborn from among the dead, that *he* might have the first place in all things". It is as if it is among the last things that are referred to, this wonderful glory that attaches to Christ. He is the Head of the body, the body bringing in the mysterious side, in the saints here.
J.H.S. Because it is hidden, is that why you say it is not official?
S.McC. That is it. It is Christ apprehended personally and cherished in the affections. It is like what we have in Rahab; she secreted the men, hid them under the stalks of flax. That is the Colossian idea. The world is puzzled, they do not know. They would like to know what lies behind our position and where things are. Colossians involves that Christ is known spiritually, operating in a living way amongst us. It is Christ among the Gentiles, the hope of glory.
J.H.S. So what we have had in Peter lays the basis for appreciation, "your life is hid with the Christ in God", @Colossians 3: 3.
S.McC. It does, because the Person to whom we have come in Peter, is the Person in Colossians who is our life. And the life is hid. The world cannot enter into it, nor understand it, but the believer understands it. The saints know it. How important it is that our souls should be built up in the knowledge of Christ as Head, because wisdom is involved in that and resource, guidance and direction, in a subtle, inward, spiritual way.
{81}
J.A.K. That is, headship is an inward influence under which the saints are moving.
S.McC. In lordship it is an authoritative influence, but in headship it is an inward influence, through the affections. Lordship is through the mind and the conscience; headship is through the affections.
J.H.S. So that 'impulse' is the word that would fit in.
S.McC. The link between Christ and the body, in Colossians, is marvellous because the body lives in the life of the Head. The Head, as presented in Colossians, is the Head who is risen in glory, who lives in the power of indissoluble life. He is the One who is our Priest, but Colossians is presenting Him as our Head. As the Head of the body, He is the source of all direction in the body. Any move that the body makes, it makes by His impulse and His direction.
Rem. "That *he* might have the first place in all things". 'All things' covers a lot of territory.
S.McC. It does. It is remarkable that in Colossians you get two references to Christ in that way. In the verse read in chapter 1: "that *he* might have the first place in all things", and then in chapter 3: 11 in regard to the new man: "Wherein there is not Greek and Jew, circumcision and uncircumcision, barbarian, Scythian, bondman, freeman; but Christ is everything, and in all". The great point of Colossians is that Christ becomes everything to us. God is not said to be everything. God is said, in a coming day, to be "all in all" (@1 Corinthians 15: 28), but Christ is said to be "everything and in all", and that "he might have the first place in all things".
Ques. Does that involve His manhood?
S.McC. It involves His manhood, but it involves the greatness of the Person who has come into manhood. His headship is linked with His manhood, but lying behind it is the greatness of His Person.
{82}
C.A.H. Would you explain a little more what this "everything, and in all" means?
S.McC. I think it means that Christ characterises everything. He is everything in the way of character, characterising the whole position in relation to what is new.
C.A.H. Would it refer at all to persons?
S.McC. "In all" would bring in the thought of persons, although it may involve more. He is 'everything' as characterising things, and 'in all' involving state.
W.B.G. Would the present moment be involved in Christ being everything?
S.McC. The reference is to the new man. The new man is a provisional testimonial thought; it is not an eternal thought, and it is in that relation that Christ is said to be "everything, and in all".
W.B.G. In spite of every circumstance that would interfere.
S.McC. Showing that there is nothing that can arise in our history here but what He can be to us all that is necessary. He is everything, not some things, but everything. The contrast is the old man with his deeds and what marks him. In relation to our subject, the building up of our souls in the knowledge of Christ, this knowledge of His headship is very important, because it helps is as to where to turn for direction and influence and impulse.
J.H.S. Would philosophy and vain deceit in this epistle involve just that, turning to other sources?
S.McC. It does. It is turning to the world, in that sense. It may be in a religious way, we are turning to other sources than Christ, whereas Christ is to be everything. He is to have the first place in all things. That is objective, but "everything and in all" involves what is subjective. We do not therefore need to go outside of Christ for anything.
{83}
J.H.S. So the new man, bearing the features of Christ, would involve His being in all.
S.McC. Exactly. Now we must come to Ephesians. I think it is very affecting the way that Christ is alluded to here. This is a well-known passage, oft gone over, but the particular thing that is in one's mind in relation to our subject, is "that the Christ may dwell, through faith, in your hearts, being rooted and founded in love, in order that ye may be fully able to apprehend with all the saints what is the breadth and length and depth and height; and to know the love of the Christ which surpasses knowledge; that ye may be filled even to all the fulness of God". "The Christ" is a wonderful reference to the operating side, but not, as in Colossians, the Person in His divine majesty and grandeur, as being divine and as having part in the Deity. "The Christ" here involves the greatness of the Person in relation to operations in the mediatorial economy, in that wonderful arrangement divinely devised, into which God -- Father, Son and Spirit has come. The great Operator is this Person, "the Christ". And in the result of the operations He is in the very centre of the vastness of the divine domain and we are with Him in the centre of it. He dwelling in our hearts by faith, reminds us that it is still the position down here, it is not eternity yet. And then it says: "to know the love of the Christ which surpasses knowledge". I believe we need to weigh that statement in view of the building up of our souls in the knowledge of Christ in this relation.
J.H.S. Could you help us as to your early allusion in this reading to the official side here?
S.McC. We know that in Colossians the great thought is Christ. His personal glory being peculiarly before us; whereas the great thought in Ephesians is God. In referring to the official side, we are using the word 'official' in the right sense. The Christ is
{84}
alluded to in a peculiar way in Ephesians because He is officially the appointed Operator in the divine economy for bringing to pass divine thoughts.
J.H.S. So I think it has been said that His headship in Ephesians is according to God's sovereignty.
S.McC. Just so; whereas, His headship in Colossians is because of what He is personally; He takes that place, He is Head of the body. But in Ephesians, He is appointed Head, as it says: "and gave him to be head over all things to the assembly, which is his body", @Ephesians 1: 22.
Ques. Would Joseph in Egypt represent that same thought?
S.McC. Well, Joseph on the administrative side would correspond in that He brought everything, in the working out of the administration, in subjection to Pharaoh. Just as Christ, in the operations and working out of things, brings everything in results to God.
L.E.S. You have something in mind as to the love of the Christ.
S.McC. It is important we should see how it comes in here: "and to know the love of the Christ, which surpasses knowledge". Why should it come in in this passage, in this way? It shows that while the official glory of Christ, as the great divine Operator, is impressed upon our minds in this great, vast system of glory, yet the love of Christ is projected on to our view, as if to suggest His relations with us on this line. It is not so much on the official line now, but on the inward line, such as the Lord's supper builds us up in relation to.
L.E.S. So there is nothing greater than to understand, and to know, and to be responsive to, the love of the Christ in this setting. It is love in its most exalted and highest setting.
S.McC. It is. We might have thought it would have said 'to know the love of God which surpasses
{85}
knowledge', but it does not, it says, "to know the love of the Christ", the official divine Operator, the Lord Jesus Christ. The Christ, that blessed Person as apprehended in this realm, has expressed a love to which we may say there is no equal. It is a love both that is divine, because it surpasses knowledge, but it is a love that we have constantly been helped in relation to through the Lord's supper, involving His relations with the assembly here.
C.A.H. Would Joseph again come in there as showing his love to his brethren in the administration of affairs?
S.McC. There would be a link in the sense of his love for them although in fulness I do not think that Joseph's position takes us to what we have here. That involves more the Colossian position -- Christ amongst the Gentiles, but here, where it refers to the breadth and length and depth and height, it is the eternal scene that is projected on to our view, while we are still in a position where faith is required. I think it would involve a higher aspect of the love of Christ than we have in Joseph's love for the brethren.
J.A.K. Would you say something as to "the fulness of God"?
S.McC. I think the love of the Christ bears on it, "and to know the love of the Christ which surpasses knowledge; that ye may be filled even to all the fulness of God". That filling to all the fulness of God is not arbitrary, but through this channel -- the Christ dwelling in our hearts by faith and knowing the love of the Christ. It is the glory of the mediatorial system in which the Christ has come on to our view as operating with this in mind that we should be brought to all that God is in the outshining of Himself in Christ.
J.A.K. Would it be right to say that it is all that is knowable of God set forth in Christ?
{86}
S.McC. It is to affect our souls that the allusion to the Christ here has in mind that we should be filled to all the fulness of God. It is not exactly filled to the fulness of the Christ, although Ephesians does refer to "the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ", which is wonderful in itself, but the Christ is operating here, and His love is serving towards the end, that we should be filled to the supreme thought, to all that God is in the outshining of Himself in His nature.
J.H.S. Is the same thought of His love carried forward into chapter 5 where it says: "the Christ is head of the assembly" and then alludes to His love: "as the Christ also loved the assembly"?
S.McC. I think so. I think "the love of the Christ" embraces His personal relations with the assembly. It is very affecting that as we reach God in His fulness, we are helped along the road, we might say, by the love of the Christ. It is a tremendous advantage, as the Song of Songs would show, for there the journeys and movements are by the one who leans upon her beloved. As our souls therefore are built up in the knowledge of the love of the Christ, it has a sustaining effect in regard to reaching God as indicated in these passages.
W.B.G. Would it give lustre and distinctiveness at the Supper in relation to Christ?
S.McC. It would, and it also helps us to see that it is not through academic means that we reach God in His fulness. It is through our souls being built up in the knowledge of the Mediator, the divine Operator. It is not only the knowledge of what He is in His operations, but the knowledge of what He is in His personal relations with the assembly. It says, "The love of the Christ which surpasses knowledge".
L.E.S. As rooted and founded in love, does that not show the way by which we reach it?
{87}
S.McC. We are not strangers to this scene. We are indigenous to it, we belong to it as rooted in it. That is a word for us: Where are our roots? Are they in the world, in our families, or business, or in this realm where the Christ is to dwell in our hearts and where we reach, through the sustaining power of the apprehension of His love, the fulness of God?
{88}
THE KNOWLEDGE OF CHRIST IN RELATION TO THE GOSPEL AND THE ASSEMBLY (5)
@John 4: 13 - 24; @John 5: 20 - 25; @John 17: 25, 26
S.McC. The brethren will readily see the link in John's gospel with our subject; namely, the building up in our souls of the knowledge of Christ and these passages have been selected because of certain features of Christ's glory that appear in them. There are other passages that could have been taken, but these particularly bear on the service of God. In the first passage we have the knowledge of Christ as the Giver of living water -- leading into the thought of the worship of God. In the next we have the knowledge of Christ in relation to the great subject of quickening. In the last we have the glory of Christ as the Revealer of the Father, the One who makes known to us the Father. Another thing will be noted by the brethren in these sections, and that is the references to eternal life, as we have it in @John 4, 5 and 17. In fact it is rather remarkable that in @John 17 we should have the two greatest blessings that God has purposed for men, namely, eternal life and sonship. The chapter opens with eternal life and ends with sonship. Sonship, of course, is a greater thought than eternal life, but eternal life is the highest thought of blessing in relation to our need and links with the earthly side. Sonship is the highest feature of blessing in the Christian dispensation in connection with what is related to God's heart. The more we think of these thoughts the more remarkable it seems that @John 17 should open with eternal life and end with sonship. Both these thoughts are prime factors in the service of God. Eternal life is basic to the service of God. I believe the Lord would help us as to eternal life at the present time, on the eve of the rapture. In the
{89}
early days of recovery in regard of the truth, eternal life was a great point of conflict. The point of conflict was the *doctrine* of eternal life. But I think the Lord is going to help us, on the eve of the rapture, as to the *practical bearing* of eternal life. Beloved J.T. at Washington, in one of the last series of meetings, emphasised that there was a good deal more for us to understand in connection with eternal life. John's ministry makes much of it. That is something we should think over, for John's gospel is particularly written for our time. The striking emphasis throughout his gospel on eternal life must surely mean that the current departure from the truth in Christendom is to be met by this great thought of eternal life, as the saints enter upon it. Eternal life strictly refers to an out-of-the-world order of blessing. The Lord is emphasising what is out-of-the-world at the present time with us, so that we might be weaned more and more from what is in the world. So that as the rapture takes place it will not merely be an arbitrary act on the part of divine Persons, but there will be a corresponding state and condition in the assembly, as in the good of eternal life, which, we might say, will cause us to go up spontaneously. As the Lord descends there will almost be, what you might call, a reciprocal action. There will be the descent of the Lord, but there will be saints moving in the power and energy of eternal life, to meet Him. We need, therefore, to consider this matter of eternal life in its practical bearing and especially its bearing upon the service of God. The service of God cannot be carried on effectively unless we are clear of the world and associations in it; therefore the emphasis on eternal life.
L.E.S. I was wondering why the woman is spoken of as a Samaritan woman. Samaria represents the whole matter of a falsified profession. It says in @2 Kings 17: 33: "they feared Jehovah, and served
{90}
their own gods after the manner of the nations, whence they had been carried away". That is a remarkable chapter showing the fundamentals of the whole Samaritan matter. We may have the fear of God in our souls and yet not come fully into the sphere which the knowledge of God has reference to, apart from the world's system and all that marks it.
S.McC. We have the history of the system that is linked with Samaria, and the woman seems to have thoughts linked with it in her mind; but the Lord brings in what really is the crux of the matter in regard to what is merely profession and not vital, in the Spirit, as typified in the living water. The great line of demarcation at the present time between an empty profession and what is vital is just this matter of the living water, the Spirit.
L.E.S. Do you think the Lord has raised up the ministry of the Holy Spirit, not only in the way of teaching, but having in mind our vital living links with the Spirit of God, in view of fully understanding and entering into eternal life?
S.McC. It is important to see the difference between eternal life in @John 4 and @John 3. @John 3 presents eternal life in relation to faith and believing, in relation to the gospel testimony: "For God so loved the world". @John 4 is more than gospel testimony, more than faith, it involves the presence of the Spirit in the believer and that, of necessity, is greater than eternal life itself. The Spirit must be greater than eternal life because He is a divine Person. So the emphasis on the living water, in @John 4, is very important, because the bearing of eternal life in that chapter (and the living water springing up to eternal life) is delivering and that is what is greatly needed in regard to the service of God. Persons need to be delivered in regard to what is inward in their souls, so that they should be free and buoyant in the assembly in the service of God. It is not so
{91}
much what is outward in the world, but conditions in their own souls.
W.B.G. Is that why the idea of drinking is brought in, showing that the inward cleansing and releasing is in mind?
S.McC. Drinking involves what will affect us inwardly. I believe that in assembly service, while some of us may make a good deal of what we do not know -- the secret of the lack of spontaneity really lies in the fact that we are not inwardly set free. We may enjoy the indwelling Spirit to a certain extent, but He has not been allowed full scope in this regard. The Lord says, "shall become in him a fountain of water, springing up into eternal life".
J.A.K. Does the springing up as in chapter 4 suggest the activity of the Spirit?
S.McC. Yes. It is delightful to see life among the brethren, and we know what is required in the service. What is there that God has not done, we might say, to make possible the greatest results in His service to Himself? Every one of us therefore should be concerned that we should be in the flow of the worship and contributing to it audibly. That is, those of us who can; the sisters, of course, cannot. It is their part to remain silent, but they contribute to it in a substantial way, silently, because the sisters form the body of spirituality that supports the service.
W.B.G. So it has a direct effect on the service.
S.McC. It does, because eternal life has a direct bearing upon the service of God. The service of God is not a matter of ritualism, getting on your feet and expressing well-known terms among the brethren. It is the result of life in your soul, life in the environment and sphere you are in. God loves the thought of life, as seen in the creation, and He so loves the thought of life in the assembly. We should be very concerned, therefore, that He should see the expression of it in His service. If I were a brother in the
{92}
assembly and sitting silent, I would be greatly concerned, especially if there were much space of time for something to be done in the way of ministering to the heart of God. We may not think it is very serious if we do not take part, but it is, because God has constituted the brothers so that they should take part. We do not have to say much -- if, for example, a brother got on his feet and just said to the Lord, 'We thank Thee for declaring the Father's Name!' Well, that is something. The Father would find great delight in that and the Lord would find great delight in it too.
Ques. Should I know what it is that hinders me?
S.McC. I should. That is what the Lord is bringing up with the woman. She had had a public history, and He is bringing matters up with her so that she may be set free; it was not to condemn her. He wanted to see her in this spontaneous flow that is indicated in "shall become in him a fountain of water, springing up into eternal life". If that is in my soul. I shall not be able to keep myself without breaking through and securing that which means so much to God. The whole economy has been designed and the whole work of redemption has been wrought in order that there may be an audible answer to God in His service in the assembly.
Rem. The Lord would help the sisters then to have intelligence as to what may be hindering in the service of God. They might serve in prayer in regard to the difficulty.
S.McC. I should think so. We owe a good deal to the sisters because the body of spirituality, in any local gathering, is largely made up of what is resident in the sisters. They are the silent unit in the local make-up and we can see from @John 12 that the body of spirituality lies with them.
Rem. The Lord spoke to a sister here, not a brother, and there was result as to it.
{93}
S.McC. In John's gospel the Lord makes a lot of the sisters.
Rem. He calls her 'Woman'.
S.McC. That is a dignified word. We want to view the sisters with the dignity that is becoming to them, in the light of this word, because there is no doubt that the assembly would be in the Lord's mind in saying, 'Woman'. 'Woman' in the normal bearing of the word always points to the assembly.
L.E.S. "This shall be called Woman" -- Ishshah -- "because this was taken out of a man", @Genesis 2: 23.
S.McC. That is it.
J.H.S. Is the secret of relief from oneself seen in what the Spirit becomes in the person -- "a fountain of water springing up into eternal life"?
S.McC. It is what is taking place; "the water that I shall give him shall become in him a fountain of water, springing up into eternal life". Christ gives the living water with this definite intent in mind that it is to spring up within.
J.H.S. So we would be helped in view of the passage: "for *we* are the circumcision, who worship by the Spirit of God, and boast in Christ Jesus, and do not trust in flesh", @Philippians 3: 3.
S.McC. That links on with what we have here, for it is not terms of theology we are primarily engaged with. In the service of God we are governed, of course, by the light that governs the position, and we are intelligent in what we do, but then we worship by the Spirit of God. That is what is in mind here, that the great power springing up within our souls, liberating us from all that sin has produced inwardly, has that in mind.
L.E.S. Do you not think we should be concerned at the rapidity with which the work of God would come into its own in its proper normal setting? Do you not feel that we are too long in coming into these things, because we do not allow the Spirit's service in
{94}
a negative way, the moral cleansing in which He delights to serve, to have its right and proper place?
S.McC. I am sure what you say is important. One of the most interesting and affecting things to watch is the development of the work of God in persons, to see how quickly it comes about in some. Some persons will come right out of the world, with an upbringing and circumstances and environment that were altogether against them. The work of God takes place and it develops and it is amazing the change, even their external appearance becomes refined and their language is enriched, because of the development of the work of God in them.
U.G. It says in Chronicles that David longed that someone would give him to drink from the water of the well in Bethlehem, and how these three mighty men quickly respond to that longing. Should there not be that longing with us in our readiness to respond to the longings of Christ?
S.McC. I think we want to get a sense of divine longings. It would help us in the service to see that divine Persons are yearning and longing for what is the fruit of grace in our souls, to express itself. If younger ones could get a sense of that, what liberation there would be for them inwardly in it. It is not a question of how much we can say, or the way we can say it; it is a question of the expression of the work of God in us.
W.B.G. If desire springs up in our souls through the divine proposal the way will soon be cleared for us, will it not?
S.McC. Just so. Now as we have been speaking about reticence in taking part, we may just have a word now as to those who actively take part. There is great need for concern amongst us that our part should be in the power of the Spirit. That is, it should be marked by what we have here. We may get accustomed to taking part without seeing to it
{95}
that our worship is by the Spirit of God. If it were so with us that we were in the gain of the fountain of water springing up into eternal life, there would be great freshness and variety in a spiritual way in the contributions that might be made to the service of God.
J.A.K. What is the import of the order in @John 4? First, the Lord speaks of the fountain of water springing up, then the adjustment that seems necessary, and then the bringing in of worship.
S.McC. I think the Lord is concerned first of all about us individually in view of the assembly. There is no doubt at all that behind the great matter in @John 4 is the assembly. In chapter 3: 35 it says "The Father loves the Son, and has given all things to be in his hand". Now that is to be noted. Then immediately the fourth chapter comes on to view and a woman is the subject of it, as the object of the service of the Son of God, who has had all things put in His hands. It is striking that a woman should come on to view, showing that the assembly is in mind in the first great thought of the administration in the economy. The Lord begins with her first of all as to the positive side in proposing the living water, enlarging and emphasising the thought of divine gift. Romans does that, as we saw in the first reading. Romans emphasises and enlarges on divine gift to begin with and then it proceeds to the experimental matter, involving sin and the principle of sin operating as it comes out here. The Lord proceeds to show how this woman can be adjusted inwardly in regard to the operating principle of sin, and then in regard to the service of God. @Romans 8 brings it on to our view in the reference to the spirit of adoption whereby we cry, Abba, Father.
Ques. As a result of the water flowing within those who are sitting down, would there be spontaneous 'Amens' to what is being said?
{96}
S.McC. That is very important. There is really nothing more taxing when you get up and take part and do not hear an 'Amen'. It is almost flattening! Where all the brethren are in the gain of the water springing up into eternal life, you will find an immediate responsive action amongst all the brethren, the sisters as well; especially when younger brethren take part, we want to encourage them all we can. Supposing they say something wrong, do not get after them immediately and try and adjust them. The system will take care of that, you know. After all, we have all had to learn. If a young brother takes part and makes a wrong expression, as long as it does not involve bad doctrine, let us leave it for the moment. Next time he takes part he may not say the same thing. We want to see that there is power in the environment, in the system, to support any responsive movement and priesthood will regulate the matter of intelligence and other things as the service proceeds. We are not referring to older ones who should know better.
L.E.S. The 'Amens' are not only in the way of encouragement, but it is really part of the living character of the system.
S.McC. That is it. So that if a brother takes part in the service of God and mentions the right hand of God -- why can you not heartily say, Amen? You may say, The right hand of God brings in distance, and it really does not fit in to the nearness of the family relationship. But then, in the *general scope* of the truth, the right hand of God is right. Hebrews enlarges on it. In Leviticus you see that all adjustment is in the system through the priesthood. There is always power in the priesthood to take account of anything that might be extraneous.
L.B. It says: "All the people said, Amen!" @1 Chronicles 16: 36.
{97}
S.McC. It is a great thing that all should say, Amen. It enters into the service of God. We may not have thought of that, but the Amen enters into the service of God.
A.B.M'N. I suppose the 'Amen' would be as spontaneous as any other audible expression in the service.
S.McC. It would. Maybe we do not say, Amen, because we are not listening to what the brother says. We may be thinking of something else. Some of us who take part may be thinking about what we are going to say, and miss what the brother is saying, when he is really expressing what is in the system, as on his feet. The brother that is on his feet is a vehicle for the conveyance of the resident wealth in the realm, the wealth that is in the sisterhood as well as the brotherhood.
Rem. It is what flows from the assembly.
S.McC. That is it.
U.G. I was wondering if it is helpful to see the way the 'Selahs' and 'Amens' come into the psalms, in relation to our worship.
S.McC. There area lot of 'Amens' in the psalms. You will always find that in David's system there was no lack of 'Amens'. You do not read of 'Amens' in Saul's system. I doubt whether there is one 'Amen' mentioned in Saul's regime, but David's service is marked by 'Amens'. Where you have what is Davidic you will get 'Amens'; where you get what is Sauline there will be an absence of 'Amens'.
Now this matter of the Giver of the living water is a very fine glory of Christ, and we want to be built up in our souls in regard to it. We want to see how the Lord gives the living water in view of our being set free inwardly.
J.H.S. Would it be right to think of Rebecca, as she appears to the servant, as illustrative of this fountain of water springing up?
{98}
S.McC. I am sure it would. She is one of the brightest types and illustrations we have of it, in the Old Testament. It shows how divine Persons, in type, are affected by that kind of thing. We have been speaking about the 'Amens', how the brethren are affected; but we want to think of how divine Persons are affected as the expression of this comes on to Their view. We may say, Well, They know what is within us. Of course, that is so. But surely that is not everything? They want to see what is in us coming out. That is the great divine intent, that what is in us should come out.
Rem. "Let me hear thy voice", @Song of Songs 2: 14.
S.McC. In regard to Rebecca, it was the servant, suggesting typically the Holy Spirit, who would know all that marks her inwardly. The Spirit knows every one of us. He has had to do with us from new birth right onward. He knows all that marks us, but we are to understand and be affected by the fact that divine Persons are affected by what comes on to Their view in expression, and not just from the standpoint of Their omniscience as divine Persons.
J.A.K. Would that be borne out in the statement "the man was astonished", @Genesis 24: 21?
S.McC. That is what I am thinking of. Divine Persons are greatly affected by the work of God in the saints, as it comes into expression and especially as to this matter of the change -- the wonderful change that comes about in the believer: "the water which I shall give him shall become in him a fountain of water, springing up into eternal life". This links on with the thought of mystery, for the world does not understand it nor know it. It says, "shall become in him"; it is what is *in* him. Elsewhere we get the water going out, which the world would be able to take account of in regard to the gospel testimony,
{99}
but here it is the mystery involved in what takes place in the believer.
J.H.S. In regard to Rebecca we should note how readily she responds to the request of the servant -- she says, "Drink, my lord!"
S.McC. That is a word for all of us. You feel for yourself the tendency is to get sluggish spiritually. We know how easy it is to get sluggish naturally, but it is very easy to get sluggish spiritually. We therefore want to be in the gain of the living water that Christ gives, so that we are marked by alacrity and immediate response in our movements to divine Persons.
L.E.S. Does it not hinge upon "if thou knewest", and then, "who it is"?
S.McC. It brings in the greatness of the Source of the giving, because the Lord links it on with God, "If thou knewest the gift of God". Of course He is God Himself; the first verse of the gospel tells us that. But then He says, "If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that says to thee, Give me to drink, thou wouldest have asked of him and he would have given thee living water". I believe that really resolves itself amongst us in assembly service. If we really knew who was there and whom we have to do with, we would not refrain from responding.
Ques. This thought of a fountain, that would be an impossibility to keep silent; it is springing up.
S.McC. If it is such a joy to those who are older to hear the faintest expression of the work of God in a person, what must it be to divine Persons -- because it is Their work? The earlier you get on your feet and take part actively and audibly in the service the better.
J.H.S. Do not the emblems help us as to who it is?
S.McC. They do. It is the love of such a Person that is before us in that way. Now the gift of living
{100}
water in @John 4 involves power in the believer's soul, but when we come in @John 5 to the Lord, as the Quickener, it is more than power. It is a more subtle thought than power and it involves nature. It involves that the believer is made to live in the divine nature. The act of quickening is therefore a great matter in our souls. It is not new birth. Quickening in new birth is the sovereign act of the Holy Spirit on a living, responsible person, but quickening, as presented in @John 5, is not the sovereign act on a living responsible person, but the sovereign act on a dead person. A person who is really morally in death is brought by divine quickening into life. He is made to live, and to fill out, in the joy and blessedness of that life, the relationships into which, through grace, he is introduced.
L.E.S. Does this involve the understanding of our intimate links with the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit? It would involve really the whole current matter of Christianity?
S.McC. It would, and this matter of quickening should greatly affect us, because no other family in God's universe will know this kind of quickening. This quickening is distinctive to the present dispensation. The wicked dead, while they will be raised, and in their bodies appear before God and be consigned to the lake of fire under the wrath of God for ever, have no such thing as quickening in this relation in regard to them. This quickening has to do with an inward sovereign act of a divine Person and it supposes the presence of the Spirit.
L.E.S. Would you say a word as to how you link the thought of quickening, relative to the Holy Spirit, with new birth?
S.McC. The believer is made to live in a potential way, in a new way; but it is not life in regard to nature and relationships as are contemplated in @John 5 and @Ephesians 2. It is more an act by which
{101}
the person is changed and affected in a new way throughout, in his links with God. Quickening is in that relation and links on with what we have in Ezekiel in regard to Israel prior to the millennium. The quickening is linked with the new birth in the act upon Israel before the millennium is introduced.
Ques. What is the difference between the dead in verses 21 and 25?
S.McC. "For even as the Father raises the dead and quickens them, thus the Son also quickens whom he will". The raising of the dead there is the literal act of resurrection. Even the Lord Jesus was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father. That is actual death. But then, in verse 25, we have those that are morally dead, not physically dead. "Verily, verily, I say unto you, that an hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God and they that have heard shall live". That has a bearing *now* on persons who are morally dead. Actually the rapture will involve the same thing. But it has a moral force in that those that hear the voice of the Son of God live.
Ques. Would 'dead' in verse 25 be linked with state?
S.McC. Oh. I think so. It links with verse 24, which refers to the state of death and verse 25 to the persons who are in that state.
L.E.S. Going back for a moment in regard to what we have said as to quickening, in @John 3, as to being born anew, it would be flowing out of the quickening power of the Holy Spirit. That is what you have in mind as to the change.
S.McC. Things are there potentially, in principle, in new birth. But when a child is born and grows up in the environment of relationships and the operation of nature, it is made to live in another relation. It is made to live in an environment of
{102}
love, in the intelligent understanding and appreciation of the relationships that it is in. And that is @John 5.
Ques. Is the woman as she comes to the well in @John 4 a type of one that is born again?
S.McC. Well, the work of God takes place in her. Something happens as she is under the hand of the Son of God, and as it happens the Lord immediately begins to take account of her as a subject of the work of God. There is no doubt at all that she is a subject of the work of God.
Rem. That is shown in the fact that she responded soon to the Lord's word.
S.McC. She 'hedges', like we all do, at first; when probing comes we try to throw up a screen, as she did. The Lord said to her, "Go, call thy husband, and come here. The woman answered and said, I have not a husband". That might have been true to a certain extent but it was misleading and we are very guilty of that at times. We may say something that has a part of the truth in it, but it is calculated to mislead. It is a terrible thing among the brethren, when a person says something that has a part of the truth in it, but he or she says it to misdirect the brethren. That is what @Ephesians 4 calls lying. We might say later, Well, what I said was true to a certain extent but then if I said it to misdirect the thoughts of those I said it to, I am lying. That is what Scripture calls lying and it is a serious thing. But the Lord operates with her, so the work of God comes right into view. She says, "I see that thou art a prophet". Only one in whom the work of God had come to light could express it in that way.
Ques. Are not these words, hearing and believing, very important?
S.McC. I would say they are.
{103}
Rem. The woman hears and moves rapidly. I am thinking of the importance of hearing and believing.
S.McC. Hearing my word, that is Christ's word. "He that hears my word" means a person who is prepared to be regulated by the word of Christ, by the mind of Christ. The mind of Christ comes into this matter. The Lord says, "he that hears my word, and believes", it is a state of active faith in the person. That character of person has life eternal. But this quickening is a very real matter because it is the great secret of assembly service, that the life that enters into assembly service is real life spiritually. It is not an imagination of the mind, but we are quickened in spiritual life, in the life of Christ as risen. We should be able to reach within ourselves in assembly experience, and lay hand spiritually on that life and its operations amongst us and within us, because it is a real matter.
Ques. Does a quickened scene come into view in @John 12?
S.McC. I suppose it would. That is, there are persons there who have had to do with death, and they move now in a realm where there has been complete victory over death.
W.B.G. It comes about by the voice of the Son of God.
J.H.S. Does Hezekiah give us the thought in alluding to the living praising as he did that day?
S.McC. Just so; it is by quickened persons. The service of God is a service of life and flows out of what is living, from those who are living spiritually. The actual life of Christ in which they are quickened is a real thing which is substantial spiritually and is experienced in the assembly.
J.H.S. So is there some advantage negatively in being quickened out of a state of death, involving
{104}
nothing carried over that would be introduced as though it was of any value?
S.McC. It is important to see that, because it is "passed out of death into life". It is a very definite statement that we are out of it. In the assembly we are in a deathless realm; death has no influence or power there. It is a wonderful thing to think of, dear brethren, that as we come out of the world where death reigns, and we come into the assembly, we come into a deathless realm, a realm where death has no power because the Son of God has held up its power.
J.H.S. So that what is quickened will be unaffected by disembodiment.
S.McC. Just so. Because what is quickened goes through. What is quickened is what is spiritual and applies eternally.
W.B.G. It is the work of God that is quickened.
S.McC. I would prefer to say that it is the person in whom the work of God is, that is quickened, because you could not exactly say that the work of God was in a state of death.
L.E.S. "And you, being dead in offences and in the uncircumcision of your flesh, he has quickened together with him", @Colossians 2: 13. And then in @Ephesians 2: 4: "but God, being rich in mercy, because of his great love wherewith he loved us (we too being dead in offences,) has quickened us with the Christ". Has it not in view the idea of association, too?
S.McC. Quickening has in mind that you are made to live in divinely-formed relationships and you are at home in them. It is not just light in our minds, being the brethren of Christ and the sons of God. Quickening is an actual operation, a concrete and a perfect operation, in which we are made to live spiritually and we are at home in the wonderful relationships that grace has introduced us into.
{105}
L.E.S. Therefore we cannot understand nor enjoy what the assembly is according to the divine mind apart from quickening.
S.McC. It is important to see that resurrection is not actual at the present time, but quickening is *actual*. In connection with resurrection faith comes into it, as it says, "ye have been also raised with him through faith of the working of God", @Colossians 2: 12. But it is never said that we are quickened by faith, because we are not. Quickening is actual.
A.B.M'N. Is that why in verse 25, those three little words, "and now is", mean so much?
S.McC. Whereas resurrection is something we anticipate, quickening we do not anticipate. We anticipate resurrection, but it will take place for us at the rapture when the dead will be raised. We come into it, according to Colossians, by faith. Quickening, as we have it here, we do not anticipate, it is a matter that now is. The thing exists, and the voice of the Son of God bears on that, for it says, "an hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that have heard shall live". The voice of the Son of God particularly bears on the matter of relationships. He has quickened us in relation to them so that we are made to live in them. It is actual, not anticipative.
W.B.G. Is it the voice of One who is enjoying these relationships who calls us into them by quickening?
S.McC. In assembly service we do not have to work up our minds to imagine it is a wonderful realm we are in, and to quote and go over in our thoughts @Ephesians 1 to know how wonderful it is to be there. Quickening means that we are actually in it, in our spiritual experience, and we are at home in these wonderful relationships, and perfectly at rest in them.
{106}
A.B.M'N. "And they that have heard shall live".
S.McC. Just so. Now we may have a word as to @John 17. The knowledge of the Lord here, in which we are to be built up, is as the Revealer of the Father: He says, "Righteous Father -- and the world has not known thee, but I have known thee, and these have known that thou hast sent me. And I have made known to them thy name, and will make it known; that the love with which thou hast loved me may be in them, and I in them". It is very affecting to think of the Lord's glory in this relation and the building up of our souls in the knowledge of it. Think of the wonderful service He renders to us in making known the Father's Name as he speaks of it here! All this has in mind the building up of richness and substance in the service of God, for the "I in them" would contemplate what is said in @Hebrews 2: "in the midst of the assembly will I sing thy praises" or 'will I hymn thee'. @John 17: 26 links with @Hebrews 2: 11, 12.
A.B.M'N. Could this be considered as one of the all things placed in the hands of the Son by the Father?
S.McC. I would say so, because earlier He speaks of the Father's name being given to Him: "And *I* am no longer in the world, and these are in the world, and I come to thee. Holy Father, keep them in thy name which thou hast given me, that they may be one as we", @John 17: 11. Now when He says, "Keep them in thy name which thou hast given me", the "which thou hast given me", does not allude to the saints, but to the name. That is the Father's name was given to Him; He was the Custodian of that name. In that verse it is a question of protection, but in verse 26, the spiritual enrichment of the assembly is in mind: "I have made known to them thy name, and will make it known". That name that
{107}
was entrusted to Him, He has made known to us, who form the assembly.
A.B.M'N. It all adds to the glories that He has. He is the Revealer of the Father.
S.McC. So the last word in Philadelphia to the overcomer is "and my new name". What does that allude to, but what we have here? It is the Lord's glory in the mediatorial position as having made God known.
J.H.S. What does "and will make it known" involve?
S.McC. @John 20.
J.H.S. That does not continue now; it is fulfilled there.
S.McC. When the Lord says in @John 20, "Go to my brethren and say to them, I ascend to my Father, and your Father, and to my God, and your God" that is the "will make it known". That is complete; there is no repetition of that in the dispensation.
J.H.S. And the name declared in Hebrews, you understand to be the Father's name.
S.McC. According to what J.T. taught, the name in @Hebrews 2: 11, 12 is what we have alluded to in @John 17: "I have made known unto them thy name, and will make it known". @Hebrews 2 is a question of relationships and what is special. You will always find that what is special is linked with the environment of relationship; while in connection with what is general, the position where relationship is, is not so much emphasised, but the majesty and greatness of what is declared.
W.B.G. So the matter of love coming into this verse would enrich our vessels in view of the service.
S.McC. When it says in @John 1: 18, "No one has seen God at any time; the only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared him", that is not special, that is general, and it
{108}
bears on the whole universe, without saying who it bears on. But when you get revelation, it is special, and it bears upon those who are in relationship with God as made known in this wonderful name. @John 17 and @Hebrews 2 stress relationship, God in the parental relation, and the making known of the name is in that connection.
J.H.S. I think that helps. What is general then would involve the three Persons?
S.McC. It would. So that in the service of God we move from the distinctiveness and blessedness of what is special, "my Father, and your Father" -- to the glory and majesty of what is general -- "my God, and your God". That God is the God we read of in @Genesis 1: 1, "In the beginning God ...".
