{#Distinctiveness and Finality in Paul's Ministry}
{1}
DISTINCTIVENESS AND FINALITY IN PAUL'S MINISTRY (1)
@Acts 9: 1 -- 20; @2 Corinthians 12: 1 -- 10
S.McC. It is suggested that we look at Paul and his ministry, and the opening up of the heavenly side in relation to it, and especially to see what is distinctive and final in it. The brethren would immediately recall how the line of distinctiveness runs through all Paul's service and ministry from beginning to end. The thought of what is final, too, appears in it, for to him it was given to complete the word of God. It is thought well, in the first reading, to consider himself personally, and see how immediately heaven comes on to view in connection with him and his conversion, and then to see the peculiar distinctiveness that no doubt entered into and characterised his ministry, as in @2 Corinthians 12. There is the distinctive side in @Acts 9, the Lord personally taking a hand in the arresting and apprehension of Saul, and the Lord referring to him in His word to Ananias, "this man is an elect vessel to me." Then we may see later on the distinctiveness that appears in relation to the gospel which he preached and the Lord's supper which he received; and then in the Colossian and Ephesian letters especially to reach the great thoughts of finality that appear particularly in the Ephesian letter in regard to the assembly in Christ Jesus. There are the great marital thoughts and family thoughts that flood the epistle to the Ephesians as what is final is brought before the saints. I thought that a consideration of himself personally in these passages would indicate the distinctiveness that the Lord has in mind in his service and ministry, especially having the assembly in view, for it is Paul's ministry that opens out and develops the truth of the assembly.
{2}
A.J.G. Have you in mind at all that Paul was himself to exemplify the truth which he ministered? Does that additional feature come into it?
S.McC. Yes, I am thinking of that in a special way, and also, that he was distinctive as a sufferer. He suffered as very few others outside of Christ have suffered; and the manner of his life was all in accord with his ministry. It is all setting out the distinctiveness that the Lord had in mind in the ministry and service of such a vessel, in raising him up as He did.
A.E.M. Have you in mind that in introducing this subject of finality, the Lord is near? We must take on these exercises right away?
S.McC. That is exactly what is in mind, the imminence of the translation, the shortness of the time. It is important that Paul's ministry and what it sets out should be laid hold of in all that it involves; whether on the lower line, involving what is practical and searching, or on the higher more elevated line, involving what is so enriching and stimulating.
A.H. You remarked that the Lord appears to take a very personal hand in dealing with Saul. Would you say how that impresses you?
S.McC. It seems to me that in view of the assembly, and the greatness of the assembly in the Lord's eyes and affections, and in view of the unfolding of the truth of the assembly in its heavenly relations, the Lord is very selective. He entrusts this service to no other, but He comes into it personally especially from the heavenly side. That is, it is an intervention from heaven, for the heavenly side is going to open up in the ministry of this servant, and the Lord intervenes from the heavenly side Himself.
P.L. How selective the Lord was in relation to the pearl, "having found one pearl of great value." Would this choice of Paul follow on that?
S.McC. It would. So that the assembly is very
{3}
select in that way. The refinement that is linked with the assembly stands out in all its distinctiveness and, as we shall see, heavenly refinement stands out in Paul in all its distinctiveness.
L.E.S. Is there something distinctive in the fact of Saul being at the stoning of the martyr Stephen, bearing upon the suffering side?
S.McC. I think there is. As we know, it was a transitional moment; God had borne with Jerusalem and what was there, but at that moment we get the transference of things to heaven. Stephen looks into heaven and sees the new centre of operations, and Saul comes on to view at that juncture. It is all pointing, I think, to the way the heavenly side is coming on to view.
R.W.S. So that heaven intervenes in this section we have read, and finally in 2 Timothy and several times in between in the apostle's service we have the Lord appearing to him. Are not these appearings important in relation to this service and ministry?
S.McC. They are, because they give the distinctive touch to service in ministry. With those that serve, it is important that there should be some experience of this kind of thing. Of course we must bear in mind the special elect vessel that Paul was, but there should be some experience in those that serve in view of distinctiveness of these kind of movements on the part of the Lord.
J.VanS. Would you say a word please in relation to @Galatians 1: 15, in connection with selection?" But when God, who set me apart even from my mother's womb, and called me by his grace, was pleased to reveal his Son in me."
S.McC. He is showing, in that letter, that he was specially marked out in connection with his service, set apart so early. It particularly comes in over against the elements of Judaism that were asserting themselves in the province of Galatia.
{4}
A.J.G. So that God's Son was revealed in him. Does that involve that the dignity and liberty of sonship in its true heavenly character was to be seen in Paul?
S.McC. I thought it did. It brings in the line of what is distinctive in that way. It is not just that He was revealed *to* him, as to Peter, but He was revealed *in* him, meaning that it would characterise him in all his service and preaching.
A.P.C.L. Does the selection of Damascus as the location for this enter into what you have in mind? He is not converted in Jerusalem. Did not the Lord extract him from that setting in order that His work might not be impaired by anything that would damage what is heavenly?
S.McC. It is very interesting that the Lord, we might say, selects the position in which He will affect him. How often we see that principle operating! The Lord meets an issue, not where we think it might be met, but according to His own wisdom and His own selection. That is a great thing, especially in conflict, and this matter here involved conflict, for Saul was at war with the saints.
L.E.S. Do you think in view of his ministry as to the assembly, that we could link this with @Genesis 24, as to Damascus, and why Damascus was selected?
S.McC. There might be something in that; I had not thought of it. It is striking that it was removed from Jerusalem. That is, it was removed from the sphere of religious influence and religious prejudice; as if the Lord would have a free hand, and a free right of way, in view of the heavenly side of the truth, and the assembly in her heavenly character, which He had in mind to bring in through this vessel.
P.H.H. Is His interest strengthened by the introduction of the Lord's own voice? It says, "falling on the earth he heard a voice saying to him," and
{5}
there are other mentions there too. The Lord is intervening, not only with light and the arresting of the vessel, but there is His own personal expression of things in the voice.
S.McC. I think that helps. The voice intensifies the thought of the personal appearance of Christ to Saul at this moment. All the influence of personality would enter into that voice, the voice of Jesus, "*I* am Jesus." What a voice it was!
P.H.H. Did Saul seem, perhaps dimly, to have some conviction about it immediately, by the way that he answers, "Who art thou, *Lord*?" It says of John in the Revelation that he "turned back to see the voice which spoke," @Revelation 1: 12. Would it be right to say that Saul seems to grasp some kind of significance in what the Lord says?
S.McC. I would think he did. It is interesting, his immediate answer when he heard the voice, "Who art thou, Lord?" He did not just say, 'Who art thou?', but "Who art thou, *Lord*?" There was some immediate recognition on his part of who the Person was. He was no ordinary Person.
G.R.C. Are the circumstances somewhat similar in @Matthew 16, where it says, "when Jesus was come into the parts of Caesarea-Philippi"? It is there that He says "Who do *ye* say that I am?", and it is there that He discloses the truth of the assembly and speaks of the Father revealing it to Peter.
S.McC. I think that helps. It shows how careful divine Persons are in regard to the choice subjects of Their operations and the selection of circumstances in which Their operations work, so that we are free from what might impair or damage. The principle of that would enter in, I suppose, to many matters. Sickness comes in and infirmity of body and detention in certain circumstances; all that brings in the Lord's way of operating in regard to matters to help us, and to help the assembly.
{6}
P.L. That is seen in its excellence in Paul being detained in prison, where these rich epistles of heavenly ministry came from.
S.McC. Well, there we have a very full allusion to what we are saying. The most of us here would recall the readings in this very hall on "Paul's ministry and the Service of God," when that very thing was referred to. The Lord was operating from His own side to remove the servant from anything that would blight or impair or hinder the full heavenly distinction of the assembly as it appears in those letters. And I believe, in all the pressure of the present moment, the deaths and the sicknesses and other matters, that we are being impressed by the Lord emphasising His right to do as *He will*, in order that the full value and distinctiveness of the heavenly side might appear in the saints.
J.S.E. Would it be just to enquire at this point whether Stephen had a special touch just before his martyrdom, for it says of him that he fixed his eyes on heaven? But when he speaks to the people he speaks of seeing the heavens opened. Would this allusion to his fixing his eyes on heaven suggest something of an expectation that an entirely new move was coming by that way and does chapter 9 show how it comes?
S.McC. I think there is something interesting in that. It is prefaced by saying, "being full of the Holy Spirit, having fixed his eyes on heaven, he saw the glory of God," @Acts 7: 55. It is as if he were a vessel that was so filled with the Spirit that he sensed the new departure in divine movements and divine operations. I think if we are like Stephen, the Spirit *must* come into this matter, in the sense that if we are accustomed to making room for the Spirit and being filled with the Spirit, we shall sense divine movements and operations, even if it may involve what is drastic, as it did then.
{7}
S.W.P. Might I enquire whether the "I am" of @Acts 9: 5, "I am Jesus," has some reference to His deity, while 'Jesus' stresses the side of His manhood?
S.McC. The very name Jesus carries a touch as to that in itself, and Saul recognises, even if it is instinctively, that he is in the presence of Someone very great. He says, "Who art thou, *Lord*?"; it is no ordinary Person he is in the presence of.
J.McK. Does the light out of heaven link on with the sound out of heaven, as though the matter is to be given impetus from heaven itself, and that impetus is to abide?
S.McC. I think so. I think we should see more this matter of heaven and how it is intervening here, especially if we are to reach what is distinctive and final we must come to what is heavenly. It is on that line that what is distinctive and what is final are brought before us.
C.M.M. Would Paul's initial experience here give him, right through his life, ever to hold the gospel as intimately intertwined with the assembly? The Lord in His skill puts Paul in touch with a brother, with a local assembly?
S.McC. That is a very important matter. The Lord refers to him in that lowly way, "I am Jesus, whom thou persecutest," identifying Himself with the saints in the suffering way and position, and then He says in verse 6, "But rise up and enter into the city, and it shall be told thee what thou *must* do." Then there come into operation the spiritual facilities in a locality to serve persons such as Saul of Tarsus, all bringing out and emphasising the importance of the local position.
A.B.P. Would that be like the half-dead man being brought to the inn? I was wondering if the service of the Samaritan in @Luke 10 is not seen filled out in our passage before us. The half-dead man is taken into the inn where he is cared for; so we have
{8}
the initial impressions received and the power of the kingdom operating?
S.McC. There is a link in that way, the local position being what is provisional, but it is the place where we are served and cared for. That brings up the question as to whether we value our local positions. The value of the position in the city is one of the first impressions from heaven that is conveyed to Paul.
A.B.P. I just thought when you laid emphasis on the word 'must,' that you possibly had in mind the authority of the voice of the local assembly.
S.McC. I think we need to see that, and especially when you think of such an one as Saul was and what he represents. It is especially important with those that have any part in service that the value and the dignity and the authority of the local assembly should be recognised.
F.D.W. So that it says in Galatians those at Jerusalem communicated nothing to him, but he would not say that as to the saints at Damascus, would he?
S.McC. No, certainly he would not. When he said that, he was referring not to the local assembly in the sense in which we are speaking of it; he was seeking to maintain the heavenly distinctiveness of his own ministry as free from all metropolitan influence. We want to be free from any earthly metropolitan influence, for our metropolis is in heaven, where Jesus is, and we want to see what is worked out commensurate with that in local assemblies in the presence of the Spirit here below.
J.S.E. Is that why Luke, a Gentile, is selected to write this history?
S.McC. Yes, that is interesting, because his gospel largely emphasises the thought of locality, the Lord being in certain places. The idea of locality is greatly emphasised in his gospel.
{9}
A.H. Speaking of the local assembly, and those who serve having right respect and really gaining from it, is that seen with Paul in an enlarged way in chapter 22? He tells us something there that Luke does not tell us here; for instance, he has to be stimulated about baptism?
S.McC. Just so, apparently he was tarrying; so that we get the facility in operation to help him in that regard. You see, when we return to our local positions, there are facilities that are not found perhaps in the same way in going around. In the local positions there are all the facilities to help us in whatever way we need help, and we all need help. It is good to see the value of the local position in that sense, because the man that the Lord sovereignly selects to open up the wealth of the assembly in relation to heavenly thoughts is the man that values the local position.
J.P.H. It says about Paul and his company at the end of @Acts 14 that they returned to Antioch and they stayed no little time with the disciples there, from whence they had gone out.
S.McC. That is they had a base to which they returned.
R.W.S. Those facilities that you spoke of involve a house as well as what is local. Is not that important? It says in verse 11, "And the Lord said to him, Rise up and go into the street which is called Straight, and seek in the house of Judas one by name Saul, he is of Tarsus." I was thinking of the house and the matter of entertaining as well as what is local.
S.McC. I am sure it is important to see how our houses and local positions come into matters, and how they may become part of the spiritual facilities which serve the work of God in liberating what there may be linked with it. What a value it puts on our houses! But it raises the question as to what goes on in our houses, and whether they are available in
{10}
the way of a facility to serve what comes into our midst.
P.L. Apollos was thus served by Aquila and Priscilla.
S.McC. Exactly, they "took him to them," @Acts 18: 26. I suppose they would have had him home. Not that we want to conjecture, or put into Scripture what is not there, but I suppose the force of it is there. They did not do it publicly, they took him to them.
E.A.K. Are these facilities you speak of seen in Corinth? On the one hand there is the subjective representation of it in the household of Chloe, and then we have Paul's estimate of the local assembly in the expressions "the assembly of God which is at Corinth," and "a chaste virgin espoused to Christ," despite the conditions?
S.McC. It shows what God can do and how things can be preserved despite current influences that may be abroad, wherever we are. It is very striking (it is a most interesting study in itself) to see how Paul was served in relation to households, and it is *he*, and *he* specially, in the assembly epistles who brings up the thought of the households and gives instructions in regard to them.
R.H. It is like Rahab's house, and the way she received the spies in peace, and sent them out another way.
S.McC. You can see how she was ready for that, and how she served them.
A.J.G. You would say that the houses and the local assemblies must be held and regulated by the light of what is heavenly.
S.McC. That is why I referred to Paul's allusions, specially in Ephesians and Colossians, to the matter of households and relations in households. It does not come out in Romans or Corinthians; it comes
{11}
out in these letters where the heavenly side is particularly in mind.
A.J.G. Might I ask further whether, in stressing the distinctiveness of what is heavenly, we need to bear in mind that what is heavenly takes character from the second Man out of heaven? I wonder whether we sufficiently realise the magnitude of the fact that One of the Godhead has entered into manhood to give character to all that God is bringing to pass in men. What would you say?
S.McC. It is a very striking thing. I have pondered that verse in @1 Corinthians 15 overnight, yesterday and the days before. It is a remarkable verse, "Such as he made of dust, such also those made of dust; and such as the heavenly one, such also the heavenly ones," verse 48. And in John's gospel, John the baptist alludes to Him, "He who comes from above, is above all," @John 3: 31. I think what you say is very affecting, that One of the Godhead has come into a position where He becomes the great pattern and model to which we are all to be conformed in a heavenly way.
P.L. And the power to do it, comes out of heaven in another Person of the Godhead.
S.McC. It is very affecting that another divine Person, sent from heaven, is here to bring us into conformity to what is heavenly and to maintain us in regard to what is heavenly.
P.H.H. Is it very touching that the man who specially had this heavenly ministry was down here at the beginning of his service subject to the assembly? Would you say that, practically speaking, it does become an important point. We may speak of the assembly and what is heavenly, but as to personally being subject, and that immediately to the assembly, is not that a practical power in the ministry?
S.McC. I think we are all searched by it. Some of us come from other parts and are away for two or
{12}
three weeks; well, it is a great thing to get back to your own locality, at least I feel it is so. I am thankful to God for my own locality and for the spiritual facilities there to help me in it. I think we need to see the value of the local assembly, that we all have as a base, and to have the right respect for it and the right regard for it.
J.M. Would you say that in our localities in view of making way for the heavenly side, we need to be prepared to change our ideas about persons? There was what Ananias had heard concerning Saul, but now he is to think of him as an elect vessel to Christ.
S.McC. It is important to see that. We should always be prepared for what heaven is doing in that way. It is very touching the way that the Lord has personal relations, not only with Saul, we have been speaking about Saul, but with Ananias. He seems to know Ananias well, and Ananias seems to know Him well. There is thus a certain ease in the relations between the Lord and Ananias that is very affecting in this section, in serving Saul of Tarsus.
S.W.P. If we undervalue the local position shall we fail to get the gain of what the Spirit is doing at the moment? In @1 Samuel 10 Saul was affected for the moment, but it did not last.
S.McC. I am sure that many of us here have seen in the little history as to time that we have had (some have had a long history and could speak of it better) persons that thought that they were greater than the local assembly and they came to disaster. We will always come to disaster if we do not have right regard and respect for our local brethren.
J.S.E. Is it not remarkable that when Uriah was called to see David, his first observation in reply stood related to the ark, and his last observation to the official man who was leading? I thought it was a kind of implementing of what you have just said.
{13}
Joab was a man who was extremely official, but when Urijah gave his reply to David his first mention was the ark, and then he puts Israel and Judah in between the ark and Joab. I wondered if there is not something in that former statement to illustrate negatively what you are at.
S.McC. I think there is, I think (I speak for myself) that those of us who travel a little bit, and serve in a little way, if we are not on our guard we may tend to become official. Therefore the importance of the local company and the local setting, where we work out things in a practical way, and come back to what is ordinary, we might say.
A.B.P. So that would you say it is not without design that Paul refers to the basket in the end of chapter 11 before he proceeds with chapter 12? Is not the basket an important facility in the local setting?
S.McC. It is, so that we have many facilities in that way in the local setting to serve us in whatever way we need to be served.
A.E.M. Is it of importance that the servant should have the confidence of the local brethren?
S.McC. It is a great matter. It means everything to those that serve, specially if they move out in any way. And it is important, on the other hand, that the local brethren should recognise what is in their midst, and get the gain of it. Sometimes it takes years, but as we are with the Lord there will be no irksomeness or chafing under it. We can wait His time, but the Lord would teach us the value of the local setting here as it appears in relation to Saul at the outset of his links with the Lord.
A.Hn. Would you say something more as to spiritual manifestations in the locality. You referred to it earlier.
S.McC. I was thinking of how the Lord appears to Saul of Tarsus. There was, of course, what was
{14}
distinctive to him, for the matter of his apostleship was bound up with it. But then he refers to it in @Acts 26: 16, "For this purpose have I appeared to thee ... and of what I shall appear to thee in," meaning that the appearing was not just an historical matter that subsided or was discontinued, but it was to characterise the whole of his service.
V.C.L. Do you think that there is an important matter in the three days in Saul's history, involving some apprehension of the truth of resurrection before he experiences and values the help available locally?
S.McC. I would think that something was wrought with him in those days of helplessness and feebleness and weakness that would greatly serve him in meeting the facilities that were operating in relation to him.
V.C.L. I wondered if @1 Corinthians 15, the great chapter unfolding the truth of the resurrection, did not find some sway over his soul in this experience so that his links with the Lord were coloured by it?
S.McC. No doubt they were.
T.J.G. The first thing that the Lord said about Saul was "behold, he is praying."
S.McC. Well, what a tribute that is to him! It is a great thing in regard to ourselves that we should be marked by praying. That is, "he *is* praying," not 'he *has* prayed,' but "he is praying," as if it is a characteristic feature with him. I am sure that we need to be marked by being praying persons, even if we have to pray all night. It is a great thing to be marked by praying.
T.J.G. So that it is very significant that the greatest and richest unfolding of the truth comes in the two prayers of the Ephesian epistle.
S.McC. Yes, he alludes to prayer and the power of it there, both on the objective side and the subjective side.
{15}
G.R.C. Could we have more help as to the Lord's appearance to Ananias, and how he bears on the local administration? He is just called a certain disciple, but would he be morally an elder, and would it indicate how the Lord would help in eldership in a locality?
S.McC. I would think so. The Lord knows the personnel, and there are those He has confidence in and He can call upon. Ananias apparently was available in regard to this service, and that is a great thing in localities, do not you think?
G.R.C. I was wondering whether we should look out for that more, especially when we have cases of interested souls where there may appear to be some complications.
S.McC. I am sure we should. We should be on the alert and available at any moment for what the Lord may indicate in anything that may be required as to what comes amongst us.
A.P.C.L. And would the salutary side be seen in the fact that He says to Ananias, "*Go*"? As regards Saul himself it is "what thou *must* do." But is there not the side of strict obedience to what the Lord has in view in the locality, and is that in extension the school of Tyrannus in Ephesus?
S.McC. Just so; the Lord enters into conversation with him. It is very affecting how Ananias says in verse 11, "Behold, here am I, Lord," and the Lord tells him to rise up and go into the street which is called Straight. Then Ananias converses with the Lord over this matter of Saul and what he has done, and then the Lord brings in the peremptory word, "*Go*, for this man is an elect vessel to me." I suppose we must have a sense of the Lord's authority in these matters. The reference to "the elect vessel" is, of course, a special touch as to Paul's distinctiveness, and specially bears on the great feature of the heavenly side that is to be opened up and the truth of the
{16}
assembly. When we come to @2 Corinthians 12 we get this unique distinctiveness seen in his reference to "a man in Christ ... caught up into Paradise," and the things that he heard and then the coming back. I think we are to see in that way in regard to the heavenly side of the truth that there is what is distinctive lying behind it.
J.B.S. Would you say why the matter of visions and revelations is connected with the Lord in the first verse of @2 Corinthians 12?
S.McC. I think he is referring to the whole domain as under the Lord's control and authority, the whole realm of what is unseen. The unseen world is all under the Lord's control in that sense and the visions and the revelations are bearing on the unseen world, the realm of what is spiritual and heavenly.
P.H.H. Does this chapter 12 appear to you to be a somewhat early experience? As he writes here he speaks of having had the experience apparently fourteen years before, which would make it comparatively early. Does it enter into your thoughts about Paul and what is heavenly and distinctive?
S.McC. It does, because the whole range of what is in Christ as suggested here, while it includes more than what is heavenly, involves what is heavenly as far as Paul is concerned. The realm of new creation, as we have part in it, would be in mind, but it is interesting that while he is speaking about an experience that occurred fourteen years ago, he says "I *know*." He does not say 'I *knew* a man in Christ,' he says, "I *know*." He was taking account of the thing abstractly, and yet we have the great reference to "I know a man in Christ, fourteen years ago."
P.H.H. Do you think that the footnote about conscious knowledge would mean that he had not only known it as an experience, but it governed him consciously in his knowledge from that time onwards? So that the heavenly side really kept him at the
{17}
level in his own mind, of the truth, and especially what the Lord had given him to minister.
S.McC. I am sure it does, I think this underlies the epistle to the Ephesians and the richness and the fulness that enter into it. We are not dealing here exactly with the family, it is God and Paradise and "in Christ," a vast realm of things so excellent, so great, that Paul is referring to, and he is caught up into that environment, but I am sure it underlies the richness and fulness that we have in the great heavenly epistle, Ephesians.
A.J.G. Had you any thought as to why he speaks of what he *heard*? He says nothing about seeing anything, but he speaks all the time of what he heard. On the other hand, in Revelation. John was constantly *seeing* fresh things, was he not?
S.McC. It is a very interesting thing that in regard to the thought of Paradise and what corresponds with it. John saw it, but Paul's emphasis is on hearing. I think we need to see that side in relation to Paul's experience, the importance of having ears attuned to what is spiritual and what is heavenly in this setting.
A.B.P. In relation to his distinctive ministry in the gospel at Corinth, and also the Supper, he speaks of having *received*. Would that be the spiritual result of right hearing? It is not simply that the Lord told him, but he *received* from the Lord.
S.McC. It would bring out in this vessel, in Paul, how his senses were acute, that there was nothing dull with him. His senses were acute, especially this matter of hearing, which I think is important in regard to this realm and environment. In these meetings we are so prone to think of what we will *say*, and the part that we will take, but there must be alongside of it this great element of hearing, and what precedes these matters, there must be this thought of hearing.
{18}
P.H.H. How far exactly does the expression go, "which it is not allowed to man to utter"? I am not ignoring the note down below, but would you mind giving us your impression of that?
S.McC. I think the note helps as to the things said. You will notice that the word 'said' involves '*rhema*,' not '*logos*.' That is, it is fresh living communications, as the note says, 'The things said which he "heard" were not suited to this lower world and our mortal condition; that is, not merely like heathen mysteries, dreadful forms of speech.' The things were suited to the heavenly scene and the heavenly environment, but not suited to the mortal condition here below. So that I think it lays open to us what may be anticipated, what is in prospect, what is possible for us on this line of elevation.
L.E.S. The footnote refers to @John 17: 8 and that greatly helps us, "for the words which thou hast given me I have given them, and they have received them, and have known truly that I came out from thee, and have believed that thou sentest me."
S.McC. Yes. What communications they were, fresh living communications these words contained!
A.N.W. While they were unspeakable things, did they not affect every saying and everything he did utter himself?
S.McC. Yes, they were all there in the treasury we might say. What a treasury Paul was! What distinctiveness there was, what resources he could draw upon, in that sense. All these impressions would be in the treasury, and the assembly would get the gain of what was resident in Paul's treasury.
R.G.B. In the mount of Transfiguration, whilst what was to be seen is referred to, the Father's voice says, "This is my beloved Son; *hear* him." He lays stress on the hearing.
S.McC. Yes, that is very interesting. How much the hearing is referred to as we come into the heavenly
{19}
environment and the environment of the glory. Well, this experience of Paul, while special and unique to him, should challenge us as to what we know of this kind of thing, whether, especially with those that serve, there is a secret and private side undisclosed that enters into and lies behind their ministry.
M.H.T. Does the fact that Paul uses the present tense, and says, "I know a man in Christ" show that the Lord's preventative discipline had preserved him with the impression fresh and living?
S.McC. Yes, it shows that the thing had been preserved with him unimpaired. That is, it was just as conscious to him then as it was when the experience took place, "I *know* a man in Christ." It is remarkable how he regards himself in that way. We have to be sober about these matters and we have to take a view objectively of ourselves and see that the flesh is the flesh, whether taken up as far as the third heaven, as Paul was, or whether coming down again, the flesh is the flesh wherever it is. It is unchanged and incorrigible; therefore the necessity of discipline to keep us all regulated.
P.H.H. Does that mean that the "man in Christ" suggests something which is true of each one of us in a certain sense, which is greater than all service? We are to keep close to that knowledge and it would prevent us from living in or pursuing after service, as such, would it not?
S.McC. I am sure it would. Because the "man in Christ" is not a question of his gift, it is not a question of his apostolic authority; it is a question of the formation that was there and Paul's conscious knowledge of it. We should all in that way have some conscious knowledge as to what we have arrived at in our souls.
P.H.H. I was just thinking that, and the heavenly status involved in the person, "a man in Christ."
S.McC. That is the point. We will see it as we
{20}
pursue these readings, the final side involving the richness and the fulness of this status as Ephesians opens it out.
A.P.C.L. In connection with "the man in Christ" could you distinguish between "of such a one" and "but of myself"? How do you think he does not attach that exactly to himself?
S.McC. I think he is thinking of his natural make up, and his condition as still in the mortal body. We cannot glory in ourselves on that line, but we can glory in the "man in Christ," because that involves the work of God. That involves a new state in which the flesh has no place at all. But in the mortal condition here, the flesh is still present and any glorying in that would lead to disaster.
A.P.C.L. But you would not in any sense divorce the one from the other in what you are saying, it is a question of the one coming into line with the other, is it?
S.McC. Just so. As I was saying earlier, "I know a man in Christ" is really an abstract view that he takes of himself.
J.H.S. Does star differing from star in glory involve the substantial idea of heavenly personality there?
S.McC. I think it does. Therefore we should be concerned, in that way, as to what we can say of this kind of thing, and the elevation, the refinement and the richness that are linked with it.
J.S.E. Would it be right to ask if Paul's enigmatical mode of approach to this in this chapter is on account of the state of the persons he is writing to? When we come to what you speak of as the more refined features of his ministry, there is sympathetic feelings towards him in the recognition of his distinctiveness, so that there is a fulness in the presentation of matters?
S.McC. Yes. You can see that he could not open
{21}
out much on the line of this elevation to the Corinthians. He had to say to them, in the first letter, "I, brethren, have not been able to speak to you as to spiritual, but as to fleshly; as to babes in Christ," @1 Corinthians 3: 1. But there was a different state in Ephesians. Then we have here the limitations that even in a great servant like Paul, the Lord does *not* remove. Therefore we have to understand with the Lord what our limitations are and it raises the question as to whether we accept them and find the grace that Christ would give to accept them.
A.Hn. In that connection, would you say something about verse 10, a most testing verse, "Wherefore I take pleasure in weaknesses, in insults, in necessities, in persecutions, in straits, for Christ: for when I am weak, then I am powerful"? I wondered whether this great buoyancy of knowing something of "a man in Christ" would enable us, in some measure, to speak like that.
S.McC. It would. It shows what a fully delivered man Paul was, how he had a full consciousness of deliverance. The flesh thus added nothing to him, he took pleasure in weaknesses, in insults, in necessities, in persecutions, and in straits for Christ, and he says, "for when I am weak, then I am powerful." I think we want to see the importance of our limitations and our discipline; it is so essential to keep us lowly and humble, and each knows his discipline, each knows his limitations and what the Lord has designed to keep him in safety.
{22}
DISTINCTIVENESS AND FINALITY IN PAUL'S MINISTRY (2)
@Romans 1: 1 -- 9, 16 -- 18; @1 Corinthians 11: 23 -- 32; @2 Corinthians 6: 14 -- 18
S.McC. It is thought well to look at these passages in the foundational epistles in relation to Paul's ministry, as the heavenly thread enters into them, involving what is distinctive and what is refined and moving on to what is final. The Lord is emphasising that the heavenly light that has been so graciously shed upon us involves that things should be refined with us, and things should be distinctive with us, as separated through the heavenly call. It is a great thing that we should keep before us the refinement and quality that seems to enter into Paul's ministry in the opening up of the heavenly side of the truth. While Romans does not deal exactly with the heavenly side of the truth, we shall see in it the distinctiveness in the gospel that Paul was separated to. We shall not be able to deal with all the details, but there are three thoughts in @Romans 1: first, we should keep before us, "God's glad tidings," in verse 1, and then what Paul says of himself in verse 9, "whom I serve in my spirit in the glad tidings of his Son," and then the distinctive touch in verse 18, "For there is revealed wrath of God from heaven upon all impiety, and unrighteousness of men holding the truth in unrighteousness." In 1 Corinthians it is in mind to see the distinctive character of the Lord's supper, the truth of which Paul received from heaven, from the Lord in glory, and how the discipline of the Lord runs along with it. Finally, in @2 Corinthians 6, we have the Abrahamic side, for in Abraham of old we have the opening up of the heavenly side in the Old Testament in the type. The passage we read in
{23}
@2 Corinthians 6 is on the Abrahamic line, calling us out from the things that are inconsistent with our calling, and then we have the promises of God alongside of that. There is the thought of the divine dwelling and God's promise to be a father -- all that might serve as a good basis in view of enlargement in regard to what may yet come before us. But this matter of the maintenance of things in their proper dignity and proper quality is very important. It might not be out of place just in passing to allude -- not to dwell on it -- to the redundancy and copiousness of mimeographed notes amongst us. We were speaking a good deal about the ministry this morning, and the ministers, and the importance of distinctiveness being maintained; whereas the production and quantity of notes often leads to detraction from quality and I think there ought to be concern about it. The Depots that have been designed for the distribution of ministry have a good deal on hand, so that the stacks of mimeographed notes that are extant would tend to detract from the distinctiveness and quality that the Lord would keep before the saints. It is not that we are saying anything about the ministry that may come in the gatherings of the saints, but I think there needs to be a certain consideration as to it.
P.L. This heavenly selective feature that we had this morning entering into it?
S.McC. I thought that. The distinctive line that appears as the truth of the assembly opens up in Paul's ministry involves selection and refinement. The wrath of God revealed from heaven is a very searching matter and would tend to keep us humble, and the discipline of the Lord running alongside of the truth of the Supper in this setting in @1 Corinthians 11 would also be searching and tend to keep us humble.
E.C.M. Would you say a word as to the distinctiveness
{24}
of Paul's preaching that you referred to this morning, he preached that Jesus is the Son of God?
S.McC. I think it is the introduction of the heavenly thread, the heavenly line. It is not opened out there, it is just referred to, but there is a heavenly touch in that, for the Son of God cannot be linked with the course of things here in this world. He is linked with another world, and the light of another world is dawning in, as J.N.D. alludes to it in @Acts 9, the dawning of another scene coming on to view as Stephen's exit is drawn attention to.
A.B.P. Would there be responsibility with those who serve as to the extent of distribution? Notes are usually revised before they are circulated, are they not?
S.McC. I am sure there is that feature entering into it, because, of course, notes are handed to myself and I must say that out of sheer consideration for the labours, the unselfish labours of the beloved sisters that have entered into them, I have revised them. But I feel in regard to a good deal of notes, as to myself (I can speak for myself in that way) that there is too much in circulation, detracting from what we need to get at so much. What would you say yourself?
A.B.P. I fully go with what you are saying. It is interesting that the letter from Paul to the saints in Corinth represents ministry which was given in a locality, and yet was serviceable universally, and dispensationally. Should there be a concern as to the character of what is revised for publication?
S.McC. I think there should be. There is ministry that may be given in a certain place, and the Lord may distinctly help in it, in relation to current exercises in that place. But if it is put into production, and copies are multiplied and extended all over the world, it may become attenuated; and you do
{25}
not have the same power in it as when it was given in the place.
A.J.G. There is another matter that is causing some concern in certain quarters, and that is recording machines. Meetings are recorded, and then these are taken round to houses, and the thing is turned on, and the saints in houses are regaled with these recordings of meetings. Is there not a double objection to that, one that you have not got the atmosphere of the assembly there, and the other that the recordings are played back without giving the brother responsible an opportunity to revise them?
S.McC. I think that is a timely word. It is like many other things that have been brought into right use, but have become subject to abuse amongst the saints. We in Detroit, in the last two years, if I remember rightly, made the announcement at the special meetings, that it was desired that no recorders be used except the recorder necessary for the transcription of the notes. I do not think that these recorders should be employed by the brethren as a means of entertainment, which alas, sometimes they degenerate into. All this bears on the maintenance of the heavenly side, for the Lord is insisting on the maintenance of heavenly dignity in keeping with the assembly's greatness as a heavenly vessel, that has just come down here for the moment in relation to the testimony and is soon to go back again.
G.R.C. Do you think that the local company where the ministry is given should soberly weigh over the matter, the assembly being the pillar and base of the truth? I was thinking of what was said, that the letters to Corinth were preserved and circulated, and letters to Philippi, and so on.
S.McC. I think what you say is right. In what is said therefore we are not seeking to discount ministry in any sense, but there is the need of balance. Everywhere a servant goes, notes are taken and there
{26}
is well-meaning in it, but the servant himself knows that he is not *always* helped in a distinctive way and sometimes he may feel that he is not helped of the Lord. Therefore the importance of discerning what is "more excellent," and what is of benefit to the saints, would you say?
G.R.C. Yes, and I was wondering in that connection whether it should be an exercise to the local company who have arranged the meeting not to want the notes published just because they were given in that locality, but to have a priestly assessment as to whether they ought to go beyond that locality or not, so that they are able to help the servant if necessary in the matter.
S.McC. I am sure what you say is important in that regard, and also that there should be a sympathetic feeling towards the beloved trustees in the Depot, who so unselfishly give their time and their labours and their energy, without any recompense from one point of view, in regard to them. Our sympathies would be with them, and we should also have confidence in them as to the distribution of ministry.
G.R.C. I was thinking of what you were saying this morning as to the importance of the local company relative to the minister, in connection with Paul himself, and whether that should not work out, if we were up to it as local companies, in this matter.
S.McC. I am sure it would; and of course we would keep in mind that the assembly does not regulate the ministry. We must keep that clear and I am sure you have it clear in your mind and I would like to keep it clear in my mind. The assembly can in no way regulate ministry in that sense, because ministry stands related to Christ and His headship and authority in the place of exaltation.
G.R.C. Quite so, so that it needs balancing; it is just a question of a priestly assessment.
{27}
S.McC. That is it. So that as we have been saying, with recorders and other things, we want to see that they do not get out of control and quality thereby be reduced. We know that in countries in the world an increase in production often leads to decrease in quality.
S.W.P. Is there any point in the fact that the Spirit of God has not seen fit to preserve the letter to Laodicea?
S.McC. Yes, it seems rather interesting that we do not have it and yet it is referred to. The reference to it by Paul would show us that it was extant, so that we are reminded that while everything may not come into the record, there is what is extant, and it is a good thing to keep that in mind.
C.R.W. Is there anything in the fact that Solomon wrote a thousand and five songs, but only one has been recorded and come down to us?
S.McC. It is rather remarkable. There must have been quite a selection in that matter. I suppose it will be testing to any one of us, but the great thing is as to whether we are prepared to accept this great matter of refinement that the heavenly line involves.
A.N.W. Is there anything in the fact that there is not a word recorded of Timothy either having said anything, or written anything?
S.McC. Barring, I suppose, what Paul says in @2 Corinthians 1: 19, "For the Son of God, Jesus Christ, he who has been preached by us among you (by me and Silvanus and Timotheus)." We know that he preached the Son of God but, as you say, we have no extensive record of what he said, nor have we any epistle written by him.
A.Hse. Is the reference in @John 21 important, that the Spirit exercises what is selective as to what is recorded of the words of the Lord Jesus, and His pathway here?
S.McC. Yes, it is an interesting reference there to
{28}
the whole world not being able to contain the books that could be written, but divine selection was employed, and therefore we have what is advantageous, and what is needed by us.
A.B.P. Would Mark and Luke suggest that there is what is augmentary and supportive in the service of those who were not apostles at the time, the apostles themselves perhaps suggesting a distinctive line of the ministry?
S.McC. I think that is an interesting reference, especially as we consider the remarkable gospels that each of them wrote, and how they found their way into, and their place in, the canon of the Scriptures. It is interesting to see how God thus honours persons serving in an augmentary way.
M.H.T. Would the contrast in the last chapter of Ecclesiastes between "the words of the wise," that are likened to goads, and the "many books," the making of which there is no end, be in line with what you are saying?
S.McC. Yes, I should think it would. The reference to discernment among the saints as to what is ministered would bear on that, because the priesthood in Numbers involves what we are saying. There is discernment as to what is ministered, and selection would be according to that, I mean the discernment as to what is right and approved of God.
A.P.C.L. In connection with what you have said as to the labours of persons in notes being presented, do you think that this discernment you are speaking of might be exercised before that took place?
S.McC. I should think so, because it is a tremendous and prodigious labour, and you feel for the sisters involved, and sometimes brothers expect them to do it. There is a tremendous amount of time and labour put in and you wonder whether it is warranted.
A.P.C.L. I feel very sympathetic with what you say, because the matter is really out of hand. I was
{29}
just wondering whether in the case of three-day meetings, and meetings of that character, a revised summary might not keep the brethren in line with what is proceeding without such labour, unless it was so decided that there was the substance in it.
S.McC. I think you are right in that. A summary could often take the place of full notes, for the general information of the brethren around who were not able to get to the meetings, as to what was before the saints. If it was discerned that there was something of general help, then it could come into the other category.
E.E.P. Paul says to Timothy "especially the parchments." Would that support what you say?
S.McC. Paul apparently attached some importance to what was current in that way. Now I think we should get to these thoughts in Romans as to the distinctiveness of the glad tidings, as Paul refers to them as "God's glad tidings," and how he served God in his spirit in the glad tidings of His Son. This is the positive side as entering into the glad tidings, and then the wrath of God from heaven bears on the negative side. This is a unique expression in verse 18; it is altogether new. There was wrath in the Old Testament, the wrath of God operating through the Assyrian, there was a scourge in Israel, making inroads into the land, and the wrath of God came on Israel in delivering them into captivity in Babylon; but that is not this. This is something different and distinctive. It is something new, something that has come in in connection with the revelation of God.
A.Hn. Do you think that Paul here, in speaking of God's glad tidings, has the whole range of his ministry in mind?
S.McC. I think it includes it, although in Romans he would particularly have in mind what is before him. But, whether it was the glad tidings of the grace of God, or the glad tidings of the glory, I am sure that Paul would have the full thought in mind,
{30}
in the way he speaks of being separated to God's glad tidings -- a remarkable expression.
A.J.G. Have you in mind that there is something distinctive about this wrath of God revealed from heaven, because the whole truth has come out, and therefore the wrath of God against those who hold the truth in unrighteousness is all the greater?
S.McC. I have. I think it is very sobering, and very solemn for us to consider this in its bearing upon what may be existent, especially in connection with the higher level from which things are now viewed, the cross having come in, and God having penally rejected evil in a total way, as He had never done before. His nature has been revealed, and this enters into this passage: "there is revealed wrath of God from heaven upon all impiety, and unrighteousness of men holding the truth in unrighteousness."
P.H.H. Would that be all the more so on account of the title used, in the beginning, "God's glad tidings, ... concerning his Son," and then in verse 9, Paul says, "God ... whom I serve in my spirit in the glad tidings of his Son"? Does the use of the term "Son" there make it something which is very dear and close to the heart of God, so that the rejection of these glad tidings, or the truth, in unrighteousness must be dealt with in a more drastic way.
S.McC. That is it. Our responsibility therefore -- not only that of men in an unregenerate way -- is much greater in the present dispensation than it has ever been before, on account of the revealed wrath of God from heaven upon all impiety.
J.S.E. Are not we more tested by it as the days close in?
S.McC. I think we are. This matter of holding the truth in unrighteousness, we can see how heaven is insisting that the truth cannot be held that way. Indeed, the wrath of God is expressed against that kind of thing, and it is all around us in Christendom.
{31}
L.E.S. Would Paul have it in mind in @2 Corinthians 4, where he says "nor falsifying the word of God, but by manifestation of the truth commending ourselves to every conscience of men before God. But if also our gospel is veiled, it is veiled in those that are lost; in whom the god of this world has blinded the thoughts of the unbelieving, so that the radiancy of the glad tidings of the glory of the Christ, who is the image of God, should not shine forth for them," verses 2 -- 4. Would there be a link with that?
S.McC. There is. It shows the seriousness, as this chapter shows, of the rejection of light, and how things become solemn when light is rejected. As we follow down this chapter we can see what necessitates the revelation of the righteousness of God, and the revelation of the wrath of God. The revelation of the righteousness of God is a new thing too, as well as the revelation of the wrath of God.
T.J.G. Could you open out a little the last clause of verse 18, "and unrighteousness of men holding the truth in unrighteousness." It does not simply say men holding the truth in unrighteousness, but "unrighteousness of men holding the truth in unrighteousness."
S.McC. It is unrighteous for any of us to profess to hold the truth and to go on with what is unrighteous and to be found in what is unrighteous. That is what is in mind, "the unrighteousness of men holding the truth in unrighteousness." If I hold to the truth of the heavenly calling, and I am found in circumstances that are not in accord with it, that are unrighteous, I am holding the truth in unrighteousness.
J.S.E. Is there any help for us in that this epistle and the epistle to the Ephesians preserve the distinctiveness of Paul by himself in the ministry, and in this one that we are reading now, he presents things, we might say, from an inclusive viewpoint. But as
{32}
he proceeds into the corrective epistles, does he not break the matter up, and bring certain features of the truth to bear upon the saints according to their state?
S.McC. It is very interesting to see that in Paul's style of writing and ministering. For instance, in the Colossian epistle, you will remember how he speaks about presenting every man perfect in Christ. You can see the broad outlook that he has, but then he wants to focus our attention on the assembly, the body. But this matter of God's Son, and the high level of the glad tidings in this sense, God's affections and God's nature entering into it, is very important in the way we preach or in the way we serve.
C.H. Would that be indicated in what he says at the end of this letter, that his preaching of Jesus Christ was "according to the revelation of the mystery" -- *according to it*? It may not have been the whole subject of the revelation, but it was part of it.
S.McC. Very good. It would show how he was always governed by that light, wherever he was.
C.H. And the effect of that seemed to have promoted the spirit of worship in his soul, according to the end of that letter.
S.McC. Just so.
P.H.H. Referring to this matter of the Son again, later on, for instance, in chapter 3, Paul talks about "righteousness of God by faith of Jesus Christ" (verse 22), and then in verse 24, "the redemption which is in Christ Jesus." Later on still he says (verse 26), "justify him that is of the faith of Jesus." Would it be right to say that "God's glad tidings ... concerning his Son" is the way God views that Person, how He stands with Him, whereas, when it is a case of the truth being applied to ourselves, other titles are more suitable, like Jesus, or Jesus Christ, or Christ Jesus?
S.McC. Exactly. That is, when certain things are
{33}
to be done in our souls, it may be "the glad tidings of the Christ" or the like. That would involve meeting a practical need in our soul, but the glad tidings of God's Son seems to have a detaching effect, introducing us, in our thoughts, into God's world and the Centre of His affections.
G.R.C. Does that show the importance of verse 9? It was from the standpoint of the glad tidings of God's Son that Paul served, he had an appreciation of God's side of the matter.
S.McC. Just so. What refinement would enter into his service in that sense, "God is my witness, whom I serve" -- not by my hands, not in the many labours -- but "whom I serve in my *spirit* in the glad tidings of his Son," showing how Paul was internally affected by the matter.
G.R.C. So that a priest was preaching, the word 'serve' being priestly service.
S.McC. He was marked by what was priestly in the service of the glad tidings, he would always think of, and think for, God.
J.M. Do his later references to God's Son in this epistle, for instance in chapter 5, "reconciled to God through the death of his Son" (verse 10); chapter 8: 3, "God having sent his own Son, in likeness of flesh of sin, and for sin, has condemned sin in the flesh," and then in verse 29, our being "conformed to the image of his Son," open up something as to this blessed thought in relation to God?
S.McC. They do. It is the background for verse 18 of chapter 1, "For there is revealed wrath of God from heaven upon all impiety." In the Old Testament we have God governmentally operating; for instance, in relation to Abimelech, and we have God governmentally operating in relation to David, and governmentally operating in relation to Israel; but that is not this; this is not the government of God on that line. This expression "For there is revealed
{34}
wrath of God from heaven upon all impiety" is the full declaration in the cross of God's total penal rejection of evil, in the light of the expression of His own nature there.
A.N.W. He does not say exactly that the wrath of God is revealed in the glad tidings, does he? The righteousness of God is revealed.
S.McC. It is important to see the distinction, because it is not revealed in the glad tidings. The statement "For there is revealed wrath of God" is just the broad statement saying that it is revealed. It is not executed, it does not come into operation in our dispensation; that is not the point. It is just the fact that it is fully expressed in the cross of Christ, when God rejected evil, rejected sin, in such a complete way.
A.B. In regard of Paul serving God in his spirit in the glad tidings of His Son, would it ensure that there was a portion for God, irrespective of public results?
S.McC. I think so. That is, he would have in mind what was for the heart of God in serving in the glad tidings, in that way, in his spirit.
A.W. Why is heaven mentioned in verse 18? I believe it is the only time in the epistle to the Romans when heaven is mentioned.
S.McC. It is the first time, for there are two references to heaven. We have one in this first chapter (verse 18), and then in chapter 10, you remember that reference, "Who shall ascend to the heavens? that is, to bring Christ down," verse 6. These are the only two references to heaven in Romans. It is very striking, what you refer to, because the point is, it is not What is revealed on earth, as we have been saying in Israel, in connection with the throne of God in Israel there was wrath operating in that relation, but this is something new. God's Son having come into the world and having gone to the cross, evil being judicially dealt with there, wrath is revealed
{35}
from heaven upon all impiety. It is from heaven, not from the earth.
J.VanS. If wrath is not revealed, what is your thought about @Acts 5?
S.McC. You are alluding to the assembly discipline there.
J.VanS. Two died without human hands whatever.
S.McC. Well, the government of God always operates, it has not ceased. The government of God operates from beginning to end, and it will operate in the millennial world if necessary, in relation to certain matters that arise. In what we are saying we do not mean that it ceases to operate, but that is not quite the thought here; "there is revealed wrath of God from heaven" is not executed wrath in this dispensation. It has been expressed and therefore our conduct, our lives, have to be taken account of in that light.
G.R.C. What you say as to it not being executed seems to make the matter very clear. It is revealed, but not executed, but because Christ has borne it, the world provisionally is in reconciliation.
S.McC. That is it, so that in the glad tidings the righteousness of God is revealed.
W.H. Would that be seen also in the end of 1 Corinthians, where the apostle refers to one being accursed at His coming, the present time is a period of grace?
S.McC. That is a striking passage, as if the subject of loving our Lord Jesus Christ is so wondrous in his soul, that he cannot bear to think of persons that do not love Him; but he anticipates it, he extends it.
J.T.S. Did you have in mind that if God has expressed His displeasure in regard of any matter, we should be brought into accord with that?
S.McC. That is what I am thinking of. It connects with the high level and standard by which we are governed in our dispensation, in wrath being
{36}
revealed from heaven against all impiety, and unrighteousness of men holding the truth in unrighteousness. That is the high standard that we are governed by in our dispensation.
A.P.C.L. Is it remarkable that Enoch should prophesy as having this matter as a kind of present reality with himself?
S.McC. Yes, that is very interesting, especially as he thinks of the Lord coming amidst His holy myriads. Have you that in mind?
A.P.C.L. Yes, he says according to Jude, "the Lord *has* come amidst his holy myriads, to execute judgment against all," @Jude 14. While the execution is not yet, do you not think that those who are waiting the appearing have that as a living present matter in their souls?
S.McC. So that in matters that come up amongst us, we do not leave them till the judgment seat of Christ, or leave them till the final administration of things. If we are in the light of this wrath revealed from heaven against all impiety, we will quickly adjust ourselves and our circumstances in keeping with that.
L.E.S. So that, is that what we have in @Revelation 18: 20, "God has judged your judgment upon her"? Wrath having been revealed from heaven, there has been the execution of it in the Revelation, and we are to move and walk, and be governed by the light of that.
S.McC. Yes.
A.J.G. Is it striking that in @Revelation 15 it is one of the four living creatures that gives to the seven angels the seven golden bowls, full of the fury of God, as though when God pours out His fury on the earth, it is administered by a living creature giving the bowls of it to the angel who is to do it. Does that show how we, as living creatures, are to be brought into full accord with the wrath that has been revealed, and in that day will be executed?
S.McC. That helps greatly, and I am sure that in
{37}
the assembly now, we should think of that. It is as through the glad tidings of God's Son coming into what we have been brought into, especially in the light of the heavenly order of things that is in mind, we should be like the living creatures in that way, sympathetic with God as in His nature He has penally rejected evil in toto. He has not rejected it according to the law, but rejected it according to His nature, which has been fully expressed.
P.L. The searching character of the judgment seat of the Christ in @2 Corinthians 5 is followed by "knowing therefore the terror of the Lord we persuade men, but have been manifested to God."
S.McC. Very good. That would be a link with what we are saying. The wrath of God has been revealed from heaven against all impiety, so that if we are in circumstances of impiety, circumstances where God is not honoured as He should be honoured, and where the truth is not being held in righteousness, we should be concerned to get out of them, because the wrath of God is revealed against it.
W.R.M. In 2 Thessalonians the apostle refers to the tribulations and persecutions of the saints as a token of the righteous judgment of God. Is that important light in relation to the sufferings of the saints at the present time?
S.McC. Yes, it is.
P.H.H. This matter of judgment, not on the same level, is pursued in relation to the Supper. I do not want to take you beyond where you want to go, but in connection with the scripture in @1 Corinthians 11 I was looking at certain persons who are said to be 'guilty,' and then the invitation for a man to prove himself, and then the eater and drinker drinking judgment to himself, and then the governmental result, for instance, in verse 30, of doing wrong things in connection with the Supper. Would that fit in with, so to speak, "holding the truth in
{38}
unrighteousness," having the light of the Supper but personally not acting up to the light we have.
S.McC. I think it does. It is very striking that we should get all this through Paul. We do not get it through Peter, we do not get it through John, we do not get it in the synoptic gospels; it is left to the minister who gives us the Supper as he received it from heaven, from the Lord, from that viewpoint. Paul is elevating, as it were, the outlook in regard to it, that it cannot be taken without the becoming sobriety and solemnity that belong to it in that setting. Do you not think?
P.H.H. Yes. I wondered whether it was mingled with your thought at the beginning of the reading concerning judgment and discipline, discipline as working among the saints in view of purity and so on. For instance, in @1 Corinthians 11 again, "being judged, we are disciplined of the Lord, that we may not be condemned with the world." Is there some element in the assembly now which ought to cause us to discipline ourselves? It is not a question of an assembly meeting and an assembly judgment being pronounced, but the element of judgment, and self-judgment.
S.McC. Paul disciplined himself. He said, "I buffet my body, and lead it captive, lest after having preached to others I should be myself rejected," @1 Corinthians 9: 27. We can see how strong he was about his own personal matters, his affairs linked with his body, so that the truth should not be held in disrepute.
A.B.P. Is this passage in @1 Corinthians 11 the bush burning but not being consumed?
S.McC. I suppose there is a suggestion of that. They were a suffering people, and yet "the good-will of him that dwelt in the bush" is very remarkable. We have God in the midst of a suffering people in a disciplinary way, yet they are not consumed. It is, I suppose, all to emphasise the line of reduction in
{39}
relation to us naturally and refinement in relation to us spiritually, would you think?
A.B.P. So would it link with Paul's word in @Hebrews 12: 28 and 29, "by which let us serve God acceptably with reverence and fear. For also our God is a consuming fire."
S.McC. Just so. I think we should have regard for the way that Paul presents the Supper; he says "*I* received from the Lord, that which I also delivered to you, that the Lord Jesus, in the night in which he was delivered up, took bread." He has his own distinctive way of bringing in the truth of the Supper, and it is linked with the first day of the week, and all the heavenly side of things that belongs to that day, the resurrection and ascension. All that enters into it is linked with that day, and he brings in the Supper as having received the light of it from heaven.
J.S.E. Does he present the words of the Lord Jesus by themselves on the line of our privilege, but when he amplifies it, from verse 26, is he really bringing home to us our own responsibility for a suited condition by which we enter into the privilege of the Supper?
S.McC. I think so. I think that is what he has in mind.
A.E.M. I appreciate what you said, but I want to raise the matter of taking young people into fellowship without their having proper appreciation of their place. I think young people should be made to understand that to break bread is a solemn responsibility; if they go away from it, they will come under the discipline of the Lord.
S.McC. That is right, I think what you say is important in that relation, because the fellowship is entrusted; after a manner of speech, into their hands, and if they compromise it, they come under the hand of the Lord. This chapter is stressing the Lord in that way.
{40}
P.H.H. Does what has been said make verse 30 a very solemn matter? "On this account," that is, the eater and drinker bringing judgment on himself, "On this account many among you are weak and infirm, and a good many are fallen asleep."
S.McC. It shows the Lord is not relinquishing His hand. We think we are in the dispensation of grace, and may be some of us think we can go a long way, but we must remember that in the assembly the Lord does not relinquish His hand, He keeps His hand over matters.
G.R.C. Are we really unfair to young people if we do not put that side to them, as the Lord said "If any one desires to come after me, let him deny himself and take up his cross and follow me," @Matthew 16: 24?
S.McC. I think we are. We are not really impressing them with the sense of responsibility; we may impress them with the privilege, but we have to impress them with the sense of responsibility in linking on with the Lord's supper and the Lord's people.
A.E.M. The Lord gives us time to judge ourselves; if we fail to do it, He will judge us.
S.McC. That is very striking, so that it says in verse 28, "But let a man prove himself, and thus eat of the bread, and drink of the cup." What grace shines in the midst of it all, that the Lord gives us opportunity to prove ourselves.
R.W.S. This is not vicarious, this is what a person actually goes through because of what he does; but in certain illnesses, and we have many, both mental and emotional and organic, we cannot exclude, I suppose, the side of what is vicarious, can we?
S.McC. We cannot; that is, often the Lord may introduce discipline into our locality because of certain conditions there. He may affect the bodies of certain of the saints, because of certain conditions that are
{41}
there; and they may have to suffer on account of others in view of bringing out certain things.
A.C.S.P. May I ask again about the matter of young people being received; it is a question that is up all over the country. Did not J.T. constantly call attention to the references in Scripture to twelve years, both in connection with the Lord, and in connection with the little girl that He raised? Am I right in thinking that while the age is not literal, we would look for the features of a young person of that age before receiving them?
S.McC. Yes, I Should think so. The idea conveyed in the age of twelve is that of responsibility. We know that there are some young persons that attain years of responsibility much earlier than others, therefore what we look for is some feature of maturity in the young people, something that shows that they are beyond their age naturally in that sense. It may be in the possession of the Spirit, or in some apprehension of the truth of the Lord, their love for the Lord; we would look for some element of maturity in them.
J.F. Did Naomi stress the side of responsibility in the way that she dealt with Ruth?
S.McC. Yes, she did. That is, she gave Ruth a sense that it would not be an easy path, and the young people have to face that.
C.H. Might I refer back to what was said about vicarious suffering? Is it understood that the Lord may cause some to suffer who are not necessarily the wrong doers? In His discipline in relation to the local company He may touch those who in fact may be valuable brothers and sisters, to exercise the rest?
S.McC. Yes, in order to bring out certain things in regard to the local position. It may be something perhaps that attention needs to be drawn to, and in getting near to God about the matter, God brings
{42}
light to bear. It is like the three years of famine in the time of David. David could not figure out just what was the cause or what it was about, and he sought God, and God gave him light as to the matter, and David proceeded accordingly. It would be like that.
C.H. I was thinking that in recent times in this country, the Lord has taken some youngish men, who have been a remarkable help in their locality, and we should have said those who could ill be spared. Is it not really to raise an issue with those who are left?
S.McC. I am sure it would raise concern with those who are left as to where we are and how we stand in relation to the testimony and the Lord's interests.
C.H. So that as partaking of the Supper in this public sense, we are in the sphere of lordship, and have to do with Him -- all of us, in our relations together?
S.McC. That is it. The Supper deals with us as brothers and sisters; J.T. pointed out that in Corinthians we are not in heaven, we are not in Canaan, we are in the wilderness. We are men and women in flesh and blood conditions and therefore we are governed by time. That is, we cannot go on all day in the Lord's supper, we are governed by time, and by wilderness conditions. Therefore all these things have to have consideration in relation to the Lord's supper.
C.H. So that we are all intended to come to the Supper as exercised persons, that as far as we are aware there is nothing in our associations or our secret lives, that would hinder us from partaking of the emblems on the Lord's day?
S.McC. Just so.
J.B.P. Could something be said about "distinguishing the body"?
{43}
S.McC. That is a matter of the Lord's body, and our discerning it. That is, you just do not take the loaf as a rite or ceremony without discerning the Lord's body involved in it.
A.E.M. You mentioned time, would it be suitable to speak of the matter of the time of the morning meeting?
S.McC. Do you mean there has been a little concern as to whether it could not be earlier? Well, I think it should have due consideration amongst us, that in regard to what is so precious, as the Lord's supper is, a little bit earlier might not only help in regard to the Lord's supper, but the whole first day of the week, which has a heavenly character about it.
P.L. "Now when he had risen very early, the first day of the week," @Mark 16: 9.
S.McC. It is remarkable how in the Scriptures we have the thought of what is early linked with that day. You think of the Father, how early He must have been at the sepulchre! As J.T. once said, 'Before anybody was there, He was there.' When Mary came to the sepulchre she would find that the Father had been there before her.
G.R.C. What time do you suggest?
S.McC. I do not know; there has been an exercise in some parts, especially where it is testing in the middle part of the day, for the carrying on of the services, that it would help to have it earlier.
G.R.C. It would help in this country to have it earlier.
S.McC. I should think it would help in other countries too. A great many of the brethren think -- maybe I should not say 'a great many,' that might not be true, but some think -- the Lord's day is a good day for a 'long lie.' I certainly do not think the Lord's day is a good day for a 'long lie.' It is a day for getting up early; the first day of the week is a day for getting up early. Surely there is only one
{44}
day that the Lord claims, specially; there are six other days in which we can work and do what we want as to our own circumstances; but the Lord reserves *one* day, and surely we would not encroach on that day by lying late in bed.
G.R.C. Many have the Saturday free also, do they not?
S.McC. Just so.
A.E.M. I recall J.T. saying at Knoxville, that we should all sit down together at the same time in the same time zone; so it is a universal matter, and the unity of the faith is involved.
S.McC. Yes, I do not think it would do for some to change the time here, and some in another district, and some in another district. We would be back to where we were before; it would not facilitate the working out of the Lord's supper.
C.H.M. Would Mr. M, tell us what is his main point in this important suggestion of having the breaking of bread earlier?
A.E.M. In the larger cities the brethren have not time to get to their afternoon reading and then to get home and entertain and get back in time for the preaching of the gospel. I think therefore that a little extra time would be essential, say half an hour or one hour earlier. There is another matter, and that is that most transport begins at 11 o'clock in this country. The brethren would therefore have to be wise about it and consider it. We cannot settle it here.
A.W. In Germany we break bread at 10 o'clock.
P.L. In large cities, where the saints are not able to gather entirely together for the reading in the afternoon, but who resort to group readings, it would certainly facilitate the group readings being held regularly every Lord's day, if there were more time available.
S.McC. Yes, it certainly would. I think what has been brought forward needs due consideration.
{45}
Brethren in the Barbados have felt that it would be much better for those in the tropical areas if it was a little earlier. Is that right, Mr. E.? You have had that concern, have you not?
H.O.E. It is quite right in respect of some, but others who have large families and who are wholly dependent on public transport could hardly get there before the present hour. It is a matter we have been considering for some time, but have not yet come to a conclusion.
A.N.W. There is no light on it in @Acts 20, is there?
S.McC. What do you have in mind?
A.N.W. We are not told the time they came together; we are told that Paul discoursed till midnight and that after they had broken the bread, it says "and having long spoken until daybreak."
S.McC. Of course, in the early days the Supper was taken in the evening.
R.W.S. Would not the thought of compression enter into the Supper, so that possibly we do not have such long meetings?
S.McC. I am sure there is something in that. I think there should be concern with us that we are there on assembly time, and the most should be made of the time, so that the meeting is not drawn out to an hour and a half, or an hour and forty minutes. The wilderness side of the position would involve that all that is measured in wisdom.
A.J.G. Would not that involve our being concerned to be ready to proceed in the various stages of the service? I do not mean in any fleshly activity, but being spiritually alert, so that no time is lost in long pauses?
S.McC. I am sure what you say is right. I remember being in a meeting in Nostrand Avenue many years ago with beloved J.T. There were two of us that were visitors and there was a pause, and neither of the visitors went forward to give thanks,
{46}
and J.T. got up, and went forward and said, 'Lord, we have come here to break bread, and we should proceed with it,' and he proceeded to give thanks. It is the value of assembly time, and that we are in the Lord's domain, and under His hand in the dominical side at that time.
A.Hn. Do the operations of the Spirit have an important bearing on that? You remember how beloved J.T. used to stress the idea of "from glory to glory," glorious persons leaving their houses, and sitting down in the assembly, and proceeding accordingly.
S.McC. Therefore we have to be concerned, even when we leave our houses, as to what we are coming to. We do not come into the assembly in *any* kind of way; we are coming into the greatest thing on earth, and therefore dignity should attend our comportment.
A.B.P. Should we always expect the visiting brother to break the bread?
S.McC. The only answer I would give to that is that love does not behave itself unseemly. If Paul or Peter or John or Timothy or Silas were to come into Detroit, I think we would wait to see if they would go forward. Would not you in New York? I am sure you would.
A.B.P. Yes, but when you are visiting this country, and you move around from place to place over several weeks, do you feel that it is right to break bread each Lord's day?
S.McC. I have been at a few places where someone else has done it.
C.H. You waited at Doncaster.
A.B.P. Should not there be an exercise with brethren that we should not put the visiting brother in the position where he has to do it?
S.McC. I should think so. It is a question of liberty, and dove behaving itself in a seemly way.
{47}
I remember, in our locality once, a brother of great respect came into the locality, and a young brother immediately jumped up. Well, it was like love behaving itself in an unseemly way, an ill-mannered way. The assembly is a place of heavenly manners, but there should be liberty, as you say. Now in @2 Corinthians 6, the thought was just the heavenly thread that comes on the Abrahamic line, "Wherefore come out from the midst of them, and be separated, saith the Lord, ... and I will be to you for a Father, and ye shall be to me for sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty." Paul alludes to all these different yokes and participations and fellowships and consents and parts, showing how finely everything is measured. I think as we reach the final side of things in relation to Paul's ministry we have to see what is not in accord, in unholy associations, with our heavenly calling. The promise of God over against it is very fine, in the way He says "I will dwell among them, and walk among them; and I will be their God, and they shall be to me a people." And then, "I will receive you; and I will be to you for a Father." So much is brought up as to our livelihoods and our salaries, and the positions that we will have to give up; but oh, the position that we come into, the favour and the resource that we have to do with in God Himself personally coming into the matter!
Ques. Would you make it a test of fellowship?
S.McC. What would you say yourself when you read this passage? Would *you* make it a test of fellowship?
Rem. It seems like it.
S.McC. It *seems* like it! Look at the scripture, for instance, now: "Be not diversely yoked with unbelievers." If a believer was yoked with an unbeliever, would you not make that a test of fellowship! Certainly. Well, there is the answer to your question.
V.C.L. Is there not almost an Ephesian touch in
{48}
the idea of hearts being expanded? The apostle prays in Ephesians that the saints may be strengthened "by his Spirit in the inner man; that the Christ may dwell, through faith, in your hearts." I wondered if the idea of having hearts expanded by the presence of the Spirit, so that we are quickly sensitive to anything that would grieve Him, is not the issue here.
S.McC. Very good; it is like another Abrahamic touch. Jehovah led Abraham out, and then we have all the expanded view He gave him, the enlarged outlook. It is like Paul taking the Corinthian brethren, and having desires for them along the same line.
A.P.C.L. Is it not affecting that it is really the Father that he is bringing to bear upon them? Chapter 11 that we have been speaking about is a matter of the Lord, and His discipline.
S.McC. It is very touching that the Father should come in here, as if it is a matter that involves a subject of tender care. What He would be to us, in these matters that become such a test!
A.P.C.L. And yet at the same time it involves the understanding of the Father's position as Lord of the heaven and the earth, and as the Governor of the universe.
S.McC. Exactly. We have the thought of El Shaddai, Lord Almighty, suggesting supreme power linked with the Father in this setting.
P.H.H. Does holiness enter into this a good deal? Is it a holy family, and is there a holy suggestion in the quotation from Leviticus, "I will dwell among them, walk among them," and so on?
S.McC. There is. So that the wrath of God revealed from heaven against all impiety is an allusion to things being judged according to the nature of God. It is not just the standard of the law, but the nature of God, God revealed, and
{49}
holiness is insisted upon in the saints, in the light of that.
D.R.J.G. Does @Haggai 2: 11 -- 13 bear on what you are saying? I was thinking of the question of holiness as it is dealt with there.
S.McC. Yes. A holy thing touching an unclean thing does not make it holy, but an unclean thing touching what is holy makes it unholy.
P.L. And an unclean association pursued, such as directorships or shareholdings, or whatever it be of that character, if disregarded by certain persons after appeal on the part of brethren, the matter should not be left where it is, should it?
S.McC. No, it should not. The Lord, in view of the final side of things, is raising all these matters with us, because of the assembly going into heaven. Therefore we should look into them and take account of them; and especially bear in mind this word "Wherefore come out from the midst of them."
L.E.S. Does the reference to @Leviticus 26 greatly help in this matter, where He says, "And I will set my habitation among you; and my soul shall not abhor you; and I will walk among you, and will be your God, and ye shall be to me a people. I am Jehovah your God, who brought you forth out of the land of Egypt, that ye should not be their bondmen; and I have broken the bands of your yoke, and made you walk upright," verses 11 -- 13. Would not that underlie the breaking of any associations that we might have?
S.McC. It would. I am sure that God would help any one of us who is in wrong associations, to face the matter and get out of them; because it is a matter that we should be unified about. It is not a question just of the thought of a few, but as on the heavenly line, Paul's ministry would insist on unification amongst the saints in regard to all that is extraneous and not in keeping with the truth.
{50}
W.B.H. Is the first verse of the next chapter important, following what we have been saying? "Having therefore these promises, beloved, let us purify ourselves from every pollution of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in God's fear."
S.McC. Yes, that is an encouragement to us.
{51}
DISTINCTIVENESS AND FINALITY IN PAUL'S MINISTRY (3)
@1 Corinthians 12: 4 -- 14, 27 -- 31; @Ephesians 4: 1 -- 16
S.McC. In considering further Paul and his ministry and the opening up of the heavenly line in it, and the reaching of what is distinctive and final in it, we come, in our consideration this morning, to the thought of the body as it is presented in these passages. The body is a marvellous conception of the divine mind, being part of the mystery. Never before, in the history of time, throughout all the ages or epochs, had there ever been anything like this. The Spirit of God was known as coming upon persons and affecting persons from the beginning, but never before had there ever been on this earth a vessel in which the Spirit of God took up residence, in the way in which He has taken up residence in the vessel that He has formed by His coming, the body of Christ. There is a distinct link with heaven in the thought of the body, because, as we see, specially in Ephesians and in Colossians too, the Head is in heaven. Of course, the Head was in heaven before the body was formed, but what is impressive in regard to these two sections of the word is the marvellous way that two divine Persons have taken up a station in relation to the great thought of the body. It is a wonderful thing that one divine Person, the Holy Spirit, has come from heaven and has formed a body as the vessel of His manifestations; and in that vessel there is witness to the divine presence. That is something that had never been before, in that way. We have of course the cloud in the wilderness, and the glory filling the tabernacle, and the glory in the temple; but we have never had before, in regard to men, the Holy Spirit taking up residence in a vessel
{52}
and sphere such as He has formed in the body of Christ. It is very affecting to think of Him coming from heaven, indeed He has been sent, as it is said, from heaven, in view of this great result. Then also it is affecting to think that in the station that the Lord has taken in regard to the assembly in Ephesians, He has gone far above all heavens. It is very affecting to consider the remarkable place that the Lord has ascended into, where no creature ever can go, and from that station or place (as we would use the word, for we have to use words) the Lord is operating in all the invincible power that is linked with His ascension into that place, in relation to what is distinctive and final in connection with the assembly, that is the perfecting of the body, having in mind that we should all arrive at what is final, I mean final in the sense of what is perfected. Sometimes we are inclined to think of what is final in the sense that it is chronological, but one is thinking of what is final in regard to the circle of the truth, and Ephesians has that in mind. Another thing that one might mention is that in these meetings where we are together from the other parts of the world, especially our brethren who have language difficulties, it is a great matter that they with us should see the value of the body in this light, and the value and importance of the Spirit's presence. While there has been a good deal of exercise as to uniformity in assembly customs, it is a great thing to see that the power and spring vitally for all must lie in the presence of the Spirit in this way, as having formed the body. So that uniformity really must spring from what is vital, and if room is made for the Spirit, despite language barriers and national differences, the body helps us to overcome all that. There is thus, as the Spirit is made room for everywhere, a sense of what is right, even if we do not have the intelligence of what is right, because it is the same Spirit. Whatever may have
{53}
come in in the way of breakdown, in the dispensation, it is the same Spirit, and the body is there as the vessel of His manifestation. It might be said that in @1 Corinthians 12 the body is viewed in a provisional way; that is, it is not exactly its eternal relation, but it is viewed in a provisional way as a vessel to which God has committed Himself. It is the vessel that He has anointed and committed Himself to, in that way, for the representation of all His thoughts down here in this scene that we are in, and in the cities where we are. In Ephesians, while it is brought in in regard to what is provisional in the passages that we have read, the body stands in an eternal relation.
A.J.G. Is the body in Corinthians connected with the local assembly, while the body in Ephesians is the full thought of what is universal?
S.McC. Yes, it helps to see the different ways in which the body thus may be apprehended. In verse 13 of @1 Corinthians 12 it would also allude to what is universal, "For also in the power of one Spirit we have all been baptised into one body," but then when it comes down to the verse that we have read, it says in verse 27, "Now ye are Christ's body"; that is, the character of that body appears in Corinth or wherever we are set in our local positions.
A.J.G. It was verse 27 that I had in mind in making the remark, but it is important as you say, to see that in verse 13 it is universal.
S.McC. Therefore the importance of that verse as applying to where there may be difficulties, because if there is one thing we should beware of it is the development of national lines. That is inimical to the truth of the body, and I am sure we need the help of the Spirit as to it. We know the sorrow of the China matter, and the remarkable thing about that matter was the strong determination to develop a national assembly, and that is so even to this day. Whatever country we may be in, if the Spirit has
{54}
operated, we must never nationalise it. We must learn to merge into the universal unity and oneness that is linked with the body, and the drinking of the one Spirit.
G.R.C. So that although verse 13 is universal, it is still provisional. That is, it is the universal body on earth at any time.
S.McC. Exactly, and I would say that although it is universal, yet verse 13 bears on what is local. Would you not think, in the backward or retroactive allusion to the Lord's supper and to the cup, that locally we are affected by this great matter of all being given to drink of one Spirit every Lord's day?
G.R.C. And so also, "we, being many, are one loaf, one body"; that should affect us every Lord's day.
S.McC. Well, it should. It reminds us of how we are bound up with all the saints. We are not, as it were, a cluster of independent assemblies, using the expression in the light in which it is presented in the scriptures; we are greatly interdependent.
P.H.H. Do you think the mention in verse 13 of "whether Jews or Greeks" would settle this matter of anything national in relation to the body? You could hardly have a people with national characteristics so different, and yet they are viewed here as finding their place in the body.
S.McC. It is very striking. It shows how, through this great matter of the baptism of the Spirit which took place at Pentecost according to @Acts 2, all are merged in this glorious entity, all nationality is gone in it. You take a gathering like this, with so many brethren; individually, as men and women, we have all got different spirits, for each of us has a spirit given by God, different from the other, but in the body there is only one Spirit. It is not a congregation of spirits, there is one Spirit pervading the body.
{55}
A.B.P. Does the passage in @Acts 15 bear strikingly on this? Peter says in regard to those in the house of Cornelius, "And the heart-knowing God bore them witness, giving them the Holy Spirit as to us also, and put no difference between us and them, having purified their hearts by faith," verses 8, 9.
S.McC. That is a beautiful word, "putting no difference." What a touch on the part of God, especially where the prejudices were so great and the feelings ran so high, that God should personally come into the matter, putting no difference between them!
G.R.C. If I might go back just for a moment to the matter of uniformity, you were referring yesterday to brethren in the same time zone breaking bread at the same time, but would you allow that in Moslem countries, where the Lord's day is a working day, it may be necessary to break bread in the evening?
S.McC. I would, but I would encourage the brethren to think of the principle, and to accept the principle; and if it were ever possible to work it out they would do so, but because of the unusual conditions in Moslem countries, I am sure the Lord would help them in working things out according to wisdom. If the brethren all have to work, as they have to in Moslem countries, and are not available, you cannot work out the Supper if you have not got the persons. You must have the persons to work out the Supper. Therefore there would be a measure of consideration for our brethren in the Moslem world in that sense, only you would encourage them to think of the principle, and see the value of the principle if it were at all possible. Would you agree with that?
G.R.C. Yes. I think that is very good. It applies in Iran and also I think it will apply if there should be a reviving of the breaking of bread in Lahore.
A.E.M. At the same time you would encourage the saints to pray, for by prayer we can alter customs and subdue nations! If the mind of God is known, we
{56}
can pray that it may be possible to do what is necessary.
S.McC. That is what one has in mind in stressing the importance of accepting the principle. If we accept the principle, God may bring conditions around to suit the saints. Where difficulties come in is where principles are not accepted, and brethren just settle down to accept the conditions without earnest prayer that matters may be changed.
C.M.M. Could you spare us a word as to the worship of the Spirit, if I am not diverting you?
S.McC. Perhaps you would make a little clearer what you are thinking about.
C.M.M. I am also thinking of uniformity, that we might move together in that great matter. Sometimes I have noticed, in going about, that it has been lacking entirely at the Supper.
S.McC. I have noticed from personal observation that when you have a distinctive response to the Spirit it colours the whole matter of the service of God. And I am sure that we need to see the importance of this blessed Person, who has come in as He has, being recognised. This very chapter establishes His deity, a Person that has the right to be worshipped and honoured.
J.S.E. If we 'drank' more of one Spirit, would that not be more easy?
S.McC. That is a good expression, 'more easy.' I think if there is anything we need to be helped in regard to, it is tension in the assembly. After all, we are in the presence of Persons who love us. Persons who love to be with us, and we are in the presence of one another, and we love one another. We are everything to one another, and where love is, tension should be lifted. Therefore we are searched as to whether we are on easy terms with one another and with divine Persons. What you refer to bears on it, "*drinking* of one Spirit."
{57}
P.H.H. Sometimes it has been found that the dear brethren do not quite realise what is in this matter of worshipping the Spirit. I suppose we should make a difference between having liberty to address the Spirit, in general, and having liberty to worship Him. Does worshipping Him bring in the acknowledgment of His Person, that He is God?
S.McC. Yes. There should be with us the recognition of His deity, I mean as distinct and apart from the collective thought of God as in the latter part of the meeting. Sometimes brethren refer to the Spirit individually as God, in the latter part of assembly service, and it is not intelligent. It is not in keeping with what we have before us in that final part of the service. If we are going to refer to the Spirit individually, as God, we have to bear in mind His personal distinctive part as it comes before us in the early part of the meeting.
A.P.C.L. Would the accustoming ourselves in the light of this chapter, to recognise that, help us in the service? I was thinking of the reference in verse 6, "the same God who operates all things in all," and then the reference in verse 11, "these things operates the one and the same Spirit."
S.McC. It would. And it would help us, too, as to reverential ease. We use the word 'ease' in contradistinction to tension, not in any careless way, because we are always, as in the presence of divine Persons, reverential and in dignity. It is a great matter, however, that we should be relaxed, and what you refer to would help us in relation to that, because it says in verse 6, "there are distinctions of operations, but the same God who operates all things in all." And then verse 11, "But all these things operates the one and the same Spirit." Therefore we get the assertion of Deity in the Spirit in this passage.
L.E.S. Would not the distinctive way in which
{58}
the great thought of oneness and sameness is brought into these passages have the effect of liberating us? Paul refers to the thought of sameness in the Philippian epistle, and then again in 2 Corinthians he refers to Titus having walked in the same steps, and having the same mind. Would not all this help us to understand the intimate link that we have in the realm of the Holy Spirit?
S.McC. It would. And it is not a sameness just from mere actual literal words, it is a vital oneness and sameness flowing from the spring linked with the presence of a divine Person in the assembly.
J.S.E. Does the first verse of the chapter shed any light on what you are saying? "But concerning spiritual." Does that help us to see the force of the word 'sameness'? It is a spiritual sameness.
S.McC. Just so. These Gentile persons had been accustomed to another kind of manifestation; but now, as coming out of heathendom into Christianity, into the assembly, Paul seeks to enlighten them in regard to *spiritual* manifestations.
L.E.S. So that thinking the same thing, and having the same love is really what is inward, and involves an intimate understanding of our links with the Holy Spirit, and with one another.
S.McC. It does, and the Lord has been helping us in recent years as to the same thinking, the same speaking and the same opinion. It is not just a matter of external uniformity, it is a uniformity that flows out from the presence of the one Spirit in the vessel of divine manifestation here in this world. And it is testimonial, in its bearing, as well as what it means to God.
J.S.E. Is that why the word the "fellowship of the Spirit" precedes what has been referred to in Philippians?
S.McC. Yes, that is interesting, bearing on what we are saying. I think it is remarkable that we should
{59}
get this full chapter as to the Spirit following the Lord's supper. There is no reference to Christ's headship in this chapter, and we are to note that. We have not come to the period in the teaching, in Paul's mind here, for Christ's headship. It is of all moment to see that the truth of the body is brought forward in the foundational epistles, without any allusion to Christ's headship in relation to it. Of course we have Christ's headship in a federal way, in @Romans 5 and in the opening of @1 Corinthians 11, that is His headship in a federal way. But we do not have His headship in regard to the body.
C.R.W. Would you mind saying what a federal way means?
S.McC. In relation to the whole universal race of man God has committed Himself to Christ as the new Head of the race; that is what I mean by the use of the word 'federal.' It is in contrast to the special and distinctive character of headship in relation to that glorious entity, His body, the assembly, which bears on what is organic.
P.L. Would it be right to say that the Spirit holds the place for Christ in Romans and Corinthians, until Christ takes it Himself supremely in Colossians and Ephesians?
S.McC. That is the truth exactly. You take @Romans 8, where the chapter is filled with references to the Spirit. The Spirit is life in the believer; not that He promotes life, but He *is* life. That is, He is everything to the believer until the believer reaches Colossians, where Christ is his life. The Spirit is everything until the position is reached where, as we shall see this afternoon, Christ is everything.
A.B.P. So that there is no such thing as a headless body?
S.McC. There is not. But the remarkable thing is that in the figure of speech employed in @1 Corinthians 12, the head is a member of the body.
{60}
P.H.H. That is a most remarkable thing, is it not? Does that help us negatively to see that it is not Christ there, being spoken about, but a part of the body which Paul is using as an illustration?
S.McC. I think it has in mind to throw into relief the Spirit, and what the body is as the vessel or the vehicle of the Spirit's activities and manifestations at the present moment. It is thus a wonderful spiritual organism.
P.H.H. Would you therefore think, as this language goes on, that every one of us should be more moved to include ourselves in this setting of the body?
S.McC. I am sure we should, and I think it lies in acquaintance with the Spirit.
P.H.H. I am thinking for instance of verse 21, "The eye cannot say to the hand, I have not need of thee; or again, the head to the feet, I have not need of you. But much rather, the members of the body which seem to be weaker are necessary." I am thinking of these expressions, such as what we 'cannot say,' and what 'are necessary.' Do you think it would help us in our ponderings about the body, to include ourselves, and reckon on the Spirit?
S.McC. I am sure it would. And it would greatly enhance the value of every one in our localities, in the sense that there is no one that we can discount. There is a great danger sometimes of thinking that everything hinges on the principal men in the lead. Well, influence is linked with that, and we are to have respect and honour for that, but we must see the value, in this vessel, of every part, every member.
P.H.H. Do you think that certain persons may tend to exclude themselves, because it is the eye speaking for itself here?
S.McC. I think there is need for that word, because the danger is with some of taking on congregational thoughts and ideas, and leaving things to others
{61}
without seeing that they are all an integral and vital part of the body.
A.Hn. You referred to the deity of the Spirit as being enlarged on in this chapter, would I be diverting to ask you to enlarge still more on that, for He operates, and He distributes, and He baptises.
S.McC. Well, would it be quite right to say that He baptises?
A.Hn. "For also in the power" (verse 13), how do you understand that word?
S.McC. I see what you have in mind in regard to it, but I was thinking of a distinctive glory that attaches to Christ, namely that He baptises with the Spirit. That is signally marked out in regard to Him, and the baptism of the Spirit is done through the power of the Spirit. That is, the Lord administered the Spirit from on high. The Spirit was sent and, as the Spirit came, the body was formed, so that it was the baptism of the Spirit characteristically, but I think the act of Christ enters into it. But this matter that you refer to as to the deity of the Spirit is important, because who but One of the Deity could act as you point out in these different ways.
A.B.P. Does the word in @Acts 2: 33 help, "and having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, he has poured out this which ye behold and hear"?
S.McC. That is what I was thinking of in regard to it. What would you say, Mr. G.?
A.J.G. Yes, there is very definite testimony of John the baptist in @John 1, "Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending and abiding on him, *he* (emphatic) it is who baptises with the Holy Spirit. And I have seen and borne witness that this is the Son of God," verses 33, 34.
A.Hn. All I was thinking of was the securing in a living way of our place in the body through the operation of the Spirit.
{62}
S.McC. Just so. So that we sometimes find divine Persons so closely linked together in a particular act or matter, that it is *difficult* to discern who is primarily acting. The body was formed by the Spirit when He came; the body did not exist in @Acts 1, the assembly did not exist in the gospels. It existed in the divine mind, of course, but the assembly did not concretely exist in the gospels, nor in the first of the Acts. The assembly was formed by the coming of the Spirit, but Christ's act, as indicated in @John 1: 33, 34, enters into it.
R.W.S. I would like to take you back to what you said earlier as to addressing the Spirit at the end of the meeting. I think you used that expression.
S.McC. I was thinking of the tendency sometimes to address Him individually as God, using such an expression as "We worship thee as God," when speaking to the Spirit at that point in the service, which I do not think is intelligent. I mean, if we worship God, in the collective sense, we worship Father, Son and Holy Spirit as God. We worship them collectively as God at that point, not severally as God. If we mention them severally, it is to bring in the glories that reflect on the Persons who are viewed together collectively as God.
G.R.D. In connection with the deity of the Spirit, would the reference in verse 6 to "the same God" be limited to the operations of the Spirit, or would we be right to include, say, the Father's operations, as well?
S.McC. Oh, exactly. We want to see His deity, but that verse is not just a personal allusion to the Spirit. It says in verse 4, "But there are distinctions of gifts, but the same Spirit," now that is the Spirit personally, but then it says, "there are distinctions of services, and the same Lord," that is the Lord Jesus Christ; and then "there are distinctions of operations, but the same God," that is the Father,
{63}
"who operates all things in all." It would be Deity in the sense conveyed in @1 Corinthians 8: 6, "to us there is one God, the Father, of whom all things and we for him." But then when we move down to chapter 12, verse 11, it is "But all these things operates the one and the same Spirit," so that Deity is attached to the Spirit now, in the operation, showing the versatility in relation to divine names in the divine realm.
P.H.H. I have not quite got your thought in regard to addressing the Spirit at the end of the meeting. Do I understand you to say that when we may speak to God in worship, as at the end of the morning meeting, we include the three Persons; I think we understand that, but what exactly have you in mind in worshipping the Spirit, and calling Him God? Is that not right?
S.McC. No, I do not think it is right (if I might speak reverently, in the use of language that we have to employ), to isolate the Spirit personally, and speak to Him *personally* as God, in the latter part of the meeting. I do not understand that to be intelligent.
P.H.H. Pardon me, I did not mean in the latter part of the meeting, I meant, for instance, soon after the Supper. If we worship the Spirit then, and mention the title "God," is that not right?
S.McC. Yes, that is what we are seeking to draw attention to. In the first part of the meeting, following the Supper, there is ample room to address the Spirit personally, in His deity, as God.
P.H.H. Thank you, that is what I meant. That has made it clear.
Ques. Does Hymn No. 8 lead up to the great thought of God, and is it hardly suitable when we have reached the final thought?
S.McC. Hardly suitable! Why, that was one of the choice hymns in the Hymn Book when it was revised, that bore on the final phase of the service.
{64}
I understand Hymn No. 8 to be one of the choice hymns available when we refer to God -- not as leading up to God, but as having reached God, in Father, Son and Holy Spirit.
J.T.S. Would Hymn No. 337 (1951 Hymn Book) be suitable at the earlier part of the meeting, following the Supper? I am thinking of Mr. H.s questions, I am not thinking of the end of the meeting now, but the place that we give to the Spirit as God earlier, and as we freely speak to Him.
S.McC. Certainly, that is His personal greatness. That hymn was given out last Lord's day in the early part of the service. In regard to our brother's question, which we need to pay attention to, two years ago the question came up in Ireland with some, when I was there, as to reaching a point beyond the economy, where we worship God as God. Now that is outside the bounds of the truth in all that has been conveyed to us. I do not understand the idea of reaching a point beyond the economy. We are always in the economy, marked by creature capacity, and finite capacity, although the God who has come into the economy is infinite, and we are in the presence of Deity in infiniteness, even in the economy. So that we have to see the importance of the name "Father, Son and Holy Spirit "; that is, God as made known or declared, in this way.
C.H. Do you mean that whilst we cannot get beyond the economy, we are affected by what lies beyond it?
S.McC. We are. That is what I mean when I say we are in the presence of infiniteness. We are in the presence of Deity which we can never compass; as alongside of Christ we are in the presence of infinite knowledge that we could never enter into in its fulness as He can, being who He is.
G.R.C. Are you thinking of @1 Timothy 6: 15, 16 for instance, "the blessed and only Ruler ... dwelling
{65}
in unapproachable light; whom no man has seen, nor is able to see"?
S.McC. That is it.
G.R.C. We know the God who dwells there, although we cannot approach there.
S.McC. We cannot. And that is the God whom we worship as Father, Son and Holy Spirit. It is nothing less -- the same God. It is the God who has moved near in the opening out of His heart. His nature coming into expression, that we might be set at ease before Him in the presence of His majesty and might.
W.R.M. How would you view a hymn like No. 297, where the Holy Spirit is worshipped as God, in verse 3? I understood that hymn to be suitable for the end of the meeting.
S.McC. I think we want to be preserved from a reviewal of the Hymn Book, in this meeting, because we have to recognise the intelligence that there is in the assembly as to hymns. The brother who wrote that hymn recognises that if he had to write it again, he would write it somewhat differently. That is, for example, the reference to "Jesus, Lord, enthroned above," which is not quite in keeping with the collective position of God, in the Persons, because it is a reference, in an isolated way, to the Lord in His uniqueness as made Lord.
A.N.W. In that regard I would like to ask, following your remark regarding the other hymn, whether even in Hymn No. 8, 'A Man in the heaven' is wholly in tune.
S.McC. Well, you have quite a difference there as I see it, because, while the Lord is Man, yet He is God. J.N.D. makes an astounding statement in one of his writings as to Deity united to humanity. We must make room for the fact that the only way that we know Deity is in a Man, we shall never know it in any other way. I see a difference between the
{66}
reference to Him as Man, and the reference to Him crowned, or enthroned, as Lord.
A.N.W. I had in mind rather "in the heaven."
P.L. But the first thought bears on what He has been made, Lord and Christ officially; the second thought bears on what He is inherently.
S.McC. That is it. We want to see that His humanity in no sense detracts from the Deity and the greatness of His personality.
G.R.C. Does not @Ephesians 4 establish that, the Man who has ascended above up all the heavens?
S.McC. Exactly. That helps; and we had a helpful reference to that at Doncaster that it is as Man that He has gone above all heavens. That could not be said of a creature, that must involve His deity.
P.L. We had this question up in London some time ago, the thought that, at that time of the service, the Son could not be addressed worshipfully because He is unknowable in His Person according to @Matthew 11. But that does not affect the thought that the revelation is in the three Persons, the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, and if we do not address the Son in the glory of His manhood, we do not know Him or have Him worshipfully at all.
S.McC. We do not. Because we certainly do not know Him in abstract deity. We have the impression as to it.
A.E.M. It may be of interest to the brethren to know that Mr. James Taylor himself altered that verse. Verse 2 of Hymn No. 8; it is put according to his views of it, especially 'Blest Son.' He said the title 'Son' was the highest title by which we know the Lord Jesus.
S.McC. I think that is helpful, because you were present at the revision of the Hymn Book. One is a little bit afraid of remarks that one hears, here and there, which almost amount to the suggestion of the
{67}
need of another revision of the Hymn Book. Whereas, what a wonderful collection we have! And whilst human error may enter into it, I think we should see the value of it, and one specially deprecates remarks that are being made, that if Hymn No. 8 is given out at the end of the meeting, we do not feel we have attained a very high elevation. I speak reverently in regard to these matters, because we are finite, and in the presence of Deity we have to recognise that we are finite. We are limited to the economy, although knowing the God who dwells in light unapproachable, and who has come into the economy in Father, Son and Holy Spirit. But we have digressed a little.
A.E.M. And we always shall be limited to the economy.
S.McC. Always, we shall never be outside of the economy throughout all eternity, and we shall never apprehend the Deity through all eternity apart from a Man, that Man.
G.R.C. Is it not remarkable that through the economy we know God in His nature and character?
S.McC. It is, I think that is the divine arrangement that that God, whom we could never have known, has designed the economy so that we should know Him in His nature and in His secret being insofar as we can know Him although, rightly speaking, in that sense, it is beyond creature capacity.
G.R.C. You have spoken of human error coming into hymns, but you do not suggest we should not use Hymn No. 297, do you?
S.McC. Certainly not, I do not suggest that we should disuse any of the hymns. Sometimes it used to be said that if a hymn was given out, for instance to the Lord Jesus, on the throne above, in a certain part of the meeting, it spoilt the whole meeting! But it is within the general framework of the truth, and a priest would recognise that, and be affected by
{68}
what is within the general framework of the truth, although it may not be apropos to the particular moment. Now we should have a word as to Ephesians.
R.H. Before going on, there has been some question about the use of the title "in the name of the Lord Jesus," when we are addressing God as the Trinity.
S.McC. Some question about the use of it? Do you mean that we should not use it?
R.H. Yes. The question has been raised as to whether it was proper to revert to the thought of lordship at that phase.
S.McC. Well, I hope we shall be saved from not using it! It would be extremely unintelligent not to use it, whoever may do it. A few years back, it was suggested, in another part of the world, that we reach a point in the assembly service where we are beyond what is mediatorial. That is entirely unscriptural. We never get beyond what is mediatorial in that sense. Therefore we are governed by the scripture in @Colossians 3: 17, "And everything, whatever ye may do in word or in deed, do all things in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God the Father by him." Now that bears on the service of God.
G.R.C. Did not J.T. say that even in giving thanks for the emblems at the Supper, where we are addressing the Lord, he would still add 'in Thy name'?
S.McC. He did. One was impressed with that recently, that even in speaking to the Lord Himself, you recognise the mediatorial system that we are in and the greatness of that name in that relation.
G.R.C. Otherwise we are ignoring the deity of Christ, are we not? What I mean is that we could not even approach the Lord Jesus apart from His name, involving what He has done in manhood, and what He is in manhood.
{69}
S.McC. It shows the importance of being governed by Scripture, and not by interpolating Scripture according to our own ideas. The scripture in Colossians is all inclusive, "whatever ye do," we are to do it in the name of the Lord Jesus.
E.A.K. Would it not involve the glory of redemption? What basis have we before divine Persons, apart from the glory of redemption? You recall what was said here by J.T. in regard to that as touching the service of God. I think it was in the readings on the mediatorial service of Christ and the Spirit.
S.McC. Just so. That is, the value of that Person and the name come in in that connection.
E.E.P. In the end of Revelation we have the expression "I Jesus." I was struck with the fact that the mediatorial system is never to be given up.
S.McC. The Lord would affect us in the last chapter in the Revelation by His own personal glory, "I Jesus"; it is the identification of the Person, in that way.
J.O.T.D. Is it important that the whole system of side-chambers in the temple was held to the house by beams of cedar?
S.McC. I think there is something in what you say, but we would like to get a little more what is in your own mind.
J.O.T.D. I am referring to @1 Kings 6: 10, "And he built the floors against all the house, five cubits high; and they held to the house by the timbers of cedar." The house would involve the great system of divine glory, and for us would connect with the knowledge of God as Father, Son and Holy Spirit, but the side-chambers would suggest how the saints are to live eternally in nearness to that. But the link between the two is in the beams of cedar which suggest the manhood of Jesus.
S.McC. I think there is something important in what our brother says. In the study of the types,
{70}
which is very affecting in the passages that he alludes to, we have the way the saints are viewed as at home in relation to the divine dwelling, but never in a detached way. Similarly, we cannot view the absolute and the relative in too much of a detached way; that is, while we cannot compass or enter into what is absolute, it is not presented in a detached way, because the absolute enters into the relative. We have to see that, and we have a similar thought with the saints, that while we have to do with God, and worship Him in His majesty and supremacy, it is not in a detached way; it is as linked with Christ as the cedar suggests, by the dignity of humanity in sonship before God.
P.L. And divine love being the link.
S.McC. It is the link between the absolute and the relative. It is not detached in that way.
A.W.R. Whatever divine Person we address, and whenever, it is the *Person* that we are addressing.
S.McC. In Deity, as Scripture sets out, there are three Persons, co-equal and co-eternal. We do not worship an office. It is God, the Supreme, the Being whom we worship, involving these holy Persons in co-equality in their collective relation, now known as revealed, in Father, Son and Holy Spirit.
H.C. Would you say a word in regard to the bearing of @Colossians 3: 17, on some of the hymns addressed to God? That scripture shows that whatever we do is to be in the name of the Lord Jesus, but some of the hymns addressed to God do not make any reference to that.
S.McC. I think all would be covered by the value of the name in a general sense. Hymns are not in the sense of a prayer, or a direct expression of need. In a hymn, the saints are collectively engaged in ascribing praise to God. So that in the doxologies of Paul we have no reference formally to the name of
{71}
the Lord Jesus; @Romans 11: 36; @1 Timothy 1: 17; @1 Timothy 6: 15, 16; @Ephesians 3: 20, 21; the doxologies are like the poetical side in the hymns.
G.W.B. Would you mind saying what you think of the remark which is often quoted that we cannot think of the Lord as God and as Man at the same time?
S.McC. I think it involves the truth.
G.W.B. I am asking because of what you said, a moment or two earlier, as to Deity and as to the abstract.
G.R.C. Is that remark a misquotation? Did F.E.R. say that?
S.McC. He did make some reference to it in the letter on the Person of Christ in referring to what cannot be grasped at one and the same time by the finite mind.
G.R.C. I thought what was in his mind was that we cannot think at the same time of what Christ is as the expression of God to man, and what Christ is as the perfect Man before God, at the same time. But I would have thought that we always had in our minds His deity, however we are thinking of Him.
S.McC. There is light in our minds as to His deity and His humanity all the time. What I thought our brother had in mind was as to whether, in a *concrete* way, we can hold the two thoughts in mind at the same time, which I do not think we can.
G.R.C. But I wondered whether, for instance, when we enter the holiest, we can be engaged with Christ in His perfection as Man before God; but then we are privileged also, in the holiest, to contemplate Him as to what He is as from God to us, that in Him dwells all the fulness, and that He is the effulgence of God's glory. I wondered whether it was those two sides that we can scarcely take in at one and the same time. But we are privileged, in the holiest, to think of both sides, and at other times, too.
{72}
S.McC. Oh, certainly. What F.E.R. was seeking to guard against was that when, as in @Hebrews 2, for instance, the Lord is before us as Man, in His relation to God as Man, we do not introduce the thought of what is proper to Deity in that relation. But in the same Person, we may see what God is toward us, what Deity is. That is not confusing the thoughts; he was seeking to maintain the distinctiveness of the two, that He may act as God, in the raising of His body for instance, but at times He is viewed as Man distinct and apart from what He is as God, in singing the praises of God.
G.R.C. Yes, that is what I thought.
P.L. And if we confuse them, we may lose the distinctive glory of each thought?
S.McC. Just so. Therefore the great need of holy regard in saying too much in regard to the Lord. Because the truth in the Scriptures is that He is a divine Person who has come into manhood. In His essence, He is unchanged; as to form, in relation to what has taken place before our eyes according to @Philippians 2, there is some change, but as to essence and personality, He remains unchanged, and that is there all the time.
W.S.S. I think on an earlier occasion, in Australia, when this similar question arose, you emphasised the point that we worship the Person.
S.McC. Yes, and what was said at that time was that F.E.R. did not say that He was not God and Man at the same time. That is not the thought at all in F.E.R.s mind in that remark. There is light in our minds, at the same time, as to the fact that He is God, and He is Man. But when we are engaged with Him as Man, and the features that are proper to manhood, we do not introduce into that the attributes and other things proper to Deity.
Ques. Could we have a reference to Ephesians?
S.McC. We have the reference to the supreme
{73}
place of exaltation that the Lord has ascended to, and then how the gifts come in and how the body comes in. It shows what a great item in the divine system the body is, that such a place of exaltation seems to be required, and the irresistible and invincible power that flows from it, in view of our arriving at what is distinctive and final.
P.H.H. I would like to ask why the thought of the assembly follows on in @1 Corinthians 12 and is brought in in @Ephesians 2. In verse 27 of @1 Corinthians 12 it says, "Now ye are Christ's body, and members in particular. And God has set certain in the assembly." He does not say 'in the body,' but "in the assembly: first, apostles, ... " Is there a close connection practically between the existence and working of the body, and this working of the assembly where the gifts are?
S.McC. There is. I think it is like the distribution of what is heavenly and its influence in this environment. It is like the levitical side distributed through Israel in the types. It is striking how the gifts are linked with the assembly in both these chapters, as if God accentuates the side of heavenly influence to maintain this distinctiveness.
J.S.E. Was it stated some time ago that the extended set of statements in @1 Corinthians 12 bore on the necessity for regulation amongst us in the wilderness, and the compressed set of statements in @Ephesians 4 bore on persons who in themselves as written to were regulated, but it took them higher? Is that bearing on what you have in mind?
S.McC. Just so. So that in Corinthians the body is presented as a figure, whereas, when we come to Ephesians, it is the great substantial side of the body, as Christ's body, out of Christ. It is not so much now what it is as formed by the Spirit, the vessel of the Spirit's manifestations, although that all underlies it, but what it is in its link with Christ.
{74}
P.L. Not animated by Christ testimonially so much, as deriving from Him in purpose.
S.McC. Yes, and all the grace of the heavenly Man is expressed in that which is His body.
A.P.B. Could you help us as to the function of the body in its eternal setting? We have been more familiar with the working of the body in its provisional setting perhaps.
S.McC. I think that Christ will be expressed eternally through His body, the assembly being His complement, the completeness of Him that fills all in all. The assembly is not only adequate for the testimonial sphere, and the day of display, but the assembly is adequate for the eternal scene, for the expression of the graces and the beauties of Him as Man.
A.B.P. Does verse 16 suggest that a point may be reached where gift is no longer needed, but that the body works for itself?
S.McC. It seems to be viewed in that way. The body is presented as a complete entity by itself in relation to Christ as Head, and functioning and operating for its own increase; it "works for itself the increase of the body to its self-building up in love." What an entity this is, when you think of it, in God's universe!
A.B.P. Does that come close to what is in mind, "through all, and in us all"?
S.McC. I think it does.
A.J.G. When, in the eternal day, the holy city comes down out of the heaven from God, will not the influence that she exerts in eternity be the effect of the influence of Christ on His body?
S.McC. It will. That is, the assembly gets His direct impulse. The universe does not get the direct impulses of Christ, but the assembly as His body does, and then we have the relay of the influence
{75}
towards the universe. So it is a remarkable position in which we are set in that light.
J.McK. It says, "we may grow up to him in all things, who is the head, the Christ." Does the thought of growing up to Him convey the ideas of an abiding and final result in the assembly, so that the assembly should be fully complementary to Christ in His own position as Head?
S.McC. Exactly. So that it involves the substantial side. It is not just an abstract view according to purpose, although purpose underlies all that we have in this letter, but the growing up, the agricultural thought in that, and the development in the body, is all to bring out the substantial side of this great entity.
W.B.H. Does the conception of the body, which is distinctive to the assembly, underlie every other figure under which the assembly is alluded to, such as the city, the temple, and the house?
S.McC. I think it does, because of the vital link of the body with Christ. The body is quickened in the life of the Head, and the direct impulses of the Head enter into it and affect every situation in which the assembly may appear.
P.L. Being who He is, does He not require a medium, through whom all that He is has to be known, and is to be diffused in life and love and glory? And does not the body furnish that?
S.McC. It does.
A.B.P. Is that what is meant by the fulness?
S.McC. Exactly. It is a wonderful thought. God delights in fulness, and we know what the fulness of the earth is, and the fulness of other things; but think of the fulness of Christ, and the assembly's part in that!
{76}
DISTINCTIVENESS AND FINALITY IN PAUL'S MINISTRY (4)
@Colossians 1: 12 -- 29; @Colossians 2: 1 -- 10, 16 -- 19; @Colossians 3: 1 -- 4
S.McC. It is in mind this afternoon to consider the distinctive way in which the headship of Christ is presented in this epistle. The passages that we have read are very rich and full and it will be obvious that we cannot dwell on all the details of them. I believe, as it has often been said, the Spirit of God amongst us would leave an impression upon us through these passages as to "that is my master," as the servant of old said to Rebecca. You will notice there is not only the side of what is distinctive in connection with Christ as Head, but the thought of what is final and complete in regard to the saints entering into this epistle. Paul completes the word of God, not as a matter of time exactly, nor a matter of the number of books in the sense that he wrote the last one to complete the number. It is not that at all; it is a question of the circle of the truth, the assembly being the mystery involving the completion of it, Christ and the assembly as we should say. Then there is the great object that Paul had in his service that he might "present every man perfect in Christ." What an objective he had in his service! The expression "every man" would indicate that every person would be in mind in his outlook abstractly. Concretely of course it works out in the saints who form the assembly. We get the thought of completeness too in regard to the saints and Christ, for we are complete in Him, this letter being to help us to see the value of the Head, and the importance of holding the Head, as deriving all supply and wisdom and direction from the Head. It is very easy, perhaps, to get away from the Head in our affections and
{77}
thoughts, and maybe to hold the truth just as the truth without sufficiently abiding in the Head, abiding in Christ in that way, as the great Source of supply for the saints. They are complete in Him in that relation. This morning we were dwelling on the body in the foundational epistles, and we alluded to it of course in Ephesians, but in Romans and Corinthians reference is made to the body to affect our corporate relations so that unity might prevail. There can be no gain of Christ's headship unless in our corporate relations we are united; the headship of Christ is available, and the gain of it is to be received, where the saints are united, and where affection is present and operating.
A.E.M. Can I take you back? You said this morning (if I understand you rightly) that we arrive at the "collective idea of God." Can you explain that?
S.McC. It is using a form of speech that we have to use, being finite and being creatures that we are. In using it we have in mind the Father and the Son and the Spirit, as together, as expressing to us the great thought of God. Deity is presented in the Father in the economy, as we know, in @1 Corinthians 8, and in the Name in @Matthew 28, Deity is presented to us in the three Persons. Their place in Deity is in mind, although economical names are used. It was the Name of @Matthew 28 that was in mind.
A.E.M. But does not the term "collective idea of God" convey to us that there are three Gods?
S.McC. It does not to me. It is not a question of three Gods; it is the Persons collectively, together, as God. It is no thought of Tritheism, and no thought either of Sabellianism; it is the opposite to that.
A.E.M. We have to preserve the idea that God is One.
S.McC. I might say that I was only using an expression which J.T. used himself in referring to
{78}
God in that part of the meeting, where the three Persons are particularly before us. The word 'collective' was used over against what is singular, that is, to speak of each Person singly as God is not in keeping with the truth *at that moment*, and the light that governs the position at that time; we speak of the Persons collectively as God at that moment.
A.E.M. Yes. You have the whole Trinity before you.
S.McC. Exactly.
G.R.C. Might I refer to the Name of @Matthew 28. Is it right to say that that Name on the one hand presents the truth of the economy in the graded positions taken, and on the other hand, the equality of the Persons in the unity of Deity?
S.McC. If we can use the expression 'unity.' I am sure you know what we mean, for it is a question whether the word 'unity' is strong enough when it comes to that.
G.R.C. We could use 'oneness.' 'Unity' is the Latin word, and 'oneness' the Anglo-Saxon. We have come to give more force to oneness, so it may be best to keep to that.
S.McC. Yes, I think what you say is right, because the bearing of the Name is economical in Matthew. That is, it bears on the economy and operations in it. It is the Father, the Son and the Spirit, and as we have been taught, you could not reverse the order and put the Spirit, the Son and the Father. It is put in the order in which it appears in the economy, but yet it is one Name. It emphasises in our minds and in our hearts, in regard to the Persons abstractly, Their co-equality, in the oneness of Deity.
G.R.C. Do you think we might sometimes misunderstand what is in one another's minds in our words, in this sense that in thinking of the co-equality of the Persons, in the oneness of Godhead, we are really thinking of something which in itself is outside
{79}
the economy? We are not, of course, ignoring the fact that our knowledge of that God is through the economy, but the Persons in the equality, in the oneness of Deity existed ever, whereas the economy began to be.
S.McC. They ever existed in eternal oneness, and yet according to @John 1: 1, in Their co-equality as Persons, for "the Word was *with* God, and the Word *was* God." The distinctness of personality is maintained.
A.B.P. Does the expression in @Matthew 1: 23 "they shall call his name Emmanuel, which is, being interpreted, 'God with us'," convey more than that that Person is God? It implies that *God* is with us. Equally so in @1 Corinthians 14: 25, "God is indeed amongst you," would possibly relate to the Spirit, but as we think of these divine Persona, the oneness of God is in our thoughts.
S.McC. Just so. It is always important to remember that whatever place two of the Holy Persons take in the economy, it never alters the Deity. The Deity remains the same, and when Deity is presented in the One, it does not alter the Deity in that sense; it is still there in its fulness, as it says, "to us there is one God, the Father" (@1 Corinthians 8: 6), but it is fixed, to use creature language which we are bound to use having no other means of expressing ourselves, in the economy on that Person.
E.E.P. This morning we had "the same Spirit," "the same Lord" and "the same God who operates all things in all." Does that refer to co-equality?
S.McC. I hardly think it refers to co-equality there; it refers to the administrative relations in the economy.
S.G. Is it of interest that in @Revelation 21 we have the expression "God Himself," in @Ephesians 3 we have "to him be glory," and in @1 Corinthians 15
{80}
"that God may be all in all"? It is the singular all the way through.
A.N.W. And the word in Timothy, "God is one."
S.McC. We are reminded in all that of the personal God that we have to do with, that is God Himself. I think it is important to keep in mind in talking over these holy matters, that we are but creatures, with very limited knowledge, and we should not attempt to compass the infinite, because we cannot do it. If we have any latitude at all, as J.T. said from this very place in 1949, in speaking of these things, it is only in the Spirit. Therefore the need of being girt, so that we do not get beyond our depth. I am afraid of getting beyond our depth.
A.J.G. J.N.D. spoke once of the importance of thinking in Scripture, and of having our thoughts formed by the way the truth is presented in Scripture.
S.McC. We have to see therefore the danger of the human mind in applying metaphysics to the Deity. That is, trying to arrive at the conception of God by the analysis through science of being. We cannot do that. We have just got to leave what is infinite, and speak as Scripture speaks. If God is revealed in three Persons, and we speak of Them collectively, we do not have in mind collectively three Gods. We have in mind these three Persons collectively, as in contrast to each of Them singly, as God, and the expression "God himself" bears on that. It is God Himself, but as J.N.D. points out, in Father, Son and Holy Spirit.
L.E.S. So that whilst we may distinguish the Persons, we can never separate Them. Do we not need constantly, subconsciously in the Spirit's power in our souls, to maintain the thought of mystery attaching to Each, and to the full thought of Deity?
S.McC. We must, because it is only in revelation that the Persons are distinguished for us. When it comes to abstract Deity you are confronted with what
{81}
is inscrutable; but Scripture says "the Word was with God." That is what Scripture says, but to explain it or define it is entirely beyond us. We cannot say much about it.
J.S.E. Is that why both in Luke's gospel, where the title God is used more than in any other gospel narrative, and in the epistle to the Ephesians, where God is so much to the front, even to the extent of "all the fulness of God," so much place is given to the Spirit?
S.McC. I am sure it is important to see that, and especially the remarkable way in which the whole position is guarded in the opening of Luke. The whole environment is sterilized by the divine presence and power, lest there should be any encroachment of defilement.
P.H.H. What is the bearing of the term 'fulness' in chapter 1, and later in chapter 2 of Colossians in connection with what you are saying? In chapter 1, it is "the fulness of the Godhead," and J.N.D. explains about the bracketed piece. Later on he refers to the Fulness as 'it' (chapter 1: 21), and again in verse 22 "irreproachable before it." Then in chapter 2: 9 we have "in him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily." One might be permitted perhaps to refer to one of our hymns which occupies us with the Fulness, Fulness as a complete thought. Would you mind saying a little about that?
S.McC. It is remarkable how it is almost used as a title here. In fact the Fulness is referred to by itself "by it," as it says, "For in him all the fulness of the Godhead was pleased to dwell, and by him to reconcile all things to *itself*." It is a remarkable reference. The Fulness has to do with the outshining; that is, what has come on to our view, and within our range, in Jesus. That was so wonderful and so blessed, yet it is always good to remember, in regard
{82}
to Fulness, that whatever may be the outshining, it is not greater than what it is the outshining of.
P.H.H. Do you mean that the greatness of God Himself, the Godhead, lies behind that, and that must be the greatest thing of all?
S.McC. I mean God in His essence lies behind that, but in His essence He is unknowable. That is, the essence of God in that sense is not disclosed, but it lies behind all these wondrous matters.
J.S.E. Is it somewhat bearing on this matter of depth that we had last night, that we should reflect on the peace of the Fulness having been disturbed, but now peace has been made for Itself through the blood of the cross of Christ? Is it something for our hearts to contemplate?
S.McC. It is, very much. We should see the remarkable way in which the Fulness comes into this matter of reconciliation, both in regard to things and in regard to the members of the body, the members of the assembly. It should be very affecting to us that it should be presented on this exalted level. One thing that it helps to see in this section, is the dual glories of the Person of Christ, the dual glories of His work, the dual glories of Paul's ministry and service, the dual glories linked with Christ as Man, the fulness of the Godhead in Him towards us, and the saints as towards God complete in Him. Then we see the Fulness connected, in the dual character of the saints experiences, "buried with him in baptism, in which ye have also been raised." In all that it is very interesting to see this thread linked with the glories of Christ in this epistle.
M.H.T. With regard to the distinctive activities of the Father mentioned in the two verses where we began, would you mind saying if you regard those activities as involving the service of Christ, and the service of the Spirit, or something separate from them?
{83}
S.McC. All operations in the present dispensation are by the Spirit. The Spirit is the great medium of operations in regard to the saints, and what affects them subjectively, whether it be the Father we view operating or Christ operating, the Spirit is always the great power by which the operations are carried out. But the Father is referred to here in a peculiar way, as it says, "giving thanks to the Father, who has made us fit for sharing the portion of the saints in light." It is not sharing our place in heaven exactly, but "sharing the portion of the saints in light, who has delivered us from the authority of darkness, and translated us into the kingdom of the Son of his love." This reference to "the kingdom of the Son of his love" is so distinctive; we do not have it elsewhere in the Scriptures. We do have the expression "the Son of the Father, in truth and love" in John's second epistle, but "the kingdom of the Son of his love" is a very fine and rare reference.
A.W. Why is the Spirit only mentioned in verse 8?
S.McC. I think it is important to see that the Spirit is not prominent in Colossians. He is behind the scenes as it were, and what comes on to view is His work, and the graces that have sprung from His presence and service among the saints, because the great thing in mind in Colossians is "Christ."
J.S.E. Would it fit into @John 16: 14, "He shall glorify me"?
S.McC. Exactly. That verse could be written all over this letter, and it all has in mind that we should get the gain of the headship of Christ.
V.C.L. Would it be right to ask if the "in whom we have redemption, the forgiveness of sins" really refers to our appropriating that in the power of the Spirit to give us capacity to understand and be influenced by headship?
S.McC. It is essential that we should have the
{84}
forgiveness. Romans deals with how sins have been met, and how forgiveness and justification have come in, and how deliverance from the world comes in. Then we have what the Spirit is to us in @Romans 8, but now when we come to Colossians it is as if the Spirit is transferring us over to Christ, not that the Spirit ever leaves us, but it is like the servant in the type in @Genesis 24, reaching Isaac, I mean in that manner of speech that we use, and leaving us under His hand.
W.S.S. Would "the kingdom of the Son of his love" be used to occupy us with the Father's love for the Son, and the verses which follow, open that out to us in detail, the Father's delight in all that the Son is?
S.McC. I think it is especially to impress us with the fact that we are not in an arbitrary realm. We have been translated out of an arbitrary realm, the authority of darkness, but the realm that we have been brought into is a realm of the kingdom of the Son of His love, and that is to prepare us for headship, because we cannot get the gain of headship apart from an active state of affection. We may think that we get the gain of the headship of Christ arbitrarily, but we do not. The headship of Christ works through the affections.
W.S.S. If we were captivated by the Father's love for the Son, we would not have difficulty about headship, I should think.
S.McC. We would be attracted to the Person who is Head, which this epistle has in mind.
A.P.C.L. Would verse 14 relieve the tension you spoke of this morning and bring in restfulness in relation to the unfolding of the glory that follows?
S.McC. That is good, and bears on what we were saying as to forgiveness. It sets us free and at ease, that matters will not come up, we might say, in this realm.
{85}
J.S.E. In the fundamental treatise much is said of redemption, and the vicarious work of Christ. But it is presented largely objectively, is it not? Does not this brief expression "in whom we have redemption, the forgiveness of sins" presuppose that the brethren are already in joy, and the gain of redemption, and the present experience of it in forgiveness, so that the Spirit can proceed further into what you have referred to, I think, as higher levels?
S.McC. I think that is the point. The mention of forgiveness of sins here is not so much to draw attention to our enjoyment of it, as to throw into relief the glory of the Person in whom it is. It says, "*in whom* we have redemption," it is not exactly to make the subject redemption, or forgiveness of sins, but the subject is the greatness of the Person *in whom* we have these things.
G.R.C. Would you open up what you had in mind as to the dual glory of Christ?
S.McC. If we all followed things carefully, and I am sure you know what one refers to, we shall see for instance, verse 16, "because by him were created all things, the things in the heavens and the things upon the earth, the visible and the invisible, whether thrones, or lordships, or principalities, or authorities: all things have been created by him and for him. And he is before all, and all things subsist together by him." There is one side of His glories, and then it goes on to another, "He is the head of the body, the assembly; who is the beginning, firstborn from among the dead, that he might have the first place in all things." That is, we have His glories in the great domain of creation, and then His glory in the great domain and empire of death, the One who has come out of it, "firstborn from among the dead." What a dual aspect we have there as to His glory! The reconciliation is applied to all things, but then, it is
{86}
immediately applied to ourselves. The reconciliation of all things is anticipative, but it is applied to ourselves in verse 21, "And *you*, who once were alienated and enemies in mind by wicked works, yet *now* has it reconciled in the body of his flesh through death." What would you say yourself about it?
G.R.C. I think it is very helpful to point out the two sides, and do they not bear on what was before us this morning? Verses 15 and 16 are His Godhead glories, in the sense that He is the "image of the invisible God," He thus expresses God to us, but verses 17 and 18 are what He is as Man before God. Of course as "image" He is in manhood, but expressing God to us.
S.McC. I was thinking of that very thing, how this passage would help us as to what we were referring to this morning, because the Person is the same in essence. He never changes, whether in Deity or in manhood; in essence He is always the same. It is good always to keep in mind that while things may change before our eyes. He may take a bondman's form, yet even in bondman form His essence remains unchanged.
G.R.C. And is it not striking that while, as F.E.R. says, we can scarcely think of both sides at the same time, yet Scripture nearly always puts them close together?
S.McC. It is very remarkable. In @John 1 and @Colossians 1 and even in @Hebrews 1, while it is His deity that is alluded to, there are some expressions there that could not be apart from His humanity. Is not that so?
G.R.C. The exact quotation from F.E.R. is 'As the Word became flesh, He dwelt among men, and revealed God. But He Himself filled and still fills the place as Man toward God, and the two thoughts are wholly distinct conceptions which cannot be grasped at one and the same time, by any finite
{87}
mind.' That is rather different from just the bald statement that we cannot think of Him as God and Man at the same time. It is these two sides, is it not, that we have in this chapter? He is the image of the invisible God on the one hand, so that all that we know of God is in Him, towards us; and on the other hand, all perfection in manhood is in Him towards God. Is that so?
S.McC. Yes. @Colossians 2 really involves that for the saints are brought into it. Other passages can be quoted to show that there is not only the perfect expression of God towards man in Him, but there is a perfect expression of man in Him towards God. It is the same Person, not another. The same Jesus, as we would say.
A.J.G. Are not those two sides in verse 15?
S.McC. They are: "who is image of the invisible God" must involve His deity, because who but a divine Person in manhood could be referred to as the image of God? Then "firstborn of all creation" is a distinct allusion to His humanity, but it also carries with it a touch as to His deity, because none other than a divine Person could be the firstborn of all creation.
A.J.G. As having come into relation with the creation, it is to hold it in relation to God.
S.McC. That is it.
A.P.C.L. There are two references to "by him," one in verse 16 and the other in verse 20, the first one relating to the power of His Person, in whose intrinsic power, as the note says, the creation was made, and the other 'instrument.'
S.McC. It is important to see that the second 'by' does not involve in any sense inferiority as to position.
A.P.C.L. I was hardly meaning that, but that for the moment He became in Himself the instrumental power by which the Fulness was acting, but as to His own Person it must be there.
{88}
S.McC. We need to guard that when we view Him in bondman's form, and certain relations in which He is as Man towards God, inferiority *as to position* is there, but in the instrumental 'by,' where the mediatorial principle is referred to in regard to creation, we could not admit of any suggestion of inferiority, because mediatorial activity does not always imply inferiority in the Persons employed.
A.P.C.L. Which 'by' are you referring to in that?
S.McC. There are three 'bys' as you know. First it says in verse 16, "Because *by* him were created all things," that is, as the note says, it is the Greek preposition '*En*,' and is literally 'in him,' in the power of whose person. He was the one whose intrinsic power characterised the creation. It exists as His creature! Then, down further it says in the end of verse 16, "all things have been created *by* him," that is the preposition '*Dia*' in Greek, involving the instrumental power, which brings in the mediatorial principle. The mediatorial principle was active in creation, but there is not any suggestion of inferiority of position in the Persons.
A.P.C.L. What about verse 20, which brings in reconciliation by the blood of His cross?
S.McC. "And *by* him to reconcile all things to itself" brings us down to what He was in manhood. The preposition at the end of verse 16, while it is speaking of a Person whom we know in manhood, is alluding to Him in the pre-existing condition before He came into manhood, as the One by whom all was created, because the mediatorial principle entered into the creation, did it not?
A.P.C.L. Yes, that is how I understand the truth. The second 'by' I was referring to was really verse 20, where it is a question of the blood of His cross.
S.McC. Oh, I misunderstood you. I thought you were referring to the second 'by' in verse 16.
A.P.C.L. No, I was taking those as both together
{89}
to involve His deity really, the glory of His Person; and the second one that I referred to was in verse 20, involving His manhood and His work.
S.McC. Just so. I think it is important now that it has come up, that we should keep in mind that mediatorial activity does not always involve inferiority in position in the operations. Creation is a standing testimony to that.
P.H.H. Would @Hebrews 1 confirm that, where it says "the Son, whom he has established heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds"? There could not be in that expression of things mediatorially any inferiority of Person.
S.McC. No, there could not.
J.S.E. The whole bearing of that chapter is emphatic of equality, is it not?
S.McC. Yes, it is. So that we are reminded of the greatness of divine operations in that way, and the necessity of having the help of the Spirit. We need to be lifted out of mere human thoughts as to these matters and especially to be governed by the Scriptures.
A.B.P. Is this not confirmed by the reference in @John 1: "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God ... . All things received being through *him*, and without him not one thing received being which has received being"?
S.McC. Just so.
A.J.G. Might we now get on to the thought of the headship of Christ, and what it has in view in this epistle, and how we come practically into the gain of it?
S.McC. I think it is important that we should see how the saints are to get the gain of the headship of Christ, so that we should be saved from Laodiceanism. It is clearly in view in this epistle that Paul had a holy concern about Laodicean conditions, where the danger was of being deprived of the fulness that was
{90}
in the Head. This epistle is critical in that sense, for it is a question of whether the saints are going to be deprived of getting the fulness that is in the Head.
G.R.D. In that connection, do the dual glories that you have been speaking of, that is, in verses 16 and 17, and then later as to the body, bear upon the headship of Christ towards the saints, the body?
S.McC. They do, because we are reminded of the greatness of the Person who is Head. It is in His humanity, in the exalted position in which He is, that He is Head of the assembly. But we are reminded in all these statements in Colossians as to the greatness of the Person, so that our affections are drawn out to Him, we become attracted to Him.
A.J.G. And every other object that might influence us is eclipsed and displaced?
S.McC. I think that is the point in the epistle. It has often been referred to as a critical epistle; it is not a matter of the low moral state of things, as we have it in Corinth, where J.N.D. refers in connection with @2 Corinthians 12 how the highest elevation is contrasted with the lowest depths of carnal degradation. But Colossians is not dealing with the lowest depths of carnal degradation; it is dealing with the fine man, the polished man, the wise man, the man that we have got to be afraid of, especially the speech side coming in, which would deprive us of all the fulness of the resource that is in the Head, and from which the body derives its sustenance and its life.
J.McK. Would you say why, in chapter 2, it refers to the fulness of the Godhead dwelling in Christ bodily? That is in His present position, I presume, whereas in chapter 1 it was pleased to dwell there. What is the thought of it dwelling there bodily? It is following that that it says "and ye are complete in him."
S.McC. Do you not think that the saints are particularly in mind in chapter 2, whereas it is not a
{91}
question of us being in mind in chapter 1? It is the Lord Jesus as He came into humanity here, especially would He come on to view at the Jordan, where the Spirit comes upon Him, and the voice is heard from heaven, and He is standing there upon earth. In chapter 1 we get the great thought of the Fulness coming concretely on to view without any reference to what it is bearing upon, but chapter 2 is to bear upon the saints.
J.McK. And the Fulness coming to extend to the saints? The idea of being "complete in him," would it not involve that that fulness, in Him bodily, is to be drawn upon?
S.McC. Just so. It is important to keep in mind the greatness of the Person in chapter 2, for as J.T. once said, the expression "For in him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily" does not necessarily mean what is mediatorial. It is a reference to the greatness of the Person of Christ, that Deity is there in that Person and it is towards us, and then, on the return side, we are toward the Godhead, as complete in Him.
P.L. The Spirit of God turning right round, if we may use the expression reverently? Is that not so? "Ye are complete in him."
S.McC. It is very striking that while the word is 'filled full' in the original, referring to all fulness being in Him, it does not say, 'for in Him dwells all the completeness of the Godhead bodily,' but "for in him dwells all the *fulness* of the Godhead bodily, and ye are complete in him." We are filled full, in relation to that fulness, as in Him.
W.C. Is that what is referred to in being deprived of your prize? It suggests the thing of the greatest possible value, "See that no one deprive you of your prize." Is that a suggestion of a race, and that we might be turned aside? Is it the thought of the value of headship and that we should reach out after it?
{92}
S.McC. The prize suggests the great value that is linked with this thought of Christ in this epistle. The persuasiveness of speech and the vagaries of the human mind, especially as they were then prominent in the Gnostic system of philosophy and teaching, would all tend to draw us away from Christ, the Head, and we should thus lose the gain and the value of what is in Him in a special way. The assembly has no source of sustenance or supply outside of Him in this relation.
P.H.H. Did you have something in mind about verse 9? You said it does not say 'in Him dwells all the completeness.' Had you something in mind as to the difference between 'completeness' and 'fulness'?
S.McC. It seems to me that there is a shade of difference, although there is a strong link between the two expressions. The Fulness dwelling in Him is what is in mind with a certain purpose. It is God shining out, the expression 'bodily' representing what is necessary for finite range, and finite appropriation.
A.N.W. "Which is his body, the fulness of him who fills all in all" in Ephesians; is that further?
S.McC. That would be a reference to Christ as Man, the assembly being the fulness of Him as Man. The assembly is not said to be the fulness of God. She is the fulness of the Man, who in the exalted position as to His Person, we may regard as God. *He* fills all in all. That could only be said of One who is divine; but she is the fulness of the Man; she is not the fulness of Deity.
A.B.P. So that we have in @Ephesians 4 that "he might fill all things" -- "He that descended is the same who has also ascended up above all the heavens, that he might fill all things," @Ephesians 4: 10. Does that not link on with chapter 1?
{93}
S.McC. It does, for it is a characteristic thought. It is interesting to see that of Christ, here, in Colossians it says, "Christ is everything, and in all," and in Ephesians it says of Him that He "*fills* all in all." But of *God* in Corinthians it says that He may "be *all in all*." It is not filling all, but God will be *all* -- that word 'all' is a very great word. It is not an ordinary word; it is a supreme Word, "that God may be *all* in *all*." The "in all" would involve ourselves as well as the universe.
L.E.S. Does not the scripture you referred to help us to understand spiritually what is in mind? The idea of the Fulness here is, as it says in the note '"Godhead" here is *Theotes* -- Godhead in the absolute sense -- not *Theiotes*, merely divine in character.' Do you not think we need to distinguish between the two?
S.McC. Quite so. It is not what we have in @Romans 1, which comes after the verse that we read, "his eternal power and divinity." This word is a very full word here, and therefore it bears on what we have in Colossians. We are dealing with what is substantial, whether from God's side towards us or our side towards God.
W.R.M. What is the difference between this thought of the Fulness in Him bodily, towards us, and the image of the invisible God in chapter 1?
S.McC. The image involves representation; the Fulness is not representation. We have the representation of God in Him, but the Fulness involves more than that. It is more than representation, because Christ has part in Deity Himself, and "in him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily." It is not exactly (you fear to use words, because of human lack) that He was a channel for the Fulness, that is not the force of @Colossians 2. It is One who as to His Person was divine and had part in the Deity. The Deity is in *Him*, not just as a channel, but it is there,
{94}
"in him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily; and ye are complete in him."
L.E.S. According to the foot-note the word 'Godhead' involves Godhead in the absolute sense.
S.McC. Yes. It does not mean that we apprehend all that is involved in what comes out, but there is what comes within our range. For instance, it says in @Hebrews 1 that He is "the effulgence of his glory and the expression of his substance." Christ was that, but that does not mean that we can compass the substance, or enter into or understand that. But the Fulness bodily has in mind what has come within our range and what we can understand.
G.R.C. Does "the fulness of the Godhead" involve really the three Persons?
S.McC. It does, as to what is in mind. So that if Christ did anything, it was the Father who did it, and He did it in the power of the Spirit. The Fulness was there.
G.R.C. I wondered in that way whether the reconciliation by the Fulness would involve what was before us in the address last night -- the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit were all involved in that.
S.McC. I thought it was very affecting, how They all enter into the matter of redemption, and how, in a certain sense, each of the Persons came before us in Their feelings. It is not that you can attach too much in connection with sufferings, but what must it have been to the Father, as we heard, and what must it have been to the Spirit, that that spotless blessed One -- Object of divine delight -- should be forsaken as He was and should be in death.
T.J.G. I notice in regard of the Fulness in both references in chapters 1 and 2, the scripture says "all the fulness." Is there any significance in that it does not just say 'in Him dwells the fulness,' but "all the fulness" in both instances?
S.McC. I think it is another Colossian touch, to
{95}
impress us with the fact that we do not need to go outside of Christ for anything. It is all there in Him.
J.S.E. Does that just give the answer to the enquiry about @Ephesians 1? The assembly is not said to be '*all* the fulness of Christ,' but she is just said to be His fulness. So that there is a shade of difference in the force of the word, is there not?
S.McC. There is.
A.J.G. Could We have a word as to "holding fast the head"? Evidently it contemplates that the desire on the part of the saints to hold Christ as Head will be attacked, and we have got to hold it fast.
S.McC. I think it is very important to see this. The first reference, in verse 17, "the body is of Christ," is not an abstract reference; it is a concrete reference to the saints as formed out of Christ, in the sense that what is in Christ is in the saints. That is a concrete matter involving spiritual formation, and it enters into the matter of our holding of the Head. It is important that we should not be enticed, or drawn away, by man from the fulness that is resident in the Head. As Lord He subdues our wills, but as Head, He is the Source of direction and supply for the assembly, His body, for all of us. It is put on an individual basis here, as it says, "Let no one fraudulently deprive you of your prize ... not holding fast the head." That is, Colossians views our individual responsibility in regard to this matter.
P.H.H. Does that mean that there is substantiality, so to speak, in the saints?
S.McC. I think that is what it refers to. What underlies the body is what is out of Christ. You have got a definite formation in a body that is of Christ. It is like the woman with the issue of blood; there was something in her that was in Christ, and she was made to feel that. It is not that we read a scripture as to our place in the body and say, 'Well, that is what the scripture says,' but we should have
{96}
some consciousness of something being in us that was in Christ. The body is formed on those lines.
L.E.S. So that this would preserve us from Laodiceanism that you were speaking of at the outset.
S.McC. It would. And it would also preserve us from the danger and influences of affinities with those who, by the power of their minds, would lead the saints astray. If there is that in me which is in Christ, and I am by the Spirit affected by it, my affinities will be with Christ. I will discern His voice, I will discern His direction, and I will not be led away by the plausible speeches and reasonings of the mind that is away from Christ.
W.B.H. Is the direct operation of His headship in Colossians emphasised by the absence of any allusion to gift, as in Corinthians and Ephesians?
S.McC. It is very important to see that. We have no allusion to gift formally as gift, but we have allusion to personality in a peculiar way, and to princes, in this epistle; but the gifts are left out. In the same way the elders are left out in the epistle to the Corinthians, for there it is to draw attention to the assembly, while in Colossians it is to make the most of the body as dependent upon the Head as the Source of supply and nourishment.
A.B.P. Is there a link between "Let no one fraudulently deprive you of your prize" and the "not holding fast the head" with the word to Philadelphia, "Hold fast what thou hast, that no one take thy crown," @Revelation 3: 11?
S.McC. I thought there was a distinct link. I think the thought of the crown in Philadelphia stands related to the peculiar joy of the truth of the assembly's relations with Christ and Christ's relations with the assembly, which, in the revival, we have been brought back to understand.
E.A.K. Would it be suitable to enquire, in regard to this matter of affinity, as to how far that is
{97}
extending, in the mind of the Spirit, to what has been named as Laodicean in our day? I am thinking quite simply of the exercise that has been raised in ministry as to eating with Open Brethren.
S.McC. Well, there should be holy concern about all our links with Bethesda. We are not here to attack any system, but Bethesda has been marked by disregard of the truth as to the Person of Christ and we cannot have anything to do with a system that has been identified with that.
P.L. J.N.D. remarked: 'I know no other company that owes its origin to heartlessness as to Christ.'
S.McC. Just so. I think the Lord would help us as to these matters, especially that our links with Bethesda should be kept clear, because we must regard Bethesda in a different light from the establishment, or the established bodies, because in sheltering the enemies of Christ, Bethesda committed themselves, as a body, to the awful error that was linked with what was propagated in bad doctrine as to Christ. This matter of holding the Head is important, for it is put upon all of us, and I think it would help us in matters that enter into our localities, where we may be in difficulty. We are to understand the importance of being shut up to the Head, and deriving nourishment and supply from the Head, so that we should be guided aright.
G.R.C. So that the warning is against listening to anyone who is himself not holding the Head. It says "no one" in verse 4, and verse 8, and verse 18. Did not Eve listen to a creature not holding the Head, in the first instance? The serpent was not holding Adam as head.
S.McC. She did. That is very striking. I think the headship of Christ has a delivering effect here in regard to human wisdom, human plausibility and the rationalism and capacity of the human mind. It
{98}
is remarkable what it says here, "Let no one fraudulently deprive you of your prize, doing his own will in humility." What a statement -- "doing his own will in humility"!
A.J.G. And is there not only a matter of wisdom and impulse derived from the Head, but the influence of love, because the result of holding fast the Head is "all the body, ministered to and united together by the joints and bands, increases with the increase of God"? Do we not get the influence of love learned from Christ and made formative in us?
S.McC. I am very glad you bring us back to that, for it bears on what we were saying earlier. We do not get the gain of Christ's headship on an arbitrary basis. The lordship of Christ operates at times, on an arbitrary basis, for we come up against the Lord in authority, and if it is a question of His will, and my will, my will must go. That is arbitrary, although it is exercised through grace in His love for us. But when it comes to the headship of Christ, it is a question of affections among the saints, they are linked with one another. It involves how they are bound together in this wonderful entity, the body, in love and in affection, and deriving this gain from the Head.
C.M.M. Would the passage in the Song of Songs have a bearing on this idea, "I found him whom my soul loveth: I held him, and would not let him go"?
S.McC. Very good. The Song of Songs is full of suggestions of nearness and intimacy; and that brings us to the last passage, which we might just refer to, and especially the expression "Christ ... who is our life." The Song of Songs is filled in type, with these suggestions, that the Person whom we have thus been referring to becomes our life. It is not that we have life in Him here, but that the Christ is our life. We have been so attracted to Him, so affected by His ministrations, so affected by the
{99}
deriving of nourishment and supply from Him, that He becomes our life.
A.B.P. And is that carried through into Philadelphia, "and shall know that I have loved thee"? Does that mean that there are lovable conditions there, and is it not a love that comes near to first love?
S.McC. It is. In fact there is a definite link in Philadelphia with what we have in Ephesus. Although there is no restoration to the public position in regard to Ephesus, yet we have a spiritual touch in Philadelphia that links on with it.
M.H.T. Would the reference to "complete" or 'filled full' "in him," and the idea of "substance" stand in direct contrast in your mind with the emptiness of the inflation suggested in the word "puffed up by the mind of his flesh"?
S.McC. I am sure it does. Because to understand Colossians rightly we have to know that in history the great Gnostic theories were prevalent and prominent, and apparently some were being drawn away by these theories. Paul thus brings in the headship of Christ and the truth of the body, and all the substance linked with that, as over against the emptiness of these others, which were just theories.
{100}
DISTINCTIVENESS AND FINALITY IN PAUL'S MINISTRY (5)
@Ephesians 5: 25 -- 32; @Philippians 3: 20, 21; @1 Thessalonians 4: 15 -- 18
S.McC. The thought this morning is to consider in Ephesians the marital setting involving the relations of Christ to the assembly, and perhaps this afternoon, if the Lord will and we should live, the earlier part of the epistle in relation to the marvellous richness of the family section. The passages in Philippians and in Thessalonians were suggested to be read because of the thought of finality in them. We have the thought of what is distinctive and final in all these passages and we are to notice how much 'Himself,' Christ Himself, is before us in these passages. According to the passage in Ephesians He is going to present the assembly to Himself glorious; it is not exactly to the Father, or to the Spirit, or to God as such, but to Himself. In Philippians we have "according to the working of the power which he has even to subdue all things *to himself*," which is a remarkable reference, and then in Thessalonians it says, "the Lord *himself*, ... shall descend." That is a very fine statement. It does not say the Lord Himself shall 'come,' or the Lord Himself shall 'come down,' the very word 'descend' brings a touch of majesty into that all-transcendent moment for us, for, at the rapture, as these passages involve, we shall enter upon final conditions. In this passage in @Ephesians 5, we see the distinctive place that the assembly has, as drawn attention to in Paul's service and ministry, as the object of the constant and active love of Christ. He has delivered Himself up for it, as it says, "Christ also loved the assembly, and has delivered himself up for it, in order that he
{101}
might sanctify it, purifying it by the washing of water by the word, that he might present the assembly to himself *glorious*, having no spot, or wrinkle, or *any* of such things; but that it might be holy and blameless," chapter 5: 25 -- 27. In view of the imminence of the translation, we perhaps can sympathetically enter into the Lord's feelings in this relation, and especially the present moment in His service. His great preventative service, in view of the presentation of the assembly to Himself glorious.
P.H.H. Did you say 'preventative service'? Would you mind saying another word about that?
S.McC. It says, "that he might present the assembly to himself glorious, having no spot, or wrinkle, or any of such things." The service of the Lord in regard to the assembly goes on in the light of what it is in purpose and counsel, so that none of these things might be upon it as affecting the personnel. It says in verse 25, "Christ also loved the assembly," that is the assembly in purpose and counsel, that marvellous conception of God's. Then it goes on, "and has delivered himself up for it, in order that he might sanctify it, purifying it"; we now come down to history, and the great thought of the cross and the moral question, but all having in mind that the assembly should be presented as it is, to Himself, in the light of purpose and counsel, glorious.
A.B.P. Were there certain features, specially in women in the gospels, which brought this matter of loving the assembly into what was concrete, also in the sense of the matter being represented before Him?
S.McC. I think there were. A number could be referred to, but tell us what you were particularly thinking of.
A.B.P. Loving the assembly must of course be as you have said, in relation to the whole assembly in the divine thoughts, but I was thinking of His
{102}
feelings in manhood being drawn out in relation to certain whom He could speak to as "Woman." I wondered if there was in that the tangible expression which drew out His love for the assembly.
S.McC. You mean that they would come into His mind in such feminine quality that they would project on to His view the assembly. In a concrete way, the assembly comes in as the Spirit comes in, but it would bear on the quality of it, in persons. Is that what you have in mind?
A.B.P. Yes, and especially I had in mind the widow who gave *all*. It seems like a fitting expression of the counterpart of Him who was about to give all.
S.McC. Exactly. And you might also allude to the woman in @Luke 7, and also to Mary as in @John 20. They would all suggest some feature of the assembly.
A.H. Why do you think this remarkable passage is prefaced by the word to husbands, and the great stress laid on "your own wives," and "his own wife" and then "let each so love his own wife"?
S.McC. It is striking that there is no exhortation, as far as I recall, in these sections for the wives to love the husbands. There are the references to subjection on the part of the wife to the husband, but there is a special appeal as to the husbands to love their wives. I think perhaps it indicates a certain weakness on the side of the husband, the side of the man, as we think of ourselves, standing over against Christ.
H.B. Has this exhortation in view something of the concrete thought as presented amongst the saints that has been referred to?
S.McC. Yes, it has. The Lord of course had it at the beginning of the dispensation in a concrete way as seen in the Acts, and specially when we come to Paul's ministry, what was secured at Ephesus definitely brings it on to view in a concrete way. But then, in the revival, after the departure, it
{103}
comes on to His view in a concrete way in such a state as is before us in Philadelphia. There is something very concrete in Philadelphia, in the revived state of things that speaks to the Lord of the assembly. So that when He says "I will cause that they ... shall know that I have loved thee," He is not thinking of a remnant, He is not thinking of a few, He is thinking of the assembly as it comes on to His view in a very concrete way, in a revived state of things.
A.J.G. Do you think that the apostle's soul is so filled with the light of Christ and the assembly that though he is dealing with the hortatory part of the epistle, yet he cannot help, so to speak, enlarging on this great matter of the love of Christ for the assembly in connection with His exhortation as to the husbands?
S.McC. Yes, it would almost seem as if he enlarges on a subject that really does not fit into this part of the epistle. We would have understood it in the earlier part better, as we might humanly speak, but it just seems as if the occasion opens up for him to enlarge on it. That is the great thing about ministry, do you not think, that we must make room for what the Spirit would fill out in our minds, even supposing it is not just the subject that is before us?
A.J.G. Yes, I am sure that is important.
J.S.E. Would it be right to link this part of the exhortation with the verse which exhorts us to be filled with the Spirit? It is not very far ahead of this, is it? I am thinking of the word "be not drunk with wine, in which is debauchery; but be filled with the Spirit," and then this marital matter is immediately brought forward. Would it in any way suggest to us that ability to lay hold of this exhortation, and to drink into the wealth of the mystery, great as it is, is largely dependent on our capacity in relation to the Spirit?
S.McC. Yes, I am sure it is, because there can be no arrival at the thought of union apart from the
{104}
Spirit. In order to enjoy the blessedness of union with Christ, which this letter contemplates, there must be the making room for the Spirit. The Spirit is the bond between us and the heavenly Christ; how could there be union with Him otherwise?
A.W. Is that typified in the servant in relation to Rebecca in @Genesis 24?
S.McC. Yes, the Spirit has a great place in the type in that chapter, in the linking on of Rebecca with Isaac.
A.E.M. Would that bear on our marriage meetings? If you bring Paul in, he is always speaking about Christ and the assembly.
S.McC. I think that is important. You feel that our marriage meetings should become occasions for enlargement of the truth in regard to Christ and the assembly. So that while primarily, in our so-called marriage meetings, we are gathered in expression of fellowship with a brother and a sister, just like this matter of husbands love your own wives, the Spirit of God would help us to turn from what is merely natural, and what is linked with their natural circumstances, to expand into the fulness linked with Christ and the assembly. Therefore, you would expect ministry on marriage occasions, although sometimes it is said that there should be much more prayer and the like, but I think the marriage occasions become occasions for the Spirit to help us in regard to Christ and the assembly.
P.L. So that the marriage feast in @John 2 became the occasion for the manifestation of Christ's glory.
S.McC. So that if you had a dozen prayers at a marriage meeting and only a short word as to Christ and the assembly, everything is overshadowing Christ and the assembly, in your concentration on the brother and the sister. We are not there to wholly concentrate our attention on the brother and the sister, on what the sister is wearing, and what the
{105}
brother is wearing. We are not there to be occupied with that; we are there in support and sympathy with them in the new path they are entering upon, but it is to make room for some service of the Spirit in enlarging our thoughts in regard to Christ and the assembly. Do you think that is right. Mr. M.?
A.E.M. Yes I do, I am being distressed about several occasions. There has been much prayer and much singing of hymns, and I do not see that you have any right to call the assembly together unless for ministry. If we want to pray about it, there is the prayer meeting, and we can pray at home; but the bringing of the saints together, should be in view of ministry, because only ministry can elevate it to its proper level.
S.McC. I think it is important to see that, because, as you recall, we have been helped as to 'farewell meetings.' When a brother or sister was going away from a locality, or a brother was going out in a circuit in his service, there used to be a 'farewell meeting,' but beloved J.T. pointed out that it was not right to call the assembly together in relation to a man, a brother or a sister, in that sense. The same thing in principle has to be noticed in connection with marriage meetings, that while we gather and are in sympathy and support with the brother and sister in the new path they are entering upon, the paramount thing in our minds is to make way for ministry that would bear on the occasion.
A.B.P. Is it not important that the principals in the marriage should be exercised that some feature of Christ and the assembly is practically expressed in them?
S.McC. I am sure we should see the importance of that, especially in this day of divorce, and separation, and so much being said about 'incompatibility.' We should not countenance that kind of thing. Divorce may be necessary where the marital bond is
{106}
broken through unfaithfulness, as the Lord indicates, but marriage and the relations of husband and wife should be elevated to the dignity that attaches to it in the divine institution primarily, not only as ordained of God, but also in this dispensation, in the light of Christ and the assembly.
J.S.E. Could I ask a question about John's gospel whilst you are on this? As we are reading @Ephesians 5, with all the elevation connected with it, is it not striking that none of the synoptic writers refers to this marriage in Cana of Galilee? John, who writes long after Paul's ministry is completed, brings it forward; and is it not *he* who brings forward the noun 'woman' most, in the gospels? Is there any suggestion in that, do you think?
S.McC. Yes, I think there is, specially as bearing on the last days, when the enemy has done his best, and is doing his best, to corrupt the thought of the assembly.
J.B.P. Is there a tendency for Egyptian principles to come in in these marriage occasions, such as young people demonstrating at the station when the couple go away?
S.McC. It is a matter of universal concern as to the principles of the world entering into our marriages and in the things that take place. I think the heavenly elevation in which Christ and the assembly is presented in Ephesians would help to prevent us sinking to the level of the world in the way our marriages are carried on. People of course say, 'Oh well, it is only one day in their life, let them have all that they want,' but that is a poor way to think and to speak. We have been delivered from the world in everything, and therefore let this matter of marriage be elevated to the dignity that attaches to it in the light of the heavenly position of Christ and the assembly.
E.C.M. Does the 'washing' have any bearing on that matter?
{107}
S.McC. "The washing of water by the word," would all have in mind the maintenance of our heavenly relations in a proper way, in the dignity that is fitted to them.
R.W.S. The 'word' in verse 27 might bear upon the ministry of the word at the so-called marriage meetings.
S.McC. Yes, it would. That is what we are referring to. While the brother and sister may desire the fellowship of the brethren, the real thought of the marriage meeting is an occasion for the word to come in. This would have a purifying process in relation to all these matters, and the adoption of worldly methods and principles. That is, we should not carry on our marriages as the world carries them on.
E.C.M. Do you think the word in @John 13, where the Lord says, "Unless I wash thee, thou hast not part with me" (verse 8) would connect in any way with the washing here?
S.McC. I think the washing of water by the word not only bears on our marriage meetings, but on many things. I think the word last night was like a service of Christ, helping us in regard to separation from matters of associations such as directorships, and brethren who are involved in unequal yokes, holding shares with ungodly men in ungodly companies. The thing is not right. It should be looked into and where matters are clear, and surely they should be clear as to the unequal yokes, they should be dealt with. Other matters that are not so clear, we may get help as to them as we ponder over them, as our brother was suggesting last night and as we seek to help one another. But these matters where there is direct unequal yoke involved, the question would be how long are we going to wait? How long are we going to go on? I heard the other day of a part of the world where this matter came up, that
{108}
the brother said, 'We are waiting to see what they will do in London.' With all due respect for London, and the beloved brethren whom we honour, and our place among them; it is not a case of London, nor New York, nor Detroit, nor Sydney. It is a question of heaven, what heaven is doing and what heaven is saying through the presence of the Spirit in the assembly.
L.E.S. In the end of Nehemiah, linking on with what our beloved brother referred to last night and what you are speaking of now, it says in chapter 13: 29, "Remember them, my God, for they are polluters of the priesthood, and of the covenant of the priesthood, and of the Levites!"
S.McC. It would affect the service of God, and as J.T. often used to say, when the matter of trade unions was so strongly before us, and there was the attempt to bring in other things, 'Let us deal with one thing at a time,' Surely we should all be clear about this matter of directorships, and unequal yokes in shares with ungodly men in a company! The Scriptures are *very* plain; there is no abstruseness, no cloudiness in the Scriptures as to that. These matters should be faced in our localities, where persons are involved.
J.O.S. Would these be like "spots in your love-feasts," @Jude 12?
S.McC. Just so. And I think it is incumbent on those who are leading amongst the saints, whoever it may be, to set these matters on. Especially is it important that those of us who minister should be free from spot, free from any entanglement, which might lead to the ministry being blamed.
P.L. Would the spotlessness of the garments of the Lord in the transfiguration, in Mark's gospel, be a pattern for us? Would that particularly apply to those seeking to serve, Mark being a servant's gospel?
{109}
S.McC. It is very striking how that comes out in the great servant's gospel.
J.S.E. Are we not learning to give more credit to those in the locality, when they are called upon to face this matter, so that we pray for them that they might carry it through according to God, in view of this principle of a clean place?
S.McC. I am sure we should. There is a great need that we should pray about these matters, and also that where there is failure to act in relation to them that attention should be called to the light that governs these matters.
P.H.H. Do you think the mention of the glass sea in @Revelation 15 and the persons standing there having harps of God, emphasises the purity, necessary in the persons, as gaining the victory over the beast and so on, and thus having a full part in the service of God?
S.McC. It does. There is a suggestion of abiding stainlessness in these references in the book of the Revelation. It is a remarkable thing that, where the power is so great and where we get the fulness of evil developed, we have got these suggestions of constant and abiding stainlessness; and the saints standing related to it.
J.M. In @Revelation 19 it says, "his wife has made herself ready" (verse 7). Would that involve that she has come into the intelligence of His mind and knows how to make herself ready, so as to be in accordance with His own affections?
S.McC. Yes, I think we should see the standard the Lord has in mind, and that is what this chapter would help us in, so that the assembly might be "holy and blameless." Is there anything about us that blame could be laid to? That is the point. Is there any impurity? Is there any unholiness? The Lord is constantly serving, through these and other
{110}
meetings, that this condition and state might be arrived at in the assembly.
G.R.C. Is it not therefore important that when discipline has to be applied, that we should be marked by right feelings? Paul wrote the first epistle to the Corinthians with many tears. So that while the prison has to come into use, there should be tears on the part of the brethren, otherwise we are blameworthy as to that.
S.McC. I was thinking, when you were speaking last night, of the remarkable way in which the reference to what you were saying comes into Corinthians. In Galatians you have no suggestion of the feelings that you have in Corinthians, because Paul is dealing there with another kind of evil, another kind of wickedness, and he is distraught. Paul is terse and somewhat distraught in Galatians, but in Corinthians, where he is dealing with these matters of wickedness and unholy associations, he is filled with holy feelings about the whole matter. And I am sure we should be.
A.Hn. I wondered if you would enlarge a little on the distinction between the discipline of Galatians, if I might speak of it thus, and that of Corinthians, I think beloved J.T. emphasised that the sin of Galatia was far more serious than that of Corinthians, so that Paul, in @Galatians 5: 12, says, "I would that they would even cut themselves off who throw you into confusion."
S.McC. It is very striking that there is no suggestion of withdrawal in the epistle to the Galatians. He does not say to withdraw from these persons in Galatia. He meets the thing head-on in Peter, beloved servant that Peter was, for he was under the influence of another. Peter was under the influence of James, and wrongly influenced, and Paul meets it head-on, face to face with Peter. Then in regard to the false teachers, he would that they would
{111}
cut themselves off, a remarkable statement; whereas in Corinthians, he exhorts them to "remove the wicked person from amongst yourselves."
G.R.C. Is not Corinthians the seduction of the world, but the evil in Galatians is heresy; and you cannot have anything to do with that?
S.McC. That is right. It is the operations of self-opinionated men who are determined to force their views on the saints, and hold to them come what may.
A.B.P. So was not the case of the incestuous man at Corinth a clear case on which they could not go wrong, which Paul brought before them to adjust them in their minds to what was judicial; and does his word at the end of the epistle show that there were worse conditions there, that he had in mind that they should arrive at?
S.McC. Yes, there were. It brings out the skill of the apostle that instead of putting all things together, he brings one thing before them and exhorts them to deal with that.
A.B.P. I thought that was what you had in mind when you spoke of clear cases.
S.McC. That is what I have in mind. We cannot lump everything together and say, 'Well, we must wait till everything is clear.' Let us deal with what is clear. If a thing is clear, a link between an unbeliever and a believer, well, let us meet that. Do not let us bring in something else at the moment that may not be clear, over against that, to hinder the dealing with the other.
S.W.P. In the end of Zechariah it says, "in that day there shall be no more a Canaanite in the house of Jehovah of hosts." If we are not clear about this matter of associations, will we not be in danger of bringing one in?
S.McC. I am sure we are. Our brother was alluding to it in the passage we read in Numbers last
{112}
night. It is a question of defiling the sanctuary, defiling the tabernacle of Jehovah. It is not only a question of the saints being defiled, severally, but it is a question of the sanctuary and the tabernacle being defiled.
A.P.C.L. Is that what is in view in the word 'it' being used in this passage? While the persons are the subject of the operations, it is the assembly that is in mind in the operations.
S.McC. I think it is very helpful at this juncture to see the 'it,' the neuter thought that is used here, because it is the substantial quality linked with the assembly in this light, as it is in Christ's mind, that is in view.
M.H.T. In the various references by John in the address to Sardis, spoken both to the angel and to the overcomer, there is a reference to garments, and there is also the reference to things not being complete. Does not this question of our associations link up with the need for reaching finality and completion?
S.McC. I think there is something important for us in that, that matters should be brought to completion in all our localities wherever they are. You remember how Isaiah refers in chapter 37 to "Therefore lift up a prayer for the remnant that is left" (verse 4). But he says, just preceding that, (verse 3), "And they said to him, Thus says Hezekiah: This day is a day of trouble, and of rebuke, and of reviling; for the children are come to the birth, and there is not strength to bring forth," That is what I was thinking about. It is a great matter, in our localities, that there should not only be the children coming to birth, but that there should be the strength to bring forth; as you say, it involves moral power and strength to complete matters in view of the translation.
C.M.M. In regard to this matter of directorships and holding shares; I take it you would have no
{113}
difficulty about those who are walking with us, as together perhaps forming a small private company, provided *all* those who are in it are fully walking with us?
S.McC. Oh, not at all, there is no unequal yoke involved in that. What we are referring to, which we must keep clear, is what involves an *unequal* yoke. What involves light and darkness and righteousness and lawlessness.
J.G.M. How far do you carry the thought of the unbeliever?
S.McC. You have got to get hold of the principle. Elsewhere Paul refers, for instance, to marriage as "in the Lord," and again, "what part for a believer along with an unbeliever?" there is a principle involved in that. And that may enter into even our near relations like Lot, for they may be lawless persons and in unholy associations.
G.R.C. And may we put a wrong interpretation on the word 'believer'?
S.McC. Yes, I think we may think of it as if it covers every Christian that makes a profession. Is that what you have in mind?
G.R.C. I would have thought a believer is a person in active faith, and governed by faith, and in the obedience of faith.
S.McC. That is what I am thinking about, and that was why I referred to the expression in @1 Corinthians 7, "in the Lord." That implies an active state of subjection and obedience to the truth.
A.B.P. Is not believing defined in John's gospel, as bearing on our day?
S.McC. Yes, it is. John would make believers out of unbelievers. He stresses this thought of believing very much.
A.E.M. Would you say a word about eating with people withdrawn from, even if they are our natural
{114}
relations? I find that some exclude natural relations from such.
S.McC. On what basis would they exclude them?
A.E.M. I do not know on what basis, but they do. They say it does not apply to natural relations, such as a son or daughter.
S.McC. Supposing we read a passage: @Matthew 10: 34 -- 38, "Do not think that I have come to send peace upon the earth: I have not come to send peace, but a sword. For I have come to set a man at variance with his father, and the daughter with her mother, and the daughter-in-law with her mother-in-law; and they of his household shall be a man's enemies. He who loves father or mother above me is not worthy of me; and he who loves son or daughter above me is not worthy of me. And he who does not take up his cross and follow after me is not worthy of me." Does not that govern the matter of natural relations in these matters, as well as other matters?
A.E.M. I think so, but take young people that come into fellowship and after a while they go out; can you eat with them, if they are in your house?
S.McC. No, I would not. I would set their meals for them apart. If it is a younger one that has to be cared for, there may be consideration, but even in that there would be modification as to what is involved. Definitely if they have attained to certain years of life, and are withdrawn from, we must be firm and faithful in regard to that matter.
T.J.G. If they have come into fellowship, and have gone out, have they not shown a definite sense of responsibility or irresponsibility?
S.McC. I would say so. J.N.D. does make a modifying note in regard to tender years, and young ones, which we would consider. But when they have come to the stage where they understood, and are definitely willed and minded to go that way, I should think they should be taken account of in that light.
{115}
Ques. If parents in fellowship do not set the meals apart for a person in the family who has been withdrawn from, does that involve a breach of fellowship?
S.McC. Well, when you say 'a breach of fellow-ship,' it depends what you mean. Certainly they are compromising the fellowship, for it involves a link that is defiling, and it may defile others in that sense.
H.J.S. Does not all this confirm what was said earlier about the need of care in receiving young persons, that they should have some sense of responsibility?
S.McC. It does. But then it is not only with young people that this matter comes up; it comes up with older people, and older relations, where there is a breakdown in faithfulness with regard to the truth, where sons may eat with fathers that are withdrawn from and daughters may eat with fathers that are withdrawn from. It may even be persons that are apart from the house who may be only in-laws come and eat with those withdrawn from. The thing is not right; it is not according to the truth.
A.P.C.L. In the passage you read in Matthew there is no reference to husbands and wives.
S.McC. A wife or a husband seems to be the only exception, in the Scriptures, in that relation.
A.Hn. In @2 Corinthians 6, which we so often refer to, we have the words 'participation' and 'fellowship.' "What participation is there between righteousness and lawlessness? or what fellowship of light with darkness?" Do you think that would help us, if we reflected upon that?
S.McC. It would. I am sure that those persons that eat with those that are withdrawn from have got no real affection for the persons as they should have. If they had real genuine care and affection for the persons, they would be faithful to the Lord and faithful to the truth. Alas, there are many that are
{116}
far more ready to offend the Lord than they are to offend the persons involved.
A.N.W. Is not the word "touch not" in @2 Corinthians 6 very strong? "Touch not what is unclean."
S.McC. It is very strong in that sense, touching means that any contact would involve defilement.
G.R.C. Would you mind clarifying something that was said yesterday about those in the Open fellowship? There are those in Great Britain who have the idea in their minds that everybody in the Open fellowship should be treated as though they had been individually withdrawn from by us, even though they may be young persons who do not know their right hand from their left.
S.McC. I think if we carefully read J.N.D.s letters when the thing was at its height, we would see that he makes a difference between those that lead and those that are misled. Therefore, we have to exercise discernment. Where persons are confirmed in that evil system and are propagating it there could be no social intercourse at all with such. But where young persons may come along, and are seeking their way and interested in the truth, you would like to help such if you can.
G.R.C. And further, even if they have not got to that point, if they are just, as we might say, simple ones who have known nothing different, there would be no justification for treating them as though we had withdrawn from them, would there? We would take care, in our association with them, and seek to help them. We would not seek association with them, we would not treat them as though they were under discipline.
S.McC. You would bear in mind their links with the system that we have definitely judged to be evil and can have no contact with. But if they come along to the fellowship meetings, and are under the truth, you would not ask them to go outside when it
{117}
comes to the fellowship tea, I mean, you would accept them on the basis on which they are found until they are proved otherwise, as Jehovah said in Jeremiah, "Let them return unto thee; but return not thou unto them," chapter 15: 19.
S.G. What would you say in relation to a circumstance where two persons, one of whom is in fellowship with us and the other person is possibly a natural sister or an aunt and they live in the same household, and the sister in fellowship with us desires to have her brethren along to the house, and there is the possibility of the other party being there? What would you say as to that circumstance?
S.McC. I would say that the brethren have enough wisdom to meet all these matters, or they should have. We cannot go into all the details in these meetings, but I should credit the brethren with having wisdom to meet these situations as they arise.
W.H.W. Would the first two verses of @Ephesians 5 govern us in regard to what you are saying as to the practical circumstances? "Be ye therefore imitators of God, as beloved children, and walk in love, even as the Christ loved us, and delivered himself up for us, an offering and sacrifice to God for a sweet-smelling savour." I wondered whether we should not be thinking on the line of something for God flowing out of these circumstances.
S.McC. That passage has that clearly in mind, in the offering and sacrifice to God for a sweet-smelling savour. But here in the end of @Ephesians 5 we are being impressed with the fact that He might present the assembly to Himself, that is Christ. It is a question of what the assembly is to Christ, glorious, as it says, and that it might be holy and blameless. The Lord is constantly engaged in His service, and it is charged with the greatest love and the greatest affection and He is constantly operating towards this great objective.
{118}
J.S.E. You said in an earlier reading, in speaking of Paul's distinctive place in the ministry, that there were certain things the like of which could not be found anywhere else. Do these three passages that we have read stand in that category?
S.McC. They do. Of what other family could we say the things that are found here in @Ephesians 5? These statements are exclusive to the assembly, bringing out her priceless value in the eyes of Christ. So it says (verse 29), "For no one has ever hated his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it, even as also the Christ the assembly." That is, it is not just a question of the application of mere arbitrary principles, but behind all the light that the Lord gives us as to principles, is this nourishing and cherishing of the assembly; nourishing and cherishing His own flesh, as we might say.
J.S.E. Is it safe to say, in view of the exalted view of the assembly here, that while types help us in certain directions, there is no type that could fully present this?
S.McC. There is not. Because even while we might go back to @Genesis 2, it does not rise to what we have here. I mean in the sense that here the moral question has been resolved; so that it says, "but that it might be holy and blameless." That could not be introduced into @Genesis 2.
W.H. Does the assembly therefore secure an added lustre through the facing of these moral questions and exercises, that are not seen in @Genesis 2?
S.McC. That is the point, and how wonderful it must be to God, that not only has the moral question been solved in Christ, not only has there been the solution to the tree of good and evil at the cross, but now there is a vessel, perfectly in accord with that, for it is holy and blameless. What a lustre attaches to this vessel in that light!
A.J.G. Does the allusion to "the word" here,
{119}
"the washing of water by the word," involve bringing home to the affections and intelligence of the saints the full import of the death of Christ on the one hand, and the full grandeur of divine thoughts and the desires of Christ in regard of the assembly, on the other hand?
S.McC. It does, it is a remarkable combination in that way.
W.B.H. Does the assembly concretely here emerge from the testimonial sphere in this passage, in perfect correspondence to the altogether loveliness of the Man of the gospels?
S.McC. It is the fruit of the service of Christ. As a result of that wonderful service throughout the dispensation, and especially now, the assembly will emerge from the testimonial sphere without a spot or a wrinkle or any such thing; she will be holy and blameless.
W.C. Is the standard here the one pearl of great value?
S.McC. Just so. That was in His mind, "Christ also loved the assembly." He had the pearl in His mind in the gospels, but the epistles are to bring before us how the saints are brought into complete accord with what was in the divine mind in the gospels.
W.C. And if He sold all that He had to possess it, we ought not to be unready to part with something, or everything, do you think?
S.McC. That is a good point to bring in, I am sure, because it is humbling at times how, like the young man in the gospels, money, property and possessions weigh with us, when it comes to the working out of principles.
A.W.G.T. Is that why the Lord is said, according to the parable in @Matthew 13, to have gone and sold all that He had? There was a transaction in it?
S.McC. Just so.
J.H. You have referred to the distinctiveness of
{120}
Christ in these passages, seen in the word "himself." Does this enter into the distinctiveness of the assembly? In @Revelation 19 it is, the Lamb's wife has "made herself ready," and in @Revelation 21 she is seen by herself, as it were.
S.McC. Just so. Distinctiveness comes in here too, in the word 'it.' That is, union involves the link between two persons. It merges into the oneness that is referred to, but you have got two persons, you see. Union is not organic; it does not stand, as it were, between the body and the Head, although it is closely allied with that. It is two persons, one who is brought to the Other, just as the woman was brought to the man, and just as in @Ephesians 2 we are brought to Christ where He is. You have got two personalities brought together.
J.H. So in the light of that the incentive would be as to what we can give up, not what we can retain. Paul even apparently changed his calling so as to be freer for the assembly.
S.McC. Just so. And what affects you so much is that this whole chapter is so charged with these final touches of the service of Christ with His love and affection. It says, "no one has ever hated his own flesh"; I mean, sometimes it is suggested that hatred enters into these matters, but it is expressly said here, "no one has ever hated his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it, even as also *the* Christ *the* assembly: for we are members of his body; we are of his flesh, and of his bones."
W.S.S. Do we need to see that the final thought is the Lord's joy in the presentation of the assembly to Himself?
S.McC. Just so. And I think in passing over to Philippians in regard to this matter, that perhaps a word is apropos in regard to universal conditions, in a prevailing sin, which is linked with the modern world, and that is like a plague in different parts. I am
{121}
sure that while the grace of the dispensation is so wonderful and is able to meet us in regard to such things, it is important that we should see the terribleness of that character of sin, fornication and adultery, and the awful bearing of it in the enemy's hand in relation to the assembly, he attacking the chastity and purity of the assembly through it.
J.M. Is it striking in that way, how Paul constantly brings reference to those sins into his epistles? Do you think that he is thinking of the assembly and what it is for Christ, and how that sin particularly militates against it?
S.McC. Yes. And I am afraid of the danger of lightness in regarding that sin. It is a sin distinctive from other sins, in that it involves what is against the organism, the body of Christ.
C.H. The apostle, in Corinthians has that in his mind when he referred to the Corinthians, and his concern to present them a *chaste* virgin to Christ -- not just a virgin, but a chaste virgin.
S.McC. Exactly. I am sure he had in mind what was prevalent among them in that sense.
C.H. I wondered whether he was not governed by the light that we have been speaking about in approaching a very difficult situation. I was thinking of the reference we have had to the way things are done. Do you not think it is important to have a right motive in the way things are done?
S.McC. I am sure that is very important. In matters that are taken up in our localities, it is not because of bad personal feelings towards persons; we will never be supported on that line. It may be there is someone that I am not getting on well with, and I am glad for an opportunity to bring something up. That will never do, we shall never have divine support on those lines. We should have this high elevated level before us, that we are considering.
C.H. And the effect on the company is not just
{122}
that they should prove themselves right, but that they should prove themselves pure? That is the word in @2 Corinthians 7, I believe.
S.McC. I think what you say is very important. We do not want just to get a reputation for dealing with a matter. I mean, you might get some localities that might say, 'Well, we were the first to deal with this thing.' 'We have dealt with these things all through the years.' There is not much in that in itself.
C.H. And purity relates to holiness, does it not?
S.McC. It does.
J.K. In Malachi we have, "Take heed then to your spirit, ... (for I hate putting away)," chapter 2: 15. The feelings of God enter into the matter, do they not?
S.McC. Very good. @Ephesians 5 is charged with the feelings of Christ, and our feelings are to be effective in all these matters. Now a word as to Philippians. It says, "our commonwealth has its existence in the heavens, from which also we await the Lord Jesus Christ as Saviour, who shall transform *our body* of humiliation," not our bodies of humiliation, but "our body of humiliation into conformity to *his* body of glory." There is nothing less before the Lord than that together we should be conformed to that marvellous divine conception, according to purpose and counsel, "*his body* of glory."
P.H.H. Does the 'commonwealth,' or as it says below 'associations of life' stand over against these wicked links which we have been speaking about, which Paul mentions? Would the associations of life as having their existence in the heavens help, as a practical thing, to keep the assembly pure?
S.McC. That is very important, and especially when it comes to this matter of finality, that our associations of life should be right. We must see that they are heavenly; that is, the social side and
{123}
social cliques and social classes, and all that kind of thing that is inimical to the truth of the assembly, it would all go out in the light of this, "our commonwealth has its existence in the heavens."
A.E.M. Hospitality is a heavenly feature?
S.McC. It is indeed. It was the feature of the first heavenly man in the type, Abraham, was it not?
A.J.G. Hospitality without partisanship.
S.McC. Very important, I mean, it is very important that we should be saved and delivered from partiality, having persons to our houses that are on the same social level and status, the same professional level and status. We want to see that the assembly would abominate all that kind of thing, and that we are lifted on to a heavenly level, where all the saints are great in our eyes.
E.E.P. Does @Romans 16 indicate that Paul was not a partial man?
S.McC. It shows how he knew all the brethren. It was not just that he had a list of them, that he could read off their names, but he *knew* them, and the impressions of Christ and the spiritual qualities that marked them.
P.H.H. Were you going to say something about 'our body'?
S.McC. I thought it showed the way that we are bound up together in this matter, with Paul. Paul links himself on with the saints, like Abigail and David, in "the bundle of the living." The expression "who shall transform our body," is akin to "our house," in @2 Corinthians 5, "which is from heaven." What would you say?
P.H.H. I think I can say I was thinking something like that. Is it a kind of collective or characteristic thing which belongs to the saints as of the assembly? So that you have not the different individual persons in your mind, but something which is characteristic of all, as being in this condition?
{124}
S.McC. Exactly. That is what is in mind. Now in regard to this great event in @1 Thessalonians 4, it says, "For this we say to you in the word of the Lord, that we, the living, who remain to the coming of the Lord, are in no way to anticipate those who have fallen asleep; for the Lord himself, with an assembling shout, with archangel's voice and with trump of God, shall descend from heaven." I think it is very affecting that the Lord Himself is accompanied by all these augmentary features, if I might reverently refer to them as that. "The Lord himself, *with* an assembling shout, *with* archangel's voice and *with* trump of God, shall descend from heaven; and the dead in Christ shall rise first; then we, the living who remain, shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air; and thus we shall be always with the Lord." What a blessed hope we have! How living is it with us?
J.S.E. Could these three passages be linked with finality under three distinct headings? In this last scripture, would finality be presented to the brethren for their comfort amid sorrow, and would it be presented to the Philippians because of their practical enjoyment of heavenly associations and freedom from everything that is alien; and would the finality in @Ephesians 5 be connected with the glory and consummation of love's service with its objects? Would you think that is right?
S.McC. Yes, I think that is right.
P.H.H. Does this passage in Thessalonians bear more upon the Lord than the great change which is to happen to the saints, as such? In @1 Corinthians 15 for instance it says, "*we* shall not all fall asleep ... *we* shall all be changed," and so on. But I notice that this part says, "The Lord himself."
S.McC. There is no literal mention of the change in @1 Thessalonians 4; it involves it, but it is not developed there; it is to fasten our attention on the
{125}
Lord. I think this matter of archangel's voice is very interesting. Why does that come in? The angels attended Christ when He came into the world, they attended His reception into glory, and it is a wonderful thing that there should be a reference to the character of what is angelic in this wonderful event of the saints going into glory with Christ, "The Lord himself ... with archangel's voice ... shall descend."
J.S.E. Is there a military touch in that, because there is only one archangel mentioned, and he is a military one, is he not?
S.McC. I think so, the assembling shout, the archangel's voice and the trump of God, all have a military setting.
C.M.M. Whilst we connect "the Spirit and the bride say, Come," mainly with the appearing, is there a sense in which we can view the coming of the Lord as one complete matter, so to speak, in two parts? Is the immediate hope of the assembly linked with this wonderful moment, the marriage of the Lamb?
S.McC. Just so. This very passage involves both sides. Verse 14, for instance, says, "For if we believe that Jesus has died and has risen again, so also God will bring with him those who have fallen asleep through Jesus." And then in the next chapter we have references to the appearing. So that I think there is a faint suggestion of the whole thing here, but the immediate application is to the rapture.
V.C.L. Are we not to be reminded each Lord's day morning, at the assembly meeting, of both? The whole joy and glory of finality thus covers the service of God.
S.McC. Just so. I am sure that these thoughts as to what is distinctive and final should fill our minds and our hearts in relation to Paul's ministry, and they would help us, in the spirit of Paul, in regard to all that pertains to our path here.
{126}
DISTINCTIVENESS AND FINALITY IN PAUL'S MINISTRY (6)
@Ephesians 1: 3 -- 6, 15 -- 20; @Ephesians 3: 14 -- 21
S.McC. It is specially in mind to consider in this closing reading the richness and the glory of the family setting in this letter. This is what distinguishes this letter, in relation to all other letters. We have the glory of divine Persons presented in this letter, the glory of God according to the fulness of His nature having come out in Christ, moving according to His thoughts and purpose. But what gives peculiar touch to this letter in that relation is the great place that the saints have in the wonderful relation of sonship. We have perhaps often noted that Hebrews is full of thoughts of divine majesty. God there is presented in a remarkable way, from beginning to end, as also are Christ and the Spirit. But it helps to see in comparing the two letters that, on our side, Hebrews does not rise in its general bearing and teaching to the fulness and to the richness that we have in this letter, the epistle to the Ephesians. And it is in mind that we should be helped in settling in in the presence of these passages, that something of this richness may lay hold of us, for God would give us a sense that we are entitled to take account of ourselves in relation to His own glorious thoughts. He has that right to have us, as it were, draw apart for a moment from all that attaches to the sense of our own weakness and our own infirmity, to take account of His own thoughts regarding the saints. There are three things that stand out in these passages, amongst other things, that should affect our souls in regard to the richness and the fulness we have been referring to, especially in view of our serving God in
{127}
all His infinite majesty and greatness, being the God He is. The first is, the thought of the Beloved, one of the unique and rare references to Christ that comes into Paul's distinctive ministry; then the Father of glory, another rare and distinctive reference to God. We have Christ in manhood, the exalted Man, in all the blessedness of what that manhood means and God as Father of glory standing related to Him. He is presented as operating in view of the heavenly side, in connection with the great resurrection act, in which His surpassing greatness and power are seen, and in view of our understanding the hope of His calling. Then there is the unique reference in chapter 3 to the Father's Spirit, I think perhaps the Lord might help us to see the great importance of this expression, 'His Spirit' -- the Father's Spirit. You will notice that we do not get the Spirit of sonship formally referred to in Ephesians; whilst sonship is there in all its richness, the Spirit is not alluded to, in these chapters, as the Spirit of sonship, although His presence is referred to, which would involve that as the earnest of our inheritance. He is referred to as the Spirit of sonship in the fundamental letters. Romans and Galatians; but when we come to the letter that deals with assembly formation in all its surpassing greatness and uniqueness in the universe of God, and when we come to what bears on the uniqueness of family relations in Ephesians we get the Father's Spirit referred to. We bear in mind also Matthew's reference to it, in the testimonial sphere. In connection with these first few verses that we have begun with, F.E.R. long ago pointed out, able teacher such as he was, that there is no allusion to our responsibility in them; nevertheless, the height and the richness and dignity of our calling would affect us in the scene and path of responsibility here.
J.S.E. In order that we might settle in (as you have suggested) could we just have another word
{128}
about the contrast between this epistle and that to the Hebrews?
S.McC. I think, as we generally know and understand, that it helps to see that Hebrews is an extricatory epistle, Ephesians is not. Colossians is almost on the line of what is extricatory, in that the saints were being affected by alien influences diverting them from the Head, but Ephesians and Romans are normal epistles, in which the truth is laid out with skill by the apostle. Hebrews is extricatory, having in mind the detachment of the saints from the earthly side, especially Jerusalem, with all that in their minds held such repute. It is also a wilderness epistle, so that while you get rays of divine majesty and greatness shining into the letter, the state of the saints is not normal, as we have in Ephesians, where the state of first love exists.
J.S.E. Would it be right to say that the fact that the Spirit approaches Hebrews by way of types, which must have had a beginning in time, makes it less than this, which refers to the saints in relation to what is beyond time? Would that be just, do you think?
S.McC. Yes, it is very interesting to see that we do not get the types formally referred to in Ephesians, nor the Old Testament scriptures quoted in the same way in the first part as we have in the epistle to the Hebrews. I think all that helps.
P.L. So that the word 'saints,' and 'faithful in Christ Jesus,' does not allude to faithfulness in the wilderness path, though of course that must ever be there, but trustworthiness in regard of the whole scope of the truth?
S.McC. That would be it. It is a question especially of the completeness of Paul's ministry which this letter involved; so that in verse 15 when he refers (we might anticipate that for the moment) to the faith in the Lord Jesus which is in them, it is not the
{129}
faith exactly that is linked with the relief side in our acceptance of Him as Saviour; it is the quality that is linked with spiritual formation, it is the product of the work of God in the saints.
A.J.G. Has it significance in your mind that, in this exalted epistle, sonship is treated of before there is any mention of the assembly?
S.McC. I think it is of all moment to see that. You will recall that, in this very place in meetings some years back, that matter came up, and it seems to suggest the significance of the family side in Ephesians and impresses our hearts with what they have often been impressed with, that sonship involves what is greater than union. Would you go with that?
A.J.G. Why do you say that? Have you in mind that it is the pleasure of God that is primarily in view in sonship?
S.McC. Just so, although it is well to keep in mind the equality from a certain angle of the features of the truth, whether the brethren of Christ, or the bride and wife of Christ, or the sons. But sonship seems to have been a marvellously designed blessing by God in relation to men; so that even when we reach divine supremacy, and are before God, in all the majesty of God, we never lose sight of sonship.
H.C. Does it link up with J.T.s remark that masculine love exceeded feminine love?
S.McC. That was what I had in mind in making the comparison, although, in another way, we must see the equal values of all the features of the truth as merging in that glorious expression which we hope to finish with, "the assembly in Christ Jesus."
G.R.C. Did not F.E.R. say that no one who has not some apprehension of the truth of sonship could ever merge in the body? So that from that standpoint it is essential that we should understand something of sonship before we can be of any service in the assembly.
{130}
S.McC. It is a very interesting thing, in the light in which you now refer to it, that sonship not only has to do with the fullest and greatest thoughts of God as to men, but it enters into the very elements of Christianity. It is one of the first things that is linked with the gospel.
G.R.C. That is what I was thinking. It is, in one way, one of the most basic truths and yet it goes to the very highest point.
A.B.P. Are you thinking of Galatians when you say that?
S.McC. That is just what I was thinking of, how the light of sonship is brought into Galatians. And then, reference is made to it in Romans.
G.R.C. So that the experience of sonship in @Romans 8, coming to it experimentally, precedes the presentation of our bodies, with a view to the working out the truth of the one body in Christ.
S.McC. Just so. The skill of F.E.R.s ability as a teacher, to set the truth in order in the minds of the saints, is remarkable. And he referred to the two things in @Romans 8, which were essential as preceding the thought of the body. That is, the great place of the Spirit and also the matter of sonship, that you referred to. We must understand these two things in order to be rightly in our place in the body.
C.R.W. Is that why we have sonship mentioned so early in John's gospel?
S.McC. I suppose you allude to Christ? As you know, sonship is never formally alluded to in the saints in John's gospel. The only reference, and it is by implication, that we get to sonship in the saints in John's gospel is in chapter 20.
A.N.W. We have the thought of children.
S.McC. Yes, children of God. I am glad you referred to that because it links up with what our brother is referring to, that at the outset of John's
{131}
gospel the family relationship in the saints is referred to, only it is not on the line of sonship; it is on the line of generation -- the children of God.
A.B.P. How do you fit in the reference in @John 4, about the son, the courtier's request that the Lord would come down and heal his son. I have wondered about that passage in relation to what you have been saying, that we do not have sonship in the saints set out directly in John's gospel.
S.McC. I think there are many ways in which we *apply* the thought. You take @John 17 and other passages that could be referred to, we apply the thought in the interpretation of the truth. And we could do so in the passage you quote, for it is sonship on the moral line in the end of @John 4, is it not? By indirect allusion, the saints would therefore come in. But what I was referring to is the fact that there is no direct allusion, in John's gospel, to sonship actually in the saints. It is all the sonship of Christ until @John 20, when He says, "my Father and your Father."
M.P.S. Would you distinguish for us a little more between the thought of children and of sons. Are we children by birth, and sons by adoption? There is sometimes found the thought in some minds that sonship is connected with maturity as from childhood, the suggestion being made that the son is a grown-up child.
S.McC. This remark that sonship is a grown-up child is wholly contrary to the truth in Christianity, because Galatians clearly shows that that is the great distinction in Christianity. We have the contrast in that epistle of the child under tutors and guardians; but now sonship has been brought in. We do not have the kindergarten in Christianity, we do not have childhood in Christianity in that sense, as under tutors and guardians; we come immediately to maturity in Christianity as receiving sonship.
{132}
W.R.M. In verse 4 here, we have the thought of holy and blameless. Does that link in any sense with the idea of generation, what the saints are in nature?
S.McC. I am sure it does, because, while the children of God allude to the saints generally, as presented in scripture, in the scene of contrariety, yet the children of God, as a family, are an eternal thought. It is an eternal idea, and the appellation "children of God" has the same status in the family that is linked with the appellation "sons of God." There is no inequality in status.
J.S.E. And apart from gradation, like @1 John 2, it is generally not diminutive, is it?
S.McC. No, it is not. It has the full thought in mind. We do have the diminutive thought when John is referring to stages of growth in his epistle, but not in the reference in @John 1.
C.M.M. Would you say a word about adoption pertaining to Israel, and the many families in heaven and earth, named of the Father, and such expressions as "Jehovah, thou art our Father," in @Isaiah 63: 8?
S.McC. I think it helps to see that in the universe of God, every family as named of the Father will be affected by sonship in some way or another. Whether it is angelic or men, whatever family we may think of, they will be affected by sonship in some degree or another, but the assembly is unique. No other family in the universe of God has got the Spirit of sonship but the assembly.
G.R.C. So that in the case of the assembly, it is more than adoption in the sense in which we use the word generally, because we have the Spirit of sonship?
S.McC. It is. You could never get that on ordinary natural lines, could you?
G.R.C. Impossible.
R.G.B. Does the thought of character enter into the thought of children, as following the idea of
{133}
generation, and is the thought of dignity and glory linked with sonship?
S.McC. I think so. I think that helps to see the eternal thought that will run through.
G.R.C. So that this applies only to those of the assembly, would you say? Every family may receive sonship in some measure, as status, but only those of the assembly are called children of God.
S.McC. That is the truth. No other family has that designation in the Scriptures, but the assembly in this dispensation.
P.L. Is that the distinction between the abodes, where every other family will be in its divinely appointed abode, but the Lord's utterance in @John 14 is, "For I go to prepare you a place." Is that the distinctiveness of the family of the firstborn ones, the assembly?
S.McC. Yes, it is. It brings out the fact that the assembly will eternally retain a distinctiveness that will mark its position in the universe. All the families will recognise the distinctiveness that attaches to the assembly as nearest to God.
P.H.H. Would you mind saying a little about the thought of choice as preceding the thought of sonship or adoption? It says in verse 4, "according as he has chosen us in him before the world's foundation." Does it bear the character of what is choice as we say, or excellent, and would it link on with the peculiar glory of the assembly?
S.McC. I think it does. It also carries the determinate action of God's will, for the "chosen" links with the thought of purpose which comes into this chapter.
L.E.S. Do we have the constitutional side here involving the persons, the family side, when it says "that we should be holy, and blameless before him in love"? Those same words are referred to in chapter 5, that we had this morning. Is one more the
{134}
family side, and the other the full side as to the assembly?
S.McC. It is a remarkable thing that we should get it mentioned at the beginning of the letter on the masculine side in connection with the saints in sonship, and also at the end in chapter 5 in connection with the marital side.
L.E.S. That is what I was thinking, that the two sides correspond.
S.McC. They do. And so this matter of what is constitutional is very important, for eternally we are to understand the fulness that attaches to this family. That is, underlying the great thought of sonship is their constitution as of divine generation, that they are of God and have the divine nature in that way. They fill out the position, not only as a matter of light, but they have got the nature suited to the position. Then we have the Spirit of God's Son augmenting the whole matter, with His feelings, and also the Spirit of the Father, augmenting in a strengthening way, in view of a wider apprehension of the whole matter. There is a fulness in all that, that should affect us.
G.R.D. Is there what is unique in the term "the Beloved," as attaching to Christ in sonship?
S.McC. I think that should affect our hearts, as one said at the outset, for it is one of the things we should consider in this passage, "wherein he has taken us into favour in the Beloved," without saying who He is, or going into any dissertation as to the Person, as if He is well known by that appellation amongst the saints in Ephesus.
G.R.D. Does that uniqueness, and our link with Him, give a certain distinctiveness to the way we enter into sonship?
S.McC. Yes. Because, what He has received. He has given to us, only that He always retains, "as
{135}
the apple-tree among the trees of the wood," His own eternal distinction, as *the* Beloved.
A.W. We have "The blood of his *own*," in @Acts 20. Is that the same expression?
S.McC. You have in mind that "his own" brings in a strong term of endearment? Yes.
A.P.C.L. Does the reference in verse 5 "to himself" bear in any way on this matter of the Beloved? The adoption is said to be to Himself.
S.McC. I am glad you bring that reference in, because one was thinking of it earlier in reading this passage. We were speaking this morning about the "Himself," in the passages we had before us then, but now we have another "Himself." That is, the glory of the Lord's humanity, in His present glorious state, is before us, and the God and Father that is alluded to here, of that blessed Man. The "Himself" would particularly focus our attention on that, "having marked us out beforehand for adoption through Jesus Christ to *himself*." There is what Christ finds Himself in regard to the assembly, but now we are in the presence of what the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ has for Himself.
A.E.M. Is it greatly affecting to us to consider that God had not only the idea in His thoughts, but He had the persons in mind?
S.McC. That is very fine. That should touch our affections very much, because we might be inclined to get occupied with conceptions and thoughts and forget the blessedness of the fact that God had persons in mind.
A.J.G. Would it also be right to say that these greatest thoughts of God could not be brought out until after the incarnation and indeed the ascension? That is to say, until the Beloved, in whom they centre, was actually in heaven.
S.McC. It is very affecting to think of that, along with what you suggested earlier in these series of
{136}
meetings, that in regard to the heavenly side, One of the Godhead, One of the Holy Trinity, came into a condition where that thought could be set out in relation to which we are being conformed. The same applies, does it not, to this matter of sonship? It is very affecting to think that One of the Holy Persons came into this position and this condition in which He was so unique, "the only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father."
R.G.B. Does that bear on the way in which the sonship of Christ is presented in John's gospel? We have the uniqueness of it, and transcendent greatness of it coming out, and the relations of the Son with the Father, as if the fulness of the thing is to be set out in Christ as Man here.
S.McC. That is it. Therefore the importance of the incarnation as it is presented in John's gospel, because the relationship of sonship was in the human family a long way back. As we go up the stream of time, we see, from the beginning, how that relation of father and son was in the human family. But then the fulness of the time comes, and God indicates to us that He is going to set out His own thoughts, not in angels, not in men who are creatures, but in one divine Person taking the place of Son, as born in time, as coming into the world. John presents it, "the Word became flesh," and another divine Person taking the place of Father. How all that should affect us as to the greatness of this subject!
P.H.H. And does it add something to the mention of the Beloved, as you mentioned just now; it does not say who the Beloved is? This epistle, in other parts, says "in Christ," "in the Lord," and "in Jesus"; but this title appears to be unique, "in the Beloved," referring to Christ. Would it be useful to say a little about that? I wondered whether it referred anti-typically to David and Solomon.
S.McC. I think it does. Although I think there is
{137}
particular weight on the Davidic side, it would be inclusive of both, because Solomon was called Jedidiah, the Beloved of Jehovah. But the point you bring up, I think, is important, and should help us in the service of God. Very often when an appellation or a name comes up, the question is asked. Who does it refer to? Does it refer to the three Persons, or does it refer to one Person? Who is in mind? Paul does not tell us who is in mind. He seems to minister on the ground of confidence that the brethren know whom he is referring to, as he goes on to say (which we have not got in mind to touch) "in whom we have redemption." The saints know that there is no other one but Him, that is the Beloved.
J.S.E. Does this bring up the whole matter of really being in the secret of divine thoughts? You have made reference to that word a little earlier and I wondered if that is not the key to the wealth of the epistle. It is not only persons, as has been said, but persons who are in the secret. Is that right?
S.McC. Just so. Persons that are the subject of the heavenly call. That is, it is not a general idea of the calling, the calling is according to God's purpose, the exalted thoughts linked with His purpose. It is all to lift and elevate our thoughts above the level of things here, so that we might see the dignity that attaches to us. God surely has a right to have us apart for a while, and speak of the dignity that attaches to us in the light of purpose, and then eventually, as called.
A.B.P. In that connection, should we have in mind possibly verse 7 of the next chapter, that the saints are necessary in order that all that has been accomplished through Christ is to have its glorious display?
S.McC. Yes. It is a remarkable thing how the saints are bound up with display. That is, what has come on to view in mediatorial operations in Christ
{138}
and all the grace that has been operating in these operations towards the saints, the saints are so fitted, through divine workmanship, that they become the body or the vessel in which the surpassing riches of God's grace is going to be displayed.
A.B.P. And according to this epistle would that be, not so much the kingdom, but the display to the principalities in the heavenlies?
S.McC. I think it would involve the whole scope of the heavenly intelligences, because they are greatly interested in this matter, because sonship was in the angels historically, before it was linked with the saints, I mean as to actual fact.
A.J.G. This display, which has just been referred to, is in the coming ages. It is not limited to one age, but it says, "that he might display in the coming ages." Does that give it an eternal bearing?
S.McC. It does. Throughout all eternity, men will marvel, men in that abstract sense perhaps inclusive of the angels, will marvel at the wonder of the workmanship of God in this family. Because only of the assembly is it said "we are his workmanship." It shall be said of Israel, "What hath God wrought?" but of those that form the assembly it is said, "We are his workmanship."
A.B.P. And that passage you refer to in Numbers links it on with the present moment, does it not, "At *this time* it shall be said ... What hath God wrought!" @Numbers 23: 23?
S.McC. Just so.
A.B.P. That comes in at the time of the last encampment before going over into the land, does it not?
S.McC. It does, and the brazen serpent and the springing well have all come on to view, and led in the path of the purpose of God, the pathway in which there is life and no death. The whole thought of the inheritance is before them.
{139}
P.H.H. Is the service of God in any way in the apostle's mind? I am thinking of the expression in verse 6, "to the praise of the glory of his grace." Would that mean that whilst Paul is laying out the truth in a certain normal, heavenly setting, he has in mind that it would be immediately taken up and mentioned responsively by the saints in the service of God?
S.McC. I think so. I think this is all designedly here through the levitical skill of Paul, under the superintendence of the Spirit, having in mind the service of God, because we must remember that what gives fulness to the service of God is this family side in the assembly.
P.H.H. And coupled with that, according to what we have been saying, the ability in mind with the Spirit's power to go back into eternity. "He has chosen us in him before the world's foundation," and then, "having marked us out beforehand for adoption," and so on. Must that be unique to the assembly?
S.McC. Just so, although in a general sense, men come into the purpose of God, because the tree of life stands related to purpose, and while the truth of it bears on the celestials, it is a thought that stands related to men. Then, eternal life, originally in its primary setting, stood related to *men*, but these thoughts here are exclusive to the assembly, in that sense.
P.H.H. Yes. What was really in my mind was the reference to J.T.s term years ago, when Ephesians was read, "From Eternity to Eternity." Does the assembly have the ability, in the service of praise, as a heavenly vessel, to mention intelligently what is from eternity and what goes into eternity?
S.McC. Exactly. So that as we think of the purpose of God, and as we think of eternity, and then all that has transpired in the dip down into time, and the coming into manhood of the Lord Jesus;
{140}
there was first of all the thought of the heavens, heaven secured, because heaven did not exist when the purpose of God was conceived. We sometimes confuse heaven and eternity, as if heaven and eternity are one idea, but they are entirely different ideas. The purpose of God was conceived in eternity, and heaven was designed as a sphere in which that purpose in regard to us would work out, so that it comes on to view here, "blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenlies in Christ."
P.L. "And God called the expanse Heavens." Is that what you have in mind?
S.McC. Yes, it involves that. Although generally the expanse is linked with the sphere of operations, but it lies linked with what we are saying.
J.B.P. Would it be comely, in assembly service, to address the Lord Jesus as the Beloved?
S.McC. I thought it was generally done. At least, I have often heard the saints referring to the Lord as the Beloved, and the Father's delight in Him, and the assembly's delight in Him.
A.J.G. Our brother asked if it was comely to address Him in that way.
S.McC. Well, of course, if you are alluding to Himself and the glory that He has it would be comely, but I do not think it would be comely to *address* the Lord directly as "Beloved."
J.S.E. It is rather descriptive than ascriptive, is it not?
S.McC. That is what I am trying to get at, that is a good way of putting it. In the Song of Songs, of course, it is ascriptive.
M.H.T. Would you mind saying a word, in comparison with the thoughts of children and sons, on the thought of "offspring of God" as it is presented in @Acts 17. Is that only predicated of men as such naturally?
S.McC. Yes, that is quite different from children
{141}
of God. That is, the offspring of God that Paul alludes to bears on man's essential link with God. Man has an essential link with God that no animal or bird has in another sense. Man lives and the animals live, but man is unique, in that sense, as the offspring of God. He has got a link with God that the animal creation does not have, for God breathed into his nostrils the breath of life and man became a living soul. That is unique to man.
G.R.C. Would you say what you think is referred to by the world's foundation? I am referring to this because of remarks as to eternity, and so on.
S.McC. I think Paul is reminding us, in using time and creature language which we have to use, of how far back this matter goes, I mean. We might think it goes back as far as @Genesis 1, "In the beginning"; but this goes back beyond @Genesis 1, "before the world's foundation." I would take it that "before the world's foundation" would involve what is before @Genesis 1: 1. Not only @Genesis 1: 2 to the end, but @Genesis 1: 1. What do you say?
G.R.C. I wondered whether the general thought of the world might include heaven and earth, the whole created sphere.
S.McC. I think it does, and it is put in this way, while we know that creation in Hebrews, and in other parts, involves many worlds. I think the world here is a general expression alluding to what is created.
A.J.G. So when the expression "before the world's foundation" is used, has it not in view the accomplishment of the counsels of God in view of which He brought the world into being?
S.McC. That helps. It is good to see that from this angle the world has been designed by God as a sphere into which His own Son would come. His own Son would be apprehended, contemplated, and in which His Son would die, and in which His thoughts
{142}
would be worked out, and into which the Spirit would come.
P.H.H. Does the thought of foundation therefore bring to mind something to be constructed, a structure; in this case, the structure of all the eternal thoughts of God? Did it not need a foundation of some kind, in which all these things could come into evidence?
S.McC. Well, the world was necessary for men, in that sense, for the working out of God's great thoughts and within the framework of the world we have got profuse suggestions, in figure and in type, as to what God had before Him.
W.B.H. Would it bear on what was said earlier as to the persons being in mind before the structure?
S.McC. That helps. You mean that before the inanimate theatre of operations comes on to view, the persons were before God in His purpose and counsel.
G.W.B. The Lord Jesus in @John 17 speaks to the Father of the *men* whom the Father had given Him out of the world. Does that link with these thoughts?
S.McC. Yes. There is no question but what the Lord in @John 17 is abstractly holding them in relation to the accomplishment of His thoughts, which involve redemption. That is, redemption was necessary in order that these thoughts might come to fruition; that would all be in the Lord's mind in @John 17.
A.P.C.L. Is it remarkable that in that chapter you get the two references, one, "thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world" in verse 24, and in verse 5, as to the glory, just simply "before the world was"?
S.McC. Yes, I think these statements are intended to impress us with the fact of how far back we were in the divine mind, in Ephesians, and how far back we are to be impressed with the Lord being loved.
{143}
V.C.L. Is there a three-fold stress in the "has blessed us," "has chosen us," "has taken us," which would show that the great emphasis on the persons, as has been mentioned, is to be livingly entered into right now, by the Spirit?
S.McC. Just so. What a sense Paul must have had in his soul of it, because, I am sure, being detained in prison, as he was, in all the enjoyment of sabbatical conditions, he was revelling in the glory of these thoughts; not only in an abstract way, but as being reached in the saints at Ephesus. Because there is no doubt but that these great thoughts were reached in Ephesus, amongst the saints.
G.R.C. I think what you were saying just now, as to the world being filled out with creatures and created things, which all bear on what is spiritual, is a very important thing to take account of. God founded the world, and formed it, with processes and things that are to teach us what He had in mind spiritually. I was thinking for instance that, as far as we know, angels were created without generation. Would it not cause us to wonder at the wisdom of God in the present creation that He has designed, that men should come into being by generation, to teach us the family thought; and also, that the marriage link should be here? It is not there with angels, is it?
S.McC. No, it is not. That is very striking and I think it should help us as you come down Genesis chapter 1 and all the verses, and think of all the marvels of divine operations. You think of the varied things and the varied spheres, and then you think of light and rule introduced, but down we come until we get to the sixth day and then the acme of His thoughts comes into view, Man, involving, as we are considering it, what God has had in mind from all eternity.
A.B.P. Should this give us an elevated view of
{144}
@John 3: 16, so that it is not restricted to the gospel *only*, but it has a glory behind it?
S.McC. Well, it has. It is the ordered system of things, as well as the persons, that God loved before it was marred by sin. That should affect our hearts, I think we should be affected here, before passing on to chapter 3, by manhood in this relation to God. That is, "Blessed be the *God* and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ," at the beginning of our passage, and then "the Beloved" at the end of our passage. Surely it should affect our souls, manhood in this glorious condition, standing related to God. Whether we think of the official side or whether we think of God in the paternal relation, as the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, humanity in Christ in these relations should surely affect us.
A.J.G. Does not that rather confirm what was said earlier, that the title "the Beloved" covers both the types of David and Solomon, David being the *man* after God's own heart, beloved on account of *what* he was, and Solomon being the son and loved in sonship?
S.McC. Very good. So that Solomon is loved before there ever was an action on his part, before there ever was a movement, we might say. God sent by the hand of Nathan the prophet, and called him Jedidiah, meaning 'Beloved of Jehovah,' @2 Samuel 12: 25.
G.R.D. Before you go on to chapter 3, would you say something as to verse 17 that you read, "the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory." Is that God in the sense of Father, Son and Spirit?
S.McC. I think it alludes to God, it alludes to Deity; but in my own mind, I do not introduce, actively and concretely, the Son and the Spirit in viewing the Lord Jesus Christ as the exalted Man in this passage. In this passage here, from verse 15 to the end, it is the exalted Man that is before us, and
{145}
the assembly is united to Him as the exalted Man. As I view Him as the exalted Man. I do not introduce active thoughts as to the Deity, and His part in it, in that sense; although abstractly, we must always keep in mind His place in that. The word 'God' never loses its fulness; let us always keep that in mind.
A.P.C.L. Is there therefore, a reference to the fulness of the matter as set out for us in the Father, in the position that He has in the economy?
S.McC. I think there is. That is, the Deity is before us operating in relation to the great scheme of glory in that glorious Person, especially in regard to the calling, and the raising of Christ from among the dead, and that power operating in the saints; it is Deity that is operating, but in that relation.
A.P.C.L. So was there not great skill in what beloved J.T. said as to this title, "the God of our Lord Jesus Christ," that it was a full title as to God, not of God, but *as to* God, bearing on what you are saying, as to His position and in relation to Christ in manhood?
S.McC. Just so. More than once J.T. alludes to the Spirit of glory, and the Lord of glory, and the Father of glory, as involving all three Persons; showing how, in his mind, he attached the thought of Father of glory, to that Person; but then it is linked with "the God of our Lord Jesus Christ."
J.S.E. Would it serve to remind one another of what J.T. used often to say, as to that Man's God?
S.McC. That is the point, I think. In reply therefore to the question I would say it is the full thought of God, but I am afraid that sometimes we think that we have to include *concretely* and actively the other two Persons when we say the full thought of God, whereas that is not always necessary as I see in Scripture.
G.R.C. Mr. Myles made a good remark ten days
{146}
ago in Hornchurch about this expression. I think he said that in the economy, the Father is the great Originator and Director of everything, but in this expression it is God, it is the Deity, and the will of the Deity involves that once you come to the economy, the Father is the One who carries that out.
S.McC. I think that helps, and it is just exactly what has always been in one's mind in regard to this passage.
C.H. Four years ago, in this place, we were reading Ephesians, and coming to this passage, it was said it is God in that Person, the Father. I think it struck a good many, as stating the truth. It is God in that Person, the Father.
S.McC. Just so. It does not lessen the thought of the Deity in any sense.
C.H. What we are to understand, is that whichever Person is operating, it is full Deity there, that is operating, and not a part of Deity.
S.McC. I think we want to see that. We are thus preserved from human ways of thinking that the full thought of the Deity must always include concretely and actively the three Persons when we speak. It does not necessarily mean that, because the full thought of the Deity is involved in the Person operating.
J.S.E. Is it not significant that in the abandonment, when Jesus uses the language "my God," as suggested in @Psalm 22, the word 'God' there is the singular word and not the plural one? Does that not help us to see how He regards God by Himself, and He, Jesus, by Himself, as in manhood at that time?
S.McC. Just so, think of manhood in the place of distance. You have there the opposite of course, to what we have here, for here it is manhood in nearness to God, in glory, which is quite a contrast; there it was manhood in distance on account of sin.
{147}
J.S.E. I was only thinking of the word as to His God, whether we cannot be simple and carry that always with us, when we think of Him in His place as Man, for He says, in the word to the overcomer in Philadelphia, "my God"?
S.McC. Just so. But I think it would help to see, in what we have been saying as to God, or Deity, linked with @Ephesians 1: 17, lest anyone would say, 'Well then, we do not need to speak to the Father, and the Son and the Spirit, and mention the Name, which we know God in, as declared.' But, surely God finds pleasure and delight in the fulness linked with the Name as declared coming into the service of God. So that in @Ephesians 3, again we have Deity, in verse 20, "But to him," who is the Him? That is God, Deity, but Deity in three Persons as it goes on to say "to him be glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus." But the 'him' there is not just Deity in One of the Persons coming on to our view, it is Deity in the three Persons objectively before us -- the Object of the answering response to the richness and fulness of the revelation.
W.R.M. Do you think that the use of the word 'him' there. Without naming divine Persons, might suggest that the Being of God is greater than any names which He takes?
S.McC. Well, of course that must be, because God is greater than any relation He comes into, and He is greater than any name that He takes. That *must* be so, the 'him' is to show us that God, the Deity, is not impersonal. It is a *personal* thought, like "God himself shall be with them, their God." It is to save us from thinking of it in an impersonal way.
A.J.G. On our side, our praise must be in accordance with His name, "according to thy name, O God, so is thy praise," @Psalm 48: 10. That would bring in the whole name in @Matthew 28.
S.McC. Exactly. So that there is what love would
{148}
delight in in every feature of glory that is linked with the Deity, with God as declared, as seen in that Name.
A.Hn. May I ask you to say a word as to this remarkable expression, "the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the full knowledge of him"?
S.McC. I think we need help as to that. We should not be content with mere terms, but we should be very much concerned that we have the inward spiritual faculty, by the Spirit, for the apprehension of the glory of our calling and the might of divine operations.
C.H. Are you going to tell us a little about the last passage, chapter 3?
S.McC. The thought of His Spirit has greatly affected me in this passage as coming in just before touching on the assembly in Christ Jesus. I think the reference to the Father's Spirit, in @Ephesians 3, is to impress us with the necessity of the family side, as giving the intimacy and fulness and the richness that are required for the worship of God in the majesty of His Being, insofar as we are able to apprehend His Being with finite understanding and capacity.
A.P.C.L. Is that why it is said to be "according to the riches of his glory"? Would that be His glory in relation to this family realm?
S.McC. Yes. It is not exactly what is linked with unapproachable light; it is the fulness of what is linked with His operations in this wonderful realm that we view Him in, in all its vastness -- "breadth and length and depth and height"!
A.J.G. So that when the Lord speaks of this realm in its wonderful extent. He calls it "My Father's house"; is that right? It impresses the paternal thought upon it, the family side of things.
S.McC. It shows us that our thoughts need to be expanded in regard to the thought of the Father in that sense. God in that paternal sense as alluded to,
{149}
because that expression really involves the universe, does it not? Just as the universe is involved here in @Ephesians 3.
C.H. And the suggestion that every family should be named of the Father, is that the means by which God is to tabernacle with men?
S.McC. That is it. Then there is the channelling of our thoughts from the wideness of the apprehension of the universe and the many families in it, to the great Centre of it, in Christ in the assembly, as it says, "to him be glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus." Think of the dignity that attaches to that expression! It is an expression that we have often had pointed out to us, the preposition 'in' involving the preposition of power, "the assembly in Christ Jesus." What a position it has in the universe of God in this sense!
A.P.C.L. Would you say that that is the most extensive description of the assembly?
S.McC. I know of no other passage in the Scripture that so extensively or so exaltingly refers to the assembly as this, because, whatever feature of glory we may think on, in regard to the assembly, it is all embodied in this expression "the assembly," and then "in Christ Jesus," involves that the holy humanity of Christ is before us; and we have the status in relation to it, "the assembly in Christ Jesus."
J.S.E. Is that 'that Man' in finality?
S.McC. You might say, that vessel in finality, and the glorious state linked with that Man in finality, for the eternal subsisting state between God and men lies in the revelation of God in a Man, and the assembly is blessed inconceivably in that Man.
A.P.C.L. Would it be possible to connect anything of that kind with the two references to "to him" in verse 20 and 21? The first one appears to be God in His fulness but operationally still, and then in verse 21 it repeats "to him."
{150}
S.McC. So that, while the fulness refers to God operationally as He has shone out in Christ, the "to him" in verse 21 really brings us more to what He is personally, as He comes on to view in that outshining, not just exactly according to His might, His righteousness and His power, but the "him" involves what He is in His inward Being, as is conveyed in the names Jehovah and Jah, insofar as we can apprehend Him in the secret of His Being, as He has come on to view in Christ.
G.R.C. So that it really links with @Psalm 150, only of course, taken up in the fulness of Christian light.
S.McC. Just so, so that as we go back to @Psalm 150 in the light of Paul's ministry, and in the light of this ascription, we can see how it links on.
P.L. Does it suggest that the assembly in her fixity will be operating in the service of God before the whole universe, and give lustre and tone and lead to all the families in the service?
S.McC. That is it. It is just like a stone dropped into the brook, and concentric ripple after concentric ripple widens out, it will be like that! As in J.N.D.s hymn -- the note started, as it were, in this refined distinctive family, widening in its waves as it extends to the whole realm and the families in it.
J.McK. Does that connect with the expression "according to the power which works in us"? Would that be unique, in a way, to the assembly?
S.McC. Very good. It brings out the uniqueness that is linked with the Spirit in the saints in the assembly, as He will be in no other family, because in that passage, without doubt, there is an allusion to the Spirit.
P.L. Although every family will be named of the Father, only one family will be set up in sonship, in the sense of the Spirit indwelling, do not you think?
{151}
S.McC. Just so. In regard to every family, we must keep in mind the thought 'By the Spirit all pervading.' That will allude to every family, for the Spirit will pervade the universe and will pervade every family; but only in the assembly in this indwelling way.
A.P.C.L. So that there is not only a matter of praise, but it is glory. It is not only responsive praise, that is in mind, is it, but the fulness that flows from God having come out according to what He is?
S.McC. That is a remarkable thing. It is like an answering glory to the Deity outshining in glory. There is a complete answer in the assembly to that great theme.
{152}
DEPTH
@Genesis 22: 1 -- 8, 15 -- 18; @Psalm 22: 1 -- 3; @Hebrews 9: 13, 14
I have the desire, dear brethren, with the help of the Lord, to say a word as to the depths into which God entered in order that all His precious thoughts might be established for ever. I think we need to take account of this side of things perhaps more than we have done, in order that greater depth of feeling, and greater sobriety, might be brought to pass with us all, not that one would exclude oneself in any way from being in need of these things, but one feels that as the end draws near, and as the Spirit of God is emphasising the exceeding greatness and morally elevated character of the things to which we have been called, there is a need with us of increasing depth of feeling, and increasing sobriety, as befits those who are not only called with a heavenly calling, but are themselves heavenly. We have been speaking, in the meetings which many of us have had already today, of the heavenly level of the things in which we have been called to have part; perhaps it has not sufficiently impressed us all, how wonderful it is that one of the Persons of the Godhead should have taken up manhood, bringing into manhood all moral excellence. All that God could look for in man, adequate to satisfy His heart, and sufficient rightly to express Himself, has now come into being in the Person of our Lord Jesus Christ in manhood, the glory of His Person shedding its light on, and giving its character to, the manhood which now subsists in Him. But what is perhaps equally marvellous is that redemption having been accomplished, we are
{153}
given to have part in that heavenly order of manhood by the Spirit given to those who have believed. It is not only a question, beloved brethren, of status, it is a question of actual formation according to Christ, and before long we shall actually take on His image. One would speak of these things feelingly in order that we might give them place in our minds to a greater extent. Not that merely thinking about them will effect very much, save as we are enabled in the power of the Spirit, to contemplate Christ; beholding the glory of the Lord we *are* changed into the same image, from glory to glory. It is a progressive work, which goes on as Christ is before the hearts of His saints as the great standard of all that affords unfailing pleasure to the heart of God, and as I have said, to whom we are all shortly to be finally and actually conformed. The apostle in writing to the Ephesians tells us of his prayer, in chapter 3, and he says that he bows his knees to the Father, of whom every family in the heavens and on earth is named, that he would give to us to be strengthened with power by His Spirit in the inner man, that the Christ may dwell in our hearts by faith; that is the first thing he desires, that the Christ may *dwell*, through faith, in our hearts and that being rooted and founded in love we should be able to apprehend with all the saints, carrying them all in our thoughts and hearts, what is the breadth and length and depth and height; and then he adds "and to know the love of the Christ which surpasses knowledge"; and to be "filled even to all the fulness of God." The breadth and the length, I take it, refer to the great expansiveness of divine thoughts. I do not propose to speak of those now, but then the apostle says "depth and height." We have had something of height before us already this day, those of us who have been present at the meetings, height in the sense of what is morally elevated, heavenly in character; but before
{154}
we can really take on height, I believe we need to know something more of depth, and I trust we may be helped to see that the height which God has before Him, in regard of His wonderful thoughts in relation to those whom He has called, is commensurate with the depths into which He Himself has entered.
So I take up this passage in @Genesis 22, a well-known passage, in order to call attention, not only to the sacrifice involved for the Son, typified in Isaac, but also to call attention to what it involved for the Father. Then the second passage, @Psalm 22, will impress us, further, with all that has been involved for the Son in order to lay an immutable basis for the establishment of all God's thoughts, and for the bringing into expression of all His glory. And the third passage will show that the Holy Spirit Himself has entered into this wonderful matter. You remember, dear brethren, that when God appeared to Moses at the burning bush, He spoke to him of the condition in which His people were, and His proposal to bring them out of Egypt, and bring them into a land flowing with milk and honey; and He said to Moses "I have seen assuredly the affliction of my people who are in Egypt, and their cry have I heard ... and I am come down to deliver them" -- "*I* am come down." Carry that in mind, dear brethren, it is not that He sent an angel, an angel could quite well have effected all that was necessary for the deliverance of His people from Egypt; but God says "*I* am come down." And I believe as we begin to take account of the way God has operated to deliver us from all that in which we were involved, and to secure us for His pleasure, we shall find that it has involved the coming down of God, first in the Person of the Son, and then in the Person of the Spirit. God Himself entering into the conditions which had come in through sin, first, as I have said, in the Person of the Son, and then in the Person of the Spirit, in
{155}
order to effectuate complete deliverance for His people.
Well now, in this 22nd chapter of Genesis. God called upon Abraham to act, "Take now," He says, "thy son, thine only son, whom thou lovest, Isaac." The answer on Abraham's part was immediate, and just by way of digression for a moment, in connection with what came before many of us this afternoon, I may point out that with this great matter in hand it says that Abraham rose early in the morning. It will be found frequently in Scripture, where something of importance is to be taken up, that those concerned rose early in the morning. We have it here in this chapter, we have it in @Exodus 24, where God called upon Moses to go up the mountain with Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel, and they went up, and saw God, and ate and drank in the presence of God. But it says in that scripture, that Moses rose early in the morning, and built an altar. And then again in the book of Joshua, in chapter 3, when they were about to cross the Jordan, and to enter into the land, something which we have before us every Lord's day morning, that by the grace of the Lord, and in the power of the Spirit, we may pass over Jordan and enter into the land, on that occasion it says that Joshua rose early in the morning. We know well that on the great first day of the week, the day on which the Lord Jesus rose from the dead, Mary of Magdala, that great lover of Christ, rose very early in the morning, while it was yet dark, and went to the sepulchre. But as has already been remarked this afternoon, the Father was there before her, the Father had been there, and had raised up Christ from among the dead by His glory. One often thinks, and I have no doubt others do too, what the feelings of the Father must have been when He raised up Jesus from among the dead on that first day of the week. Every cherished thought of the
{156}
Father was now secured, and the One in whom it was secured was there before His face in glorious manhood, firstborn from among the dead. And then, too, what the Lord must have felt on the first day of the week, to find Himself, speaking reverently, raised from amongst the dead by the glory of the Father; and all that He had cherished in His heart so blessedly was now secured for the Father's pleasure for eternity. So that He was able to speak to Mary Magdalene later on of "my brethren," and of the heavenly relationships which were now to be introduced. How much there is connected with the first day of the week. It is well that we should carry these things in our minds every first day of the week, and that we should realise that important things are before us, as we take up the privilege of the Supper, and all that springs out of it, and then go through the day with other features proper to the first day of the week. How much there is that is glorious in character, that we move amongst, that we have part in. And it is well that we should be concerned to be early in relation to these things, and that they should be before us, not as something casual, not as something even merely habitual; but as something glorious, into which every first day of the week would give us fresh entrance. And then we find too, alas, on the other side of the matter, that God, in His dealings with Israel, had to tell them several times over, through the prophet Jeremiah, that He had risen early in the morning, sending His prophets to them. Think of God using such language, that He had risen early in the morning in an appeal, in an earnest desire, to secure again the affections of His people which He had lost. So intent was He upon it that He would rise early in the morning and send prophets with that in view, in order that the affections of His people should be stimulated, if it were possible, and the answer that He sought might be secured.
{157}
Well, I only say that by way of a digression because of what has been raised, and is being raised, as to whether we might not well begin our privileges on Lord's days earlier than we do, and take up the day with a sense of the glory attaching to it, and of the importance of the things in which we are about to have part. Here in this 22nd chapter of Genesis it says that Abraham, with great things before him, rose early in the morning. God had said to him, "Take now thy son, thine only son, whom thou lovest, Isaac, and get thee into the land of Moriah, and there offer him up for a burnt-offering on one of the mountains which I will tell thee of." The verses that I read at the end of the chapter show us that as a result of what was done, as a result of all that it meant for the Father, and of all that it meant for the Son, all the precious promises of God are secured. But this is the way by which they were to be secured, a way which involved infinite sacrifice. All was to be in the nature of a burnt-offering, there is wonderful acceptability, there is wonderful fragrance before God in relation to Christ, in the way of self-sacrifice in which *He* has gone; but at the same time, dear brethren, it may be we do not always give sufficient thought to what it has meant for the Father; and so it says that they went both of them together. But it says also, that "Abraham took the wood of the burnt-offering, and laid it on Isaac his son; and he took the fire in his hand (that is Abraham's hand) and the knife, and they went both of them together." It is interesting how this scripture speaks of the wood of the burnt-offering, twice it speaks of it, "the wood of the burnt-offering." I suppose it refers to the humanity of Christ, as underlying all that was effected by means of His precious death; and what a glorious humanity it was, dear brethren; moral excellence stamped upon it. You remember how it says in @Psalm 40 that in the volume of the book it
{158}
was written of Him, "Behold, I come, ... To do thy good pleasure, my God, is my delight, and thy law is within my heart" (verses 7, 8). Think of that, dear brethren, a Man now appearing under God's eye, who carried all the will of God in His heart, and was bent upon doing it as His delight, not as something imposed upon Him, but as something in which He delighted. What it must have been to the heart of God. You can understand something of the idea of the ark of the testimony in the holiest, it speaks of Christ as devoted to God's will, for the testimony was laid in the ark, and it means that as a result of God having brought in, in Christ, One who was devoted to His will, He is going to secure a universe that is characterised by persons who love the will of God, persons who have taken character from Christ. Think of the wide extent of what God is securing as the result of the coming in of Christ, and of the basis laid in His wondrous sacrifice. And it began with that, that He came in as delighting in God's will, cherishing every detail of it, and determined to go through with it to the end, whatever it entailed for Him. You can understand that all the movements of Jesus were fragrant to God. His coming into the world, and all His movements right through this scene, and the final movement to death, and His offering Himself without spot to God, how fragrant it all was, dear brethren. I think one is beginning to get an increasing sense as one goes into the presence of God, that the presence of God is really filled with the fragrance of Christ. It is a delightful thing to repair there. All around there is that which is entirely obnoxious to God, save of course what is found in His people, but when you get into the presence of God you get an impression that there is one Man there, in the Person of our Lord Jesus Christ, who fills the heart of God with positive delight, because of all that He is, as well as all that He has done. But then, ere that
{159}
could come to pass, this way of suffering and sacrifice had to be taken, and it is well that we should see that the Father had His own part in it, the scripture presents things in this way in this chapter, in a kind of pictorial way, in order to enable us, by the Spirit, to get some impression of it, without exactly a direct statement of Scripture as to it. But there is enough in the passage to enable us, by the Spirit, to get an impression of what it meant for the Father that His thoughts should be established by this way of infinite sacrifice on the part of His Son. And so it says that the wood of the burnt-offering was laid upon Isaac, but then it says that the father, Abraham, took the fire in his hand, and the knife. Isaac was his son, his only son, for here God takes no account of Ishmael. Isaac was his only son, whom he loved; and Abraham and Isaac were going together and as they thus moved together, in unbroken communion, on a journey this part of which was still far off when it was commenced, the father was carrying the fire and the knife. He would know well what use was to be made of the fire, he would know well what use was to be made of the knife. It is put in that way, I believe, dear brethren, in order that we should not think that God is above having feelings in these matters, indeed rather we are to understand that all the Persons of the Godhead have been involved in the most extreme sacrifice, in order that divine thoughts of blessing might be for ever established. And so we are to read into the passage, I do not doubt, that it was not without cost to the heart of God Himself, cost that we cannot measure, that the basis of all the blessing that is to subsist through the world to come and through eternity, was laid; it was not, I say, without cost, either to the Father or to the Son, that this way was undertaken. And so it says, "they went both of them together." A wonderful contemplation. We see the Father and the Son moving together in the gospel of
{160}
John, in a particular way; how They moved together, there was never a shade of divergence of thought between the Father and the Son, the Son did nothing of Himself, but what He saw the Father do; on the other hand, the Father hid nothing from the Son, but shewed Him all that He was doing. A wonderful contemplation, the movements together of the Father and the Son in the gospel of John; and yet we are to understand that there *came* a moment, when the supreme sacrifice was to be made, as it says, "He who, yea, has not spared his own Son, but delivered him up for us all." And so we are to be affected by this, dear brethren, that we do not treat divine things lightly, that we do not regard lightly the fact that we have been called with the wonderful calling with which we have been called, but that underlying all that we are brought into, lies this remarkable expression of depths into which God Himself has entered. Infinite depths, and I believe I am right in saying that the blessing and the glory in wonderful moral elevation, and all that speaks of height, are commensurate with the depths into which divine Persons have entered.
Well, I will come back in a moment to the later part of this chapter, but will now endeavour to speak, and it is holy ground indeed, on the verses we have read from @Psalm 22. It is the language of our Lord Jesus Christ, as we know, on the cross; He said, "My God, my God, Why hast thou forsaken me? why art thou *far* from my salvation" -- how much there is in that Word 'far,' "why art thou far?" How the Lord felt it, dear brethren, the terrible distance that had come in. To Him who had always walked in unbroken communion with God, and in the sense of being pleasing to God, there came this moment when He says, "why art thou *far* from my salvation?" He says, indeed, "Thou art my God from my mother's belly." From the very outset He had depended
{161}
upon God, He had relied upon God in everything. He had ministered to the pleasure of God unceasingly, the heavens had opened upon Him twice, and the Father's pleasure in Him had been declared. But now there came a moment when He says "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? why art thou *far* from my salvation?" Are we able, in the Spirit, to enter in any degree, dear brethren, into all that was involved in that? The Lord speaks in the gospel of Matthew, on a certain occasion, not referring to the abandonment, but to that which followed it, "even as Jonas was in the belly of the great fish three days and three nights, thus shall the Son of man be in the *heart* of the earth three days and three nights." First abandonment by God on the cross, and then three days and three nights in the *heart* of the earth -- the *heart* of it. I only call attention to these things, dear brethren, because I believe they are intended to promote depth of feeling with us, that we may understand that God Himself, and Christ Himself, have entered into deepest depths that no creature could ever fathom, in order that the thoughts of divine love might be established on a basis that can never be overthrown. What would it mean to the heart of God to hear His only Son say, "Why hast thou forsaken me? why art thou far from my salvation?" What would it mean to the heart of God to hear that language? what would it mean to the heart of Christ to be in that position? I do not want in any way to work on feelings, one would desire to touch this matter only in a holy way, but I believe the Scriptures are intended to have with us the voice that they carry, so that, as helped by the Holy Spirit, we might get some impression of the depths to which God has gone in order that His thoughts might be for ever made good. But then there is something else that comes out. The Lord says, "And thou art holy, thou that dwellest amid the praises of Israel." He
{162}
was under the judgment of God in order that God's holy nature might be vindicated, and His rights established, by the precious work of redemption effected in His death, and so He vindicates God. He says, "And thou art holy, thou that dwellest amid the praises of Israel." No complaint, nothing but perfect complete accord of mind and heart with God in His holy nature, and a determination in holy zeal, that all God's nature should be vindicated, and all His precious thoughts for ever secured. We may well boast in our Lord Jesus Christ. It speaks of our being the circumcision, "who worship by the Spirit of God," that is, we disown every other power, "and boast in Christ Jesus," that is, we have no other Man before our hearts to boast in. And here we get that which would surely promote in our hearts a feeling that we may well boast in our Lord Jesus Christ, and indeed in our God too.
And then, as we read in the epistle to the Hebrews, "if the blood of goats and bulls, and a heifer's ashes sprinkling the defiled, sanctifies for the purity of the flesh, how much rather shall the blood of the Christ, who by the eternal Spirit offered himself spotless to God." We are intended to gather from that, dear brethren, that the Spirit Himself entered feelingly into this matter of atonement, "who by the eternal Spirit offered himself spotless to God." I do not think one can say any more about this than the passage itself conveys and expresses, but there it is, in order that we might have an impression that the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit have all entered into this matter of the atonement, of the accomplishment of redemption, in order, as I have said several times, that God's will should be established, and all His precious thoughts brought in.
And so now returning to the passage we read in @Genesis 22, the word from heaven says to Abraham, "By myself I swear, saith Jehovah, that, because
{163}
thou hast done this, and hast not withheld thy son, thine only son, I will richly bless thee, and greatly multiply thy seed, as the stars of heaven, and as the sand that is on the seashore." What wonderfully extensive results now come into view as the outcome of that which we have been considering, "I will multiply thy seed," it says, "as the stars of heaven." No doubt in one way this reference to the stars of heaven and the sand that is on the sea-shore may refer to heavenly and earthly families to be brought into blessing, but I believe on the other hand they may both be applied to the saints of our day, we are as the stars of heaven already, in one sense the full thought requires resurrection, as we have it in that wonderful resurrection chapter, @1 Corinthians 15, how star differs from star, it says, in glory. It looks forward to the moment when the saints will shine in the glory of Christ as all raised, and yet star differs from star in glory. What a scene is before us, dear brethren, in which we have part through grace. In @Isaiah 40 the prophet calls upon the people to lift up their eyes on high, and take account of the stars, the number of them, and God knows them all by name, and brings them forth by their number, and, thank God, He knows us by name too, our names are written in heaven, the Lord says, everyone having his own distinction, having his own glory, it says star differs from star *in glory*. There may be differences of measure, but at the same time star differs from star in *glory*. It is as though the Spirit of God would impress us with the sense that glory is before us, and indeed our position is glorious already. It says in Peter's epistle that the God of all grace has "called you to his eternal glory in Christ Jesus," @1 Peter 5: 10. Think of the glory of being in Christ Jesus. It is not only a question, as I said before, of heavenly status, there is status in it, but there is power in the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus to form the saints already in
{164}
the moral qualities of the second Man out of heaven. That is what is involved in being in Christ Jesus, the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, the apostle says, has set me free from the law of sin and of death. The one who commenced as a persecutor of the assembly, breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord, now seen, as a result of the operations of the Spirit in him, as completely free from all that previously marked him, so that he could move already amongst men, in the dignity of one of the sons of God, in the grace of Christ, serving others in love, content to make himself least of all and servant of all. These are glorious features, love is glorious, dear brethren; and the more we take on love, as learning it from Christ, the more we are formed in that which is of God, and which is morally glorious. And our conditions down here, as set amongst the saints in suffering and testing conditions, are only intended to bring into greater evidence and display, the formation of love that there is in the saints. And so it is a question of what is heavenly shining, the apostle writing to the Philippians says, "among whom ye appear as lights in the world, holding forth the word of life," chapter 2: 15. You get the expression "the word of life" in John's epistle, in relation to the life of Jesus here. But now the saints, as heavenly luminaries, as real stars, hold forth the word of life in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation. What a dignity it is, dear brethren, what a calling it is. Let us be concerned to take on the moral features proper to our calling. It says in the epistle to the Corinthians, "Such as he made of dust, such also those made of dust; and such as the heavenly one, such also the heavenly ones. And as we have borne the image of the one made of dust, we shall bear also the image of the heavenly one." But we can already, as formed by the Holy Spirit, come out in the moral features of the second Man out of heaven, and insofar
{165}
as we do, we are shining here in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation as heavenly luminaries. And so that is one great result at the present time -- I am not speaking now for the moment of what will be, the moment is near when the Lord will come, when all of us who are living shall be changed, and the dead shall be raised, and we shall be caught up together in His likeness to meet the Lord in the air. That moment is near, dear brethren, but even at this present time, there is the possibility for us to take on what belongs properly to our heavenly calling, and to have the sense, in the measure that the saints do so, that God finds a present answer in keeping with the wonderful depths to which God has been, as we have already had before us.
But then also, there is the question of the sand of the sea-shore. I know that these similes are taken up, the stars and the sand, in order to convey the idea of wonderful innumerability, and there is something very stimulating, dear brethren, in considering the immense number of the saints. In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, we shall see them all, we shall then not feel that we are in reproach, we shall then not feel that we are in the minority, we shall feel that we are connected with what is infinitely glorious, when the whole of the work of God comes into view, and we ourselves forming part of it. But now just for the moment, there is not only this idea of the stars of the heavens, to which I have already alluded, but there is also the sand of the sea-shore. And we find in the book of Jeremiah that God has "set the sand a bound for the sea by a perpetual decree, and it shall not pass it, and its waves toss themselves, but they do not prevail," @Jeremiah 5: 22. That is the position the saints are in today, as heavenly ones in the midst of a world of evil, of increasing evil, that God has placed us there as a bound, so that the forces of evil cannot prevail, and
{166}
they will not prevail so long as the saints are here, maintaining a heavenly influence, maintaining the light of God in this world; however greatly evil increases it will not prevail as long as the saints are here. It is a question of the sand which God has set as a bound for the sea, so that it cannot pass over.
Well, dear brethren, these are great thoughts, we want to clothe ourselves with them, clothe the dear brethren with them; it is what belongs to us, and then it not only says "the sand that is on the seashore," but "thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies." I believe that appears in the assembly now. We know that Hades gates are arrayed against the saints, that the counsels of evil are all being directed to the overthrow, if it is possible (though it is not possible) of what the Lord has here in His assembly. But thank God there is a sphere in which administration according to God is maintained, so that administration of evil does not have it all its own way. There is a sphere on this earth where what is of God is maintained, and in that way the victory is secured; there was a time, I suppose, when there was very little in the way of true assembly administration known among the saints, the enemy had so wrought that he had destroyed almost every thing of an assembly character amongst the people of God; but now the truth has been recovered, and what is true of the assembly is seen in function in various localities. It is a great thing to see that administration according to God is now secured again, after perhaps, one may say, it had for a long time been lost; so that "thy seed" it says, "shall possess the gate of his enemies; and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth bless themselves, because thou hast hearkened to my voice."
I need not say more, dear brethren, these verses we have read from verse 15 onwards are the great
{167}
result secured for God as the outcome of the wonderful sacrifice that precedes in the chapter. The devotion of Christ to the will of God even to death has ascended to Him as a sweet savour, it was a burnt-offering; and the sweet savour remains, you cannot go into the presence of God, I believe, without getting some sense of the sweet savour of Christ that fills His presence. But it is a sweet savour founded on the fact that He was prepared to go to infinite depths which no creature could ever fathom, in order that God's holiness might be vindicated, His righteousness established, His heart set free, and all the precious thoughts of His heart established for ever.
May God grant us a greater sense, dear brethren, of the depths to which God has been, so that we ourselves may become increasingly marked by depth, and by sobriety too, and enabled thus to take on in some greater degree of power, what is heavenly and spiritual.
{168}
SEPARATED FROM EVIL AND SEPARATED TO GOD
@Numbers 19: 1 -- 6, 9, 17 -- 20; @Numbers 6: 1 -- 6; @2 Corinthians 6: 14 (first clause), @2 Corinthians 16 -- 18; @2 Corinthians 7: 1; @Nehemiah 12: 27, 31, 36 (latter part, "with ... them") -- 40 (first clause), 43
I wish to say a word, dear brethren, on separation from evil, and separation to God. @Numbers 19 deals with separation from evil and @Numbers 6 with separation to God. The words 'consecrate' and 'separate' in @Numbers 6 are the same in the original; it is a question of a person making a vow to separate himself to God. The great principle of separation is fundamental in God's relations with man and man's relations with God at the present time. It came specifically into view when idolatry had established itself in the post-diluvian world, man becoming his own object and his own centre, to make a name for *himself*. It was then that the God of glory appeared to our father Abraham. He said to him, "Go out of thy land, and from thy kindred, and from thy father's house, to the land that I will shew thee." Thus the great principle of separation was introduced in relation to the one who is the father of us all; and when *he* was called, he obeyed.
I think we can see that in Abraham's case there was not only separation from evil, but also separation to God; separation to God in such a manner that, when he was tried, he did not hesitate to offer up the supreme object of his affections on earth. God was everything to Abraham, more than anything that He had given him. How easily we make idols of what God has given us! We may make idols of our ability, our skill, our natural relations, our work, our houses. God gives us things; what a recompense it is when
{169}
we allow such things to come between our souls and Him! That was not so with Abraham. Separated from evil, he was separated to God; God completely commanded his affections. Thus when the word came, "Take now thy son, thine only son, whom thou lovest, Isaac, ... and there offer him up for a burnt-offering on one of the mountains which I will tell thee of," he rose early in the morning to do it. No wonder he was called the friend of God! God can trust a man like that with His greatest secrets. One of the greatest privileges a human being can know is to be trusted by God with His secrets.
In Numbers, Balaam remarks as to Israel, "it is a people that shall dwell alone and shall not be reckoned among the nations," @Numbers 23: 9. You see how this principle is carried forward. Why were the people to dwell alone? Because they were dwelling with God, and God with them. So that while the Nazarite's vow is called a special one. God looked for it amongst His people. He looked for those who would not only be separate from evil, but be separated to Himself -- He Himself everything to them. In his epistle, John speaks of our dwelling in God, and God in us. If that is true of us, dear brethren, as dwelling in love, how could we do other than dwell alone? If we are dwelling in God and God in us, what part can the world have with us? How separated we shall be! Such people *must* dwell alone, as far as the world is concerned. And so the word to the Corinthians is, "Ye are the living God's temple; according as God has said, I will dwell among them, and walk among them." God is the living God, and He is the loving God, and nothing will satisfy Him but full-hearted responsive love from His people. He is a jealous God, because He is love. Think of a God who loves so much that He has come forth from His own place of separatedness where He ever dwells in unapproachable light, and has made Himself known in order to
{170}
dwell among men responsive to Himself. He has not chosen to dwell among angels, but among men. How it should move our affections toward Him! Furthermore, He has not waited for the eternal state, a perfect condition, but has come down to dwell among us now. "I will dwell among them, and walk among them," is the present position, the wilderness position. The temple in Corinthians is the temple of the tabernacle (see @1 Samuel 1: 9; chapter 3: 3 and @Revelation 15: 5). We are the very shrine of God. What can we have any more to do with idols? How can we have to do with anything that is contrary to God when we realise that the great, the glorious, the eternal God has come forth in love to dwell among us *now*? He had come to dwell among His people in such a city as Corinth, and, in spite of their state, He had not left them. Their state prevented their enjoyment of His presence, and prevented His enjoyment of them; but He had not left them. "I will dwell among them, and walk among them; and I will be their God, and they shall be to me a people." That is the basis of His appeal, "Wherefore come out from the midst of them, and be separated, saith the Lord." It is His own appeal to our hearts at this time, to be separated from evil, separated to Him, and wholly for Him.
"And touch not what is unclean, and I will receive you." He is longing to receive us in the sense referred to here. And we need fear nothing, because it is the Almighty God who is calling us out; a God whose almightiness we have to learn first, if we are truly to apprehend it, in ourselves, as Abraham did. The disclosure of the Almighty God to Abraham related to what Abraham was going to experience in his own body. And we learn the almightiness of God, if we learn it effectively, through the power of the Spirit in ourselves, the almighty power of God in the Spirit. And if we have learned it that way, we shall have no
{171}
fear as regards circumstances. I am not suggesting at all that I am in the gain of this as I ought to be, but I can see that, if we have learned the almightiness of God in dealing with the greatest mountain of difficulty that could face us, sin in the flesh, then it will be simple to trust God as regards circumstances. Abraham learnt the almighty power of God in himself, in a physical sense; we learn it in a spiritual sense.
And so this appeal comes to us, and I want to reinforce the appeal by referring to @Numbers 19. We have referred in these meetings, to the cross, and how God's wrath from heaven was revealed there against sin in its totality; and this passage, one of the most solemn in Scripture, indicates to us what that day of greatest sorrow, that day of unfathomed grief, meant for Christ; "when thou didst taste the horror, of wrath without relief." I do not think any burning in Scripture is depicted like this one. It says, "one shall burn the heifer before his eyes; its skin and its flesh, and its blood, with its dung, shall he burn" (verse 5). What a burning! All that God is against sin fell upon the Lord Jesus. God made *Him* to be sin for us; where should we be otherwise? What a burning! And this is to be before our eyes. Paul put it before the Galatians eyes. He said, "to whom, as before your very eyes, Jesus Christ has been portrayed, crucified among you," @Galatians 3: 1. We need to consider the cross. If we pass by judgment, we pass by the love of God, as the Lord says. We learn the love of God in the way He has met this terrible matter of sin, and in the awful sufferings Christ has passed through. Christ was the great Sufferer; but how deep the Father's anguish, and the Spirit's feelings, too.
We may sometimes overlook a little phrase in @Hebrews 9: 13, "The blood of bulls and goats," would refer to the day of atonement; but it adds, "and a heifer's ashes sprinkling the defiled." Do
{172}
not let us ignore that little phrase "a heifer's ashes sprinkling the defiled." We should have no access to God, indeed we could not even approach the tent of meeting, without the death of Christ in this character. The blood of the red heifer was sprinkled seven times before the tent of meeting. It is a type which depicts the death of Christ from *our* side, what He suffered for us, for our purification. The day of atonement, although it is the basis of all blessing, emphasises what He suffered for God, and what the blood is for God. But this type emphasises what He suffered for us. It should greatly touch our hearts to think that we could have had no part in the worship of the living God, no part, indeed, in the Christian system at all, but for "the heifer's ashes sprinkling the defiled." The thought of the ashes should affect us profoundly. The Lord Jesus said in Spirit in @Psalm 22: 15, "thou hast laid me in the dust of death." He has been into the *dust* of death for us. "Dust thou art; and unto dust shalt thou return," @Genesis 3: 19. He has been into the grave. But the *ashes* refer to what transpired before that, in those three hours of darkness when, for us, He endured and exhausted the wrath of God. The ashes are the witness that the all-consuming judgment of God on sin in the flesh has been borne. Our true place, therefore, is in dust and ashes, in repentance before God. The water of separation (note the word 'separation') was made from those ashes. It was a purification for sin; @Numbers 19: 9. It was thus that the heifer's ashes were sprinkled upon the defiled. The sprinkling is to bring home to us the true force of this aspect of the death of Christ and the awfulness of it, that it might move our souls. God made *His* soul an offering for sin, and it should move *our* souls, so that we shall say, "What have I to do any more with idols?" (@Hosea 14: 8); what have I to do any more with the unclean thing?
{173}
And so it goes on to speak of one who touches a dead person, any dead body of a man (verse 11). We have each and all touched the dead body of a man, we have each been identified with what we are after the flesh, "this body of death," @Romans 7: 24. Nothing that we could do would have delivered us from it, this dead body of a man. Jesus has laid the basis for our deliverance by bearing all the judgment Himself. Nothing is left, as it were, before God, of the man so offensive to God (and now, through grace, so offensive to us) but the ashes. "Who shall deliver me out of this body of death?" The ashes are the witness to our deliverance at *such* a cost. We are no longer identified with sin in the flesh in the mind of God, but with Him who took our place, and has been raised. But then the sprinkling means that the force of that is brought home to me, so that I no longer identify myself with it. That is the lesson of @Romans 7. "It is no longer *I* that do it," @Romans 7: 17. I see what a deliverance has been wrought, and the heifer's ashes sprinkled on me mean that I can take my stand apart from that body of death. It is no longer I that do it, but the sin that dwells in me; and I am purified from sin through the death of Christ -- the heifer's ashes sprinkling the defiled. I can say that I delight in the law of God after the inward man and that I myself serve the law of God. Romans, chapter 8, shows how the Spirit makes the deliverance effective. According to @Numbers 19: 17, "they shall take ... of the ashes of the purification-offering that hath been burned, and shall put running water thereon in a vessel." The running water speaks of the Holy Spirit given, on the very basis of these sufferings of Christ, so that we may be in practical deliverance from this body of death. "If Christ be in you, the body is dead on account of sin, but the Spirit life on account of righteousness," @Romans 8: 10. You say, 'Alas! how often I give way
{174}
to sin in the flesh.' Well, the ashes are always available. The water of purification was applied to you once, in the fullest way from God's standpoint, when you were converted; so that the thing stands from the divine side; but in your experience you may need it renewed. Who of us does not need continually to come back to the force of these heifer's ashes sprinkling the defiled, which is the basis of our deliverance from the dead body of a man? So that it is one thing to say "this body of death," and another thing to say *the body is dead*. If the body is dead, we are delivered practically, in the power of the Spirit. The body is dead, because of sin, and the Spirit is life; and if the Spirit is life, it means that we can present our bodies a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God. As far as sin goes, the body is dead; but as far as its activities go, the Spirit is life. That is a primary application of the teaching of @Numbers 19, but it is not the whole matter.
The word in @2 Corinthians 6: 17 is, "touch not what is unclean." I have to see that I do not touch the unclean thing in myself; if I do, I have to learn to judge myself, which would imply getting back to the meaning of these ashes and purifying myself accordingly. But I am also not to touch the unclean thing around. You will notice that it says of the heifer, in verse 2, "a red heifer without blemish, wherein is no defect, *and upon which never came yoke*." Was Christ ever yoked with the world? Not at all. *@2 Corinthians 6 has to do with yokes*. "*Be not diversely yoked with unbelievers*." It bears on this type of the death of Christ, the red heifer. Upon Him never came yoke. He was wholly for God, as we know, from the womb; and separated to God, the great Nazarite of God; separated from evil, of course; we do not need to say such a thing as that; but separated to God. And so it raises the whole question of yokes. We have all been under yokes,
{175}
but God has called us out, "Come out from the midst of them, and be separated, saith the Lord, and touch not what is unclean." Now I want to raise the question of dead bodies; not our own now, not the one we carry about with us, but the corporate bodies of men around us. Anything morally dead is unclean in the sight of God, and any corporate association of men that has not God as its centre, is a dead body. There is no life there, corporately, towards God. Any individual, or any body of men, where there is no life towards God, is unclean, and if you touch such, you become defiled. It is not only that the person touching the dead body is defiled but, what is far more serious, if he fails to purify himself, he defiles the sanctuary of Jehovah (verse 20). Touching, in this sense, involves identification with the dead thing.
But the water of separation is available and we would like, at a time like this, to sprinkle these ashes on one another, that is, to bring this aspect of the death of Christ home to the conscience and heart, so that we purify ourselves from the unclean thing; we refuse to be linked with anything that is dead, where there is no life God-ward. *In actual fact, there is only one fellowship of life in this world, only one fellowship that God recognises, the fellowship of His Son, Jesus Christ our Lord, the fellowship of the Holy Spirit. That is the position that we need to face, without discrimination as to the character of the association, wherever a diverse yoke is really involved. The point is, if God is not the centre, it is dead*. And, because God is not the centre, you will find a good deal of cedar-wood and hyssop and scarlet, all of which, according to this chapter, went into the burning, "The priest shall take cedar-wood, and hyssop, and scarlet and cast them into the midst of the burning of the heifer." You may say, 'This association is not like a trade union.' That may be so. But if you examine it you will find that, whatever its ostensible
{176}
purpose, it does, in a greater or lesser degree, glorify man in the flesh. The cedar-wood of man's greatness, the hyssop, of his false humility, the scarlet of his glory, while seen in their most offensive character in what is religious, also characterise men's associations and their literature generally. But all has gone into the burning; all has come under judgment in the death of Christ. When wrath of God was revealed from heaven, and sin in its totality was judged, everything morally dead was judged.
Now I wish to go on to Nehemiah, because it speaks there about the dedication of the wall. It is dealing with days of recovery and a good deal had preceded. God raised up Cyrus, His beloved, His servant, His shepherd, who opened the door for the remnant to return to Jerusalem, and they went up under Joshua and Zerubbabel, Zerubbabel meaning 'born in Babylon.' The first thing they did was to build the altar, and to keep the feast of tabernacles. That bears on the heavenly side of things and that is how the present revival began. It began with light as to Christ as Head in heaven, as to His body here on earth, and as to the presence of the Holy Spirit. It was the feast of tabernacles in principle, the top-note. That is what brought people out into separation. The altar was set up, the Lord's supper recognised, and the service of God begun. The start of things, according to the book of Ezra, was remarkable. The returned captives must have studied the Scriptures closely, because it says they offered daily burnt-offerings by number at the feast of tabernacles, according to the ordinance, as the duty of every day required; @Ezra 3: 4. It means they knew @Numbers 29. Later, when the foundation of the temple was laid (chapter 3: 10), they instituted the service of song according to the directions of David, king of Israel. They were governed by the light given to Moses and to David. And that has been a feature of the present
{177}
revival -- the knowledge of the Scriptures and of the whole truth bearing on matters. And it says, when the foundations of the house were laid, the people shouted and "the noise was heard afar off." Later the house was finished, and they kept the dedication of the house with joy. Many years later, Ezra came up bringing more treasure and more vessels, to beautify the house. Finally Nehemiah came up to rebuild the city, and its wall, and chapter 12 records the culmination, namely, the dedication of the wall.
I believe, dear brethren, this specially links with the present time. What the Spirit of God would stress *now*, the dedication of the wall. There has been much building of the wall. When Nehemiah first went round, the wall was in ruins, and, if the wall is in ruins, Christians are in reproach, as it says (chapter 2: 17), "I said to them, Ye see the distress that we are in, that Jerusalem lies waste, and its gates are burned with fire, Come, and let us build up the wall of Jerusalem, that we be no more a reproach." If you have not got the wall, you will escape the reproach of Christ, but you will be in great reproach. I would rather have the reproach of Christ than be in reproach amongst men in the sense that this means that you are despised. Men do not object to the open principle, they will go on with those who hold it and, thus, the reproach of Christ is avoided. Nevertheless men realise that it is compromise. They have an impression of what Christianity ought to be. Christianity involves the reproach of Christ, and if we try to escape it, we become despised by the very people whose reproach we are seeking to avoid. But then, as this book proceeds, the wall is rebuilt against much opposition. There will always be opposition to the building of the wall. But finally it says, in chapter 6: 15, "So the wall was finished," and in verse 1 of that chapter, the "enemies heard that I had built the wall, and that there was no breach left in it."
{178}
Now what about the wall today? Is there a breach left in it? This is the time for seeing that there is no breach left in the wall. The time came when Nehemiah said that the enemies heard that there was no breach left in it. If we have not got a wall, there can be no administration. Gates are of no use without a wall. Once you have the wall, you can have gates, and true administration. The wall is very attractive, do not think I am saying anything that is not attractive. It is said of the Holy City, that the building of its wall was jasper, and the foundations of the wall of the city were adorned with every precious stone. What a wonderful structure the wall is! Why should we be ashamed of it? And so, if the wall is there, the gates can function, each gate a pearl. The gates of the city according to @Revelation 21: 25 shall not be shut at all by day, for night shall not be there. Yet nothing unclean is allowed into the city. That is the idea of administration. The gates are open to receive all that is of God, all that should come into the city, but nothing common, nor that maketh an abomination and a lie, shall at all enter into it. There we have true administration.
In @Nehemiah 12, when the wall was completed and the gates were erected, there was the dedication of the wall. It was the culmination of joy. The name Ezra means 'help,' but the name Nehemiah means 'comfort of Jehovah.' There is no real comfort for the saints until the wall is there without a breach. The city of God is a wonderful, inclusive conception. Among nations of men, the metropolitan city contains all that is most precious, both to the king and the nation. In the city of God everything most precious to God, and to the people of God, is conserved. But we must have a wall to protect it. There can be no comfort if you feel it is exposed. And so the dedication of the wall became the crowning joy of the recovery. It is not simply the shout was heard afar
{179}
off, but it says, "the joy of Jerusalem was heard even afar off." God would bring us to this joy, dear brethren.
Now I want to say a word about dedication. There was the dedication of the house earlier (@Ezra 6: 16), and now the dedication of the wall. For us it means that we dedicate ourselves. "Whose house are we." The dedication of the house of God means that *we* are dedicated to God; and likewise, the dedication of the wall, because the wall is in the saints. The wall today is not a material structure. The dedication of the wall means that I am dedicated, we are all dedicated. Let us be in this dedication. And that corresponds with the vow of the Nazarite, not only separation from evil, but separation to God. We recognise that we belong to the house -- "whose house are we" -- and that we also form the wall of the city, and we dedicate ourselves accordingly. In the recovery, every person who is vitally in it, is a Nazarite. Indeed, in Christianity, what was special of old is normal; nazariteship is normal. The joy expressed on those occasions of dedication shows that the principle of the Nazarite's vow operated in that day of recovery of old, because they were not relying on any natural joy, or earthly prosperity, for stimulation. Their joy was entirely related to God, and His house, and His city. That is the idea of a Nazarite. It is not only that he does not touch a dead body, but he separates himself from wine and strong drink. He will not allow anything natural to be his stimulation. *God* is the source of his joy. The God of the gladness of my joy, the Psalmist says; @Psalm 43: 4. And that is what marked these returned captives. May the spirit of the Nazarite mark us! Let us ask ourselves, dear brethren, what is keeping us going? Is it some new foible down here? Do we need such things to keep us going? Or is it God our exceeding joy? If so there will be no difficulty about the wall.
{180}
It will be a great joy to us to be in the dedication.
And see how remarkable are the movements of these two choirs upon the wall! Without the wall we could never maintain the service of God; it is impossible. "Great is Jehovah, and greatly to be praised in the city of our God, in the hill of his holiness." But you must have the wall. And so, at the dedication of the wall, what service there was -- these two great choirs! The first one, with Ezra in front, had the musical instruments of David the man of God. They started at the dung gate, because that is where we must start if we are to fulfil our part in the service of God. "Let a man prove himself, and thus eat of the bread, and drink of the cup." We start at the dung gate. But it goes on to say (verse 37), "at the fountain-gate, and over against them, they went up by the stairs of the city of David." In chapter 3: 15 it speaks of the stairs that go down from the city of David, but now the time comes for going up those stairs "at the ascent of the wall, above the house of David, even to the water-gate eastward." What beautiful suggestions of the Spirit's power proved in the ascent "even to the water-gate eastward" -- suggesting the service of God in full activity, leading to the outflow of ministry and an outlook towards the Lord's coming. The second choir, in the opposite direction, with Nehemiah behind them, began at the tower of the furnaces, where all the rubbish was burnt. There is a lot of rubbish to burn in days of recovery; we have got to get rid of all the wrong ideas and the tower of the furnaces is available. Then the broad wall, suggesting the scope of the truth; the gate of Ephraim, fruitfulness; and the gate of the old wall, divine principles, going back to the beginning. Then the fish-gate, the tower of Hananeel, and the tower of Meah, even to the sheep-gate; "and they stood still in the prison-gate."
Until you have got the wall you cannot exercise
{181}
discipline, but now there is the prison-gate. Sanctions are available to maintain what is due to God. Thus the first choir is the upward line -- the service God-ward -- and the second choir is the administration man-ward, the fish-gate, the sheep-gate, the prison-gate. And both choirs stood in the house of God, "And that day they offered great sacrifices, and rejoiced: for God had made them rejoice with great joy; and also the women and the children rejoiced. And the joy of Jerusalem was heard even afar off." What a day, dear brethren! And this is what God would bring us to *now*. This is the point in the great recovery at which God would have us arrive *now*.
You may say, 'If I accept separation in the way you are speaking, my wife and children will suffer.' But the wives and children were in this, the women and children rejoiced. We were much affected recently to meet a brother with a wife and young children, suffering, having lost his work through trade unionism. They were having to sell their home and we were greatly touched to see the attitude of the wife; the way she supported and encouraged her husband. In spite of all the pressure, they were experiencing something of this joy. "The women and the children rejoiced. And the joy of Jerusalem was heard even afar off."
Now I want to say one more word. The second choir was going over the ground of administration man-ward, ending at the prison-gate; but it speaks of the tower of Hananeel, and Hananeel means 'God is gracious.' We want the breaches in the wall closed, but, let me say a word to the brethren as to the spirit in which we endeavour to do it. It is greatly affecting to see Paul's spirit in these matters. The Corinthians were in a bad state; how does he address them? In the first epistle he says, "Wherefore, *my beloved*, flee from idolatry." Idolatry is a dreadful thing. Every association which has not
{182}
God as its centre is, in principle, idolatrous. But how does he approach them? My beloved, he says.
This is the way to approach our brethren. We need patience and much love. God is gracious. The tower of Hananeel is there before the prison-gate. And so, let us make love's appeal to one another, "Wherefore my beloved, flee from idolatry," @1 Corinthians 10: 14. And in the second epistle he says, "Having therefore these promises, beloved, let us purify ourselves, from every pollution of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in God's fear." Let us know how to appeal to one another as '*beloved*.' Love would not lose one person through lack of patience and care. In the representation of God in the living creatures in @Ezekiel 1: 10, we have the lion, and the lion roars sometimes, as the prophet Amos indicates. Paul speaks somewhat like a lion at the end of this epistle. He says, "I have declared beforehand, and I say beforehand as present the second time, and now absent ... that if I come again I will not spare," @2 Corinthians 13: 2. But he is not speaking thus in the meantime; he is entreating by the meekness and gentleness of the Christ; @2 Corinthians 10: 1. There is the face of a man, "the likeness of their faces was the face of a man," @Ezekiel 1: 10. "Now I shall most gladly spend and be utterly spent for your souls, if even in abundantly loving you I should be less loved," @2 Corinthians 12: 15. What a man Paul was, the face of a man in Paul -- the face of Jesus! And then the face of the ox, suggesting patience; love has long patience, is kind. When the time comes the lion roars; but do not let us roar before the time. And when the time comes the eagle swoops. But let us rightly represent God in all these exercises. Otherwise, in our very effort to get things done, we shall lose divine support; we shall allow, in another form, the very man we are seeking to exclude. I just say that, dear brethren, that we might imbibe the spirit
{183}
of Paul, in the way we apply the truth. Even as to the work of the Lord, in which the Corinthians were very remiss, he said, "So then *my beloved brethren* be firm, immovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord." Let us learn how to appeal to one another on these lines. Should love's appeal fail, and the sanctity of God's house and His city be involved, there are the sanctions; they stood still over the prison-gate. But may the Lord help us, so that love's appeal -- God's own appeal (@2 Corinthians 6: 17) may be heeded.
More could be said as to the great heights to which the note of praise rose, once the wall was completed, "Bless Jehovah your God from eternity to eternity. And let men bless the name of thy glory, which is exalted above all blessing and praise. Thou art the Same, thou alone, Jehovah," @Nehemiah 9: 5, 6. What a marvellous note of praise was reached! The title 'El' is also brought in (@Nehemiah 9: 31, 32). "El" refers to God in His strength, not only physical, but in the strength and unchangeability of His nature and character. God never changes. His attitude to sin never changes. The returned captives come to a very distinct appreciation of El, the unchanging God, who never deviates, never lowers the standard, and yet, would, so long as it is right to do so, wait upon us in patient grace. But I believe the time has now come for us all to be concerned to fill up all the breaches and to dedicate the wall.
May the Lord help us for His name's sake.
{184}
SOME PRESENTATIONS OF THE LORD JESUS IN THE BOOK OF THE REVELATION
@Revelation 22: 16, 17; @Revelation 1: 12 -- 19; @Revelation 5: 6 -- 10; @Revelation 19: 11 -- 16
I want to say something about the Lord Jesus as He is presented in this book. He draws attention to Himself personally, in the first passage I have read, "*I* Jesus." I suppose there is nothing more calculated to strike a chord in all our hearts than that personal reference of this glorious Person to Himself. I want to speak of Him, first as the Son of Man in the first chapter, then as the Lamb in the fifth chapter, and then as the Word of God in the nineteenth chapter. It is affecting that in this book, with scenes so dark in it and with a background that is so difficult in many chapters, there should be, by the Spirit and through the medium of him who lay in the bosom and on the breast of Jesus, projected on to our view such glorious features of this blessed Person whom we love and adore. It shows that no matter how dark things may be, how strong the tide of evil or how powerful the forces of lawlessness, the Spirit of God would hold our hearts and minds by a powerful presentation of the Person to whom we owe our all, the Person upon whom everything hinges as far as our blessing, our joy and happiness are concerned. It is a book in which, with deliberate divine definiteness, there is projected in detail things in an unvarnished way in regard to the assembly publicly, the great light-bearer, and in regard to the world at large, as the scene in which evil's challenge long permitted has reared itself against God and His supremacy. It is a book where there is also depicted for us the sorrowful position of persons who have defected, persons who may be in filthiness and thus to whom
{185}
the word is, "let the filthy make himself filthy still." How solemn are these things which are depicted for us! But in the midst of it all, and over against it, come these bright rays of Christ's glory, calculated to awaken fresh hope and desire in the hearts of those that long after Him, for, dear brethren, is He not our life? It is not only that we have come into things, but we have come to a Person who in secret has so endeared Himself to us, through all His ministrations to us. When everyone else left us and we had to go through things alone, He stood by us; this same Jesus, *He* never left us, *He* understood when no one else understood. In His priestly station on high, He was thinking of us and He ministered to us and through that ministration, not once, not twice, but all through life's way, in wilderness scenes. He has endeared Himself to us in a way that no other man has or could. Not even those who are closest and dearest to us naturally, could ever have endeared themselves to us as Jesus has done. It sounds very simple, dear brethren, but have you ever sat down and pondered what would you do without Jesus? What would life be? Thank God, that we shall never be without Him, in time or through all eternity! How wonderful it will be to be actually near Him, to walk with Him and to talk with Him in scenes of purest joy above. If the blessedness of living with Him in private and in secret and in talking and communing with Him now, in the day seasons, in the night seasons, is so precious and blessed, what will it be in scenes of bliss above? Young brethren, how wonderful to be in a company like this, where every one is a lover of Jesus! Would you want to be anywhere else? Would you want to be out in the cold bleak world, with all that the great master-scheming mind has designed to draw you into? Would you be there? Never! How can we leave Him? Have you ever come to that in the difficulties
{186}
of your soul, young people? I came to it in my teens. Have you ever come to it? You felt like leaving, and the word came into your soul in power. How can you leave Him? He is to be known in the assembly; we shall know Him in heaven, we shall know Him in glory above, but how blessed to know Him in the assembly now! How wonderful the assembly is! To think that there are persons that discredit the assembly, persons that say there is no such thing as the assembly in these days. Thank God we are not among them. Thank God that through grace, and with the help of the Spirit, on the ground of sovereign mercy, we know that wonderful sphere where the Spirit abides, where He dwells and where He has unfolded to us the heavenly glories of this One we love so well, who has become our life.
Does it not touch your soul that, at the end of this book, He should say to John, "*I* Jesus"? You can understand John's feelings in his isolation, robbed of the fellowship and the companionship of the brethren; he was not able to be at these meetings as we are; he was on the lonely isle of Patmos. He would learn a little bit of the solitude that Jesus knew Himself, for Jesus had to say, "the foxes have holes, and the birds of the heaven roosting-places; but the Son of man has not where he may lay his head," @Matthew 8: 20. You remember too, how He said, in the Psalms, "I am become like the pelican of the wilderness, I am as an owl in desolate places; I watch, and am like a sparrow alone upon the housetop," Think of the solitude and loneliness of Jesus! Think of how John, who lay in His bosom and on His breast, would think of these words of Jesus. What a solace and a comfort they would be to him in the solitude of Patmos isle! What do we know, dear brethren, about this kind of thing? If our roots were more fixed in this kind of soil, there would be no desire to leave the fellowship and to go away. As the Lord
{187}
said to Peter and to the others, "Will ye *also* go away?" Think of that! He did not just say, 'Will you go away?' It is not only that our affections are bound up with Him, but His affections are bound up with us, and think of what enters into these words, the depth of the affection, "Will ye *also* go away?" Is there anyone here that is thinking of going away? Is there a young brother or sister here who has had it in their mind and the enemy is supporting it and feeding it into their mind, that they are thinking of going away? How can you leave Jesus? How can you go away from the sphere where the blessed Spirit of God is, and where He glorifies that Person? After all the scenes have passed, in the Revelation, after all the judgments are executed. He comes in With a personal word to John, "*I* Jesus." Think of the Lord coming into a meeting, or a season like this, and saying, "*I* Jesus"! Have you ever asked the Lord to disclose Himself to you? I think, dear brethren, that we should know greater intimacy with our Lord; it is a real matter to live near to Him and to walk and talk with Him here. Oh, the preciousness of it, you cannot explain it, you cannot pass it on to others! The inexplicable blessedness of living with this Person, in communion with Him, and the joy of knowing Him in the assembly. Think of every first day of the week as He presents Himself, you waken up in the morning and you are thinking of the Supper and the possibility of meeting Him! When a person comes by 'plane or by train, and you are going to meet them, you know the feelings that surge within you, especially when it is one who is very precious and dear to you; and it is like that every first day of the week! As you awaken, your soul is filled with holy and spiritual sentiments and feelings that you are going to see the Lord. The assembly is before you and you come to the assembly as gathered with the saints in assembly, and the
{188}
Supper is partaken of, the breaking of bread, and the Lord manifests Himself and says "*I* Jesus." He would say "It is I myself," as Jehovah saying to Abraham, "It is I." He did not say, 'It is Jehovah,' or 'It is the Almighty,' He said "It is I." Oh, for these links, dear brethren, of known intimacy and nearness with the One who discloses Himself in the assembly. How wonderful the assembly is in that light! If the time is moved up an hour, is it going to make any difference to love? Will love be burdened? No! love will be all the more quickened, dear brethren, to think that we are going to see Him earlier, we are going to meet with Him earlier. Love will get up earlier to prepare for it. The Lord's day, the first day of the week, is no day for lying in. Love would make us agile. Oh, you say, We were out late on Saturday night. Well, did you think of the Lord's day and the first day of the week? We want to think of the first day of the week, and the Lord's day, for it is a special day. It is a sanctified day, a dignified day, and we are to treat it and regard it as such and not a day like the people in the world regard it. It belongs to the lordly Person of whom we are speaking, "*I* Jesus," yet One so low in humiliation here.
Well now, I may refer again to that word in closing, but I want to speak now for a little while of the Son of man. This book opens with John, as we have been saying, on the isle of Patmos and the Lord is about to go over with him the matter of church failure. Has the Lord ever gone over with you the matter of church failure? Have church sorrows ever broken your heart? They have broken some hearts, have they ever broken yours? I am sure that John would have shed tears in secret after the view that the Lord gave him of the public failure. Indeed, in one of the passages that we have read in the context, John wept. He may be referred to as a 'son of thunder,' in the gospel, but he is a feeling man. He is a man
{189}
that can weep, weep over what is so near and precious to the heart of Christ, but what, in the public position, the enemy has defaced and defamed. Do we feel it? So He is about to go over this whole matter and He presents Himself to John. The Lord always loves to present Himself to love, on our side. Has He ever presented Himself to you? Have you ever been conscious of it? It is a wonderful thing to be conscious of it. The Lord knows how to do it. It is a great thing to be devoted, as John was; he was a devoted follower of the Lord. It has often been said, and it is good to bear it in mind now in this universal gathering, that if there were more devotion amongst us, there would be more gift. I would say to those who come from difficult situations and difficult environments and circumstances that as your devotion develops and increases, as you give yourself over to the Lord and His interests linked with the assembly, He will develop gift. While gift is sovereign on the one hand, you will always find that where there is devotion, the Lord will answer it by the impartation of something that means something, both to Himself and to us, and to the assembly. I do not suppose John had seen Him in this view before, He is in the judicial garments for priestly scrutiny. He is not in the garments of service; John had seen Him in the attitude of service, in the very place where it is said of John that He was in the bosom and on the breast of Jesus. It is in that very section where he saw the Lord lay aside certain garments and wash the feet of the disciples. You can understand John must have been greatly affected by that. He must have watched the Lord carefully as He went from disciple to disciple. Think of the Lord going down to their feet! What would the Lord not do with us in order that we might have part with Him? Would not you like to have part with Christ? We have been speaking in these meetings about the matter of believers
{190}
having part with unbelievers, and the like. Think of having part with Christ! John saw how the Lord was prepared to serve His own; the Lord gives us every advantage, and with every one of us we are the objects of His love and His care in this regard. It may be that with some one of us here, we need our feet washed; we all need our feet washed, but somebody needs especially the touch like Peter, and the Lord would do it for us tonight. It is not a question of being washed all over; it is a question of a final touch. We have been speaking about final touches, and the feet are the final part that go off the earth and the Lord would touch that final part, dear brethren. We are not going to go up feet first, I speak reverently, but the general idea is that man is made upright, so that our feet are on the earth. Of course, it includes more than that, but the Lord would help us, on the eve of translation, as to this final touch involving the matter of our feet, the matter of defilement. It is the matter of contact, as we had in the word that the Lord gave us last night. We have in @John 13 the disciples and their feet, and their contact with the earth, and the Lord would serve them in view of having part with Him. John had seen that, but now this is another view. The garments are not the garments of service, they are the judicial habiliments. They are, we might say, the garments that belong to the strange work, for judgment is the strange work, as we are told in the word. But in the midst of this strange work, and in the midst of all that suggests distance, we have, as we know, the golden lamp and the golden girdle. We have the emphasis on that glorious thread which runs through whatever the defection. Let men say what they like, in their departure from the truth, the golden side is there; the golden lamps are there and the golden girdle is there. It is symbolical of course, but it is to remind us, dear brethren, that what is divine
{191}
abides whatever the ruin and the failure may be in the responsible light-bearer.
Now I want to refer to what it says in verse 16, "and out of his mouth a sharp two-edged sword going forth; and his countenance as the sun shines in its power." We have often alluded, dear brethren, to the word of God and the priesthood of Christ, in the epistle to the Hebrews, and the symbol here of the two-edged sword going out of His mouth is linked with the countenance of Christ and the sun shining in its power. Have you ever thought of the link between these two things here? You will remember how, in @Psalm 19, the sun is spoken of as a bridegroom. It is very striking that we should get this figure here and that we should get the bride at the end of the book. It is as if we are reminded, at the end of the book, that the sun has completed its circuit, and on to view comes the bride, "the Spirit and the bride say, Come." Again like the bridegroom in the Psalms who is in strength, we have the sun here in the meridian of its strength, for it says, "as the sun shines in its power." Whatever the weakness or failure may be publicly, Christ remains in His shining. His countenance, which reflects the glory of all that He is, remains in the meridian of its strength throughout the dispensation over against the failure of the light-bearer in the public position. And that sun tonight would shed its benign rays upon us, its healing warming influence! Think of it as linked with the word of God, the two-edged sword! Oh, someone might say, The matters that we have been having have been cutting deeply, cutting a little bit too close home. Dear brethren, I would say, Let the word of God, as the two-edged sword going out of the mouth of Christ, have its full way with us, "penetrating to the division of soul and spirit, both of joints and marrow, and a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart," @Hebrews 4: 12. Let it have
{192}
its full way, and as we accept the exposure and seek grace to deal with the matters that the word proceeding out of Christ's mouth would call our attention to, we shall get all the priestly grace and support of Christ flowing in behind to help us in relation to all that we may have to face. It may involve sacrifice, it may involve suffering, it may involve reproach and ignominy, it may involve being ostracised, but oh, the value of the priestly service of Christ as we accept the exposure! But then, dear brethren, if I might be allowed to apply this scripture (I am not seeking to interpret it at the moment) as to the countenance of Christ, as the sun shines in its power, I believe faith can see a suggestion of the bridegroom in it. He looks over the public history and He thinks of the bridal glory that marked the church in the early days of the Acts, and He thinks of the bridal response in the early movements of the assembly, especially at Ephesus, when in the power and preciousness of first love, they enjoyed the charm of those heavenly relationships with Christ, which the assembly stood in. Think of Him as His countenance looks upon the position of the public light-bearer, robbed of her bridal adornments, robbed of her bridal glories in that public position. How He must feel it! But then all the blessedness of the warmth and the healing that is linked with His wings as arising, in the other type and symbol of the sun in Malachi, would come into the soul who is prepared, in the midst of the public defection, to accept the exposure and move into all the joy of the revival as seen in Philadelphia, where His countenance shining in its power is felt by those who are prepared to accept death to all that is in the world, and enjoy in secret, as standing in the truth of the assembly, and its heavenly relations with Christ, the blessedness of this warming and healing influence of the sun. What a presentation! It is the Son of man, dear brethren. You may say,
{193}
the brethren are saying hard things, the ministers are saying hard things. They are not considering rightly for us, they do not know the circumstances. But the Son of man does. It is the Son of man who is clothed with judicial habiliments -- the One who is on our side. As Son of God, He is on God's side, but as Son of man He is on *our* side; and it does not matter what locality we come from -- you might say, 'It is alright for America, or it is alright for England, or Australia.' But it does not matter where we come from, the Son of man stands in relation to universal dominion, universal influence, and He is on our side, sympathetically and feelingly, for He is the Son of man. Oh, how He feels with us! But His eyes are as a flame of fire. Oh, the holy jealousy that lies behind those penetrating eyes, discerning in the midst of us what is unsuited to love's cherished thoughts! Love would not suffer anything upon us that denies the true features of the assembly in her heavenly glory.
Now a word as to the Lamb. What a presentation of Christ, dear brethren, the Lamb is! It would have been wonderful to have had a talk with John after all this. I am sure he would say to us, 'I cannot tell you the half of what I have experienced.' John had to suffer this on account of the testimony, for he was there because of the word of *his* testimony. What about the word of our testimony? What about the word of our testimony to our school principals and instructors, to our employers, to our supervisors and superintendents? What about the word of our testimony to the directors of the concern that we may be bound up with? It is a wonderful thing to see a believer fearless in the presence of a board of directors, speaking about Christ. Not saying he has got religious feelings and religious ideas, but a fearless confessor of Christ. We want to be like that! John was like that. But now heaven has said to him,
{194}
"Come up here," @Revelation 4: 1. I love that thought! We have often heard of it, how heaven loves to call the sufferers for the testimony up there, as it says, "Come up *here*." It is not just 'Come up,' but "Come up *here*." We might say, not that we want to put too much in it, it is where Jesus is, where God is, where the throne is in its eternal majesty and supremacy. "Come up here," and you will get a view of everything from there. Would to God that every one of us, from the youngest to the oldest, knew something of this experience! There are those that have known what it is to face the violence of the picket lines. We speak feelingly about these matters. There are those here that have known what it is to face these extraneous matters that militate against the assembly's heavenly glory, and we can speak feelingly about these matters. But when you get up into heaven, through that door in the Spirit's power and you see the throne, your soul is prostrate before divine majesty. What does man's poor might mean? What do all his forces marshalled against a believer mean? May the Lord give us a touch of it! The voice says, "Come up here." And this is one of the things he is to see. "I saw in the midst of the throne and of the four living creatures, and in the midst of the elders, a Lamb standing, as slain." Think of that! You would think that if it were slain it would be lying down, but it is standing. Of course, it is symbolical, but the symbol is to impress our minds; every detail, as it were, is designed by the Spirit of God to throw into transcendent relief this glorious Person. As we think of the Lamb -- "*I* Jesus," as He said at the end, but the Lamb here -- we think of how He suffered for the rights of God. Think of how He suffered at the hands of men, uncomplainingly, as it is said prophetically, "he was led as a lamb to the slaughter, and was as a sheep dumb before her shearers, and he opened not his mouth",
{195}
(@Isaiah 53: 7), and then as Peter says, "who when reviled, reviled not again; when suffering, threatened not; but gave himself over into the hands of him who judges righteously," @1 Peter 2: 23. We might well give ourselves over into those hands, as Jesus did. John sees Him as the Lamb, and how it affected him. John had been weeping over the fact that there was no one able to take the book, and his attention is drawn to the Lamb standing as slain. Oh, what that brings into the soul and into the mind, as we think of how He was slain, how the experience of death was that holy One's. How He entered the empire of death and conquered him who had the power of death, and forth from death He has come. But He once lay there, dear brethren, and John sees Him as a Lamb standing; no longer lying, He is standing. It is like the vision that Stephen saw, "the Son of man standing." He is in that position and actions are going to flow from this chapter onwards. Things are going to be done, the man of sin is going to be met and he is going to be met through this channel, we might say, of operation, I speak reverently, but he is going to be met by the "Lamb standing, as slain." And it says, "having seven horns and seven eyes, which are the seven spirits of God." I think this is remarkable that the Spirit of God should be linked with the holy Sufferer, as Jesus the Lamb was. Think of the Spirit of God, in His plenary character and in the fulness that marks Him in the administration of the throne, identified with the holy Sufferer, the Lamb! He will always be identified with suffering ones, as they suffer in the spirit of the Lamb, as Peter tells us, as to those that suffer, "If ye are reproached in the name of Christ, blessed are ye; for the Spirit of glory and the Spirit of God rests upon you," @1 Peter 4: 14. You see, the great effect it has.
Now just a reference to the Word of God. What a holy scene is before us, a scene of holy jubilance!
{196}
Not only is the rival to Christ being met, in the man of sin; but the rival to the assembly has been met. She who has beclouded all bridal beauty and glory in the public testimonial position, she has been met and overthrown, and on to view comes the wife of the Lamb. We belong to the wife of the Lamb Think of the privilege that is ours as being the wife of the suffering One, the assembly, in the sense of all that belonged to Him in this dispensation -- the wife of the suffering One. It says, "the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife has made herself ready."
Are we in this? Have we made ourselves ready? Is there anything that has to be adjusted or attended to as we come into this glorious scene? Surely, we want to be ready! But the passage that I have read says, "the heaven opened." The assembly is coming out as the wife of the Lamb. If the assembly fills the divine presence and the divine mind as it does, how it should fill ours more and more! The heaven opens and then we have "a white horse, and one sitting on it, called Faithful and True." Oh, the glory of "*I* Jesus" in this relation! The One who was Faithful and True. How faithful He was, even to death! How true He was! The Lord looks for the reflex of that in us. The Spirit of God would produce the reflex of that in us, so that we should be faithful and true. Then it says, "his eyes are a flame of fire." It is very interesting, the link with the assembly feature in the beginning of the book, where we have the Son of man in judicial garments, bearing on the public light-bearer, the assembly in her public position. The reference to the eyes again appears, "his eyes are a flame of fire, and upon his head many diadems." That holy head once crowned with thorns, now adorned with the many diadems! Oh, the thought of His appearing! Do we love it? We are going to be with Him, as it goes on to say, "the armies which are in the heaven followed him upon white horses,
{197}
clad in white, pure, fine linen." It is not only that their associations, as in the clothing, are pure and white, but what supports them in movement is white. What a scene of purity! We are reminded, amidst all the defilement and wickedness in this book, of abiding purity and stainlessness in relation to heaven, in relation to God, the throne, and Christ and the assembly. And it says, "his name is called the Word of God." That is, every bit of the knowledge of God that we have has come through this glorious Person -- "*I* Jesus." Let it strike a chord in the power of the Spirit of God in our souls! "*I* Jesus have sent mine angel to testify these things to you in the assemblies," every local position in His mind. "I am the root and offspring of David," it reminds us of the greatness of that glorious Person and the refinement of His humanity; and then He says, "the bright and morning star." It is the special way He appears, in the assembly period, in heavenly light and glory to those that are in this wonderful stream of living movement with which the Spirit of God identifies Himself, as "the Spirit and the bride say, Come." May the Lord bless the word to us for His name's sake.
{198}
THE EXPANSE (1)
@Genesis 1: 6 -- 19; @Job 38: 1 -- 33
S.McC. We have often heard reference to the expanse, and it is thought that as we enquire together in the light of the temple we might get some help as to what it means, and its bearing upon us. The more you look into the Scriptures, the more you are impressed with the extensiveness and vastness of what is linked with the thought of the expanse. J.N.D. referred to it many years ago and said that it involves a sphere of heavenly power over the earth, and how much that suggestion itself spreads before the view as we go through the Old Testament into the New, and especially take account of the epistle to the Ephesians, which is full of the thought of the expanse, and the book of the Revelation, where it comes on to our view in such a peculiar way. I thought we might begin with these two sections that we have read, and see how it stands in its primary setting in @Genesis 1. While taking account of its material significance, we should have in mind particularly its spiritual significance, because in @Genesis 1 it is apparent that it is a great area and sphere of things into which light and rule enter in a very distinctive way. Then I thought of the section in Job, as particularly reminding us of the hidden resources that God has in the expanse. It is an amazing chapter, where God takes matters in hand personally, and speaks about the wonderful things that we read of, unfolding to us the marvellous hidden resources and reserves that are linked with the expanse. It should serve to encourage our hearts and strengthen our hearts together in the sense that God has the resources and the reserves in relation to
{199}
the expanse to meet all the wickedness and evil that has introduced itself into it. In the geophysical year men are thinking much of their accomplishments; no doubt Satan is entering into them in a peculiar way as he did at Babel, in the building of the tower, and then what followed in Abraham's time, he being called out of a scene of idolatry as it is referred to by Joshua (@Joshua 24: 15) where demons become worshipped as gods. There is no doubt that what is obtaining at the present moment will lead into the same kind of thing, resulting in the full thought of the apostasy. But what is in mind to see is how God would impress us as to His thoughts about the expanse, and the peculiar place that Christ and the assembly have in the divine mind in relation to it, the expanse suggesting a sphere and realm of operations that God has provided in the second phase of creation. It did not obtain in the first creation, but it obtains in the second phase of creation. God thus affording Himself room to operate and to give effect to the greatness of His thoughts, especially in relation to Christ and the assembly, but involving the whole universe, as we shall see. One does not have too much defined in mind as to what it may lead into, or how it may open up, but one trusts that there may be liberty with one another so that we may get help in regard to this thought which seems to be very great in the divine mind. The Psalms are full with the thought of it; in fact the climax of the ways of God brings in the great thought, "Praise God in his sanctuary; praise him in the firmament of his power" (@Psalm 150: 1), showing what a refined result is to be arrived at as evil and wickedness are met and dealt with in the expanse, and the great result of God's marvellous operations appears.
L.W.T. You have referred to the fact that the expanse is not mentioned in the first creation; to what extent is the expanse a provisional thought?
{200}
There does not appear to be any reference to it in @Revelation 21.
S.McC. Not as to the actual use of the word, but I think in the light of the epistle to the Ephesians we are warranted in taking account of it *in the result* of divine operations in it as something that will abide. Although its great bearing is on the provisional side, in connection with influence upon the earth, spiritually the thought goes through, in the sense of what is heavenly, because the expanse brings in the thought of what is heavenly.
J.McK. Do you think in the assembly gospel, Matthew, the Lord's face shining as the sun would confirm that to us?
S.McC. Yes. That is an interesting reference, because Matthew bears very much on the thought of the expanse, and rule and administration as they work out in relation to it. The sun, as it is referred to in @Genesis 1: 14, 15, has a very special place in it, pointing to Christ in that way. But what would you say more as to the setting of it in Matthew?
J.McK. I wondered if the present bearing of light in the heavenlies is to be upon us.
S.McC. Yes, it is interesting that preceding the great administrative chapter in Matthew (chapter 18), where the assembly so singularly appears in such an august way, we should have that reference to Christ in that great glory chapter; chapter 17. It is as if the administration is to be affected by the glory that shines in that relation.
A.P.C.L. Is it primarily in your mind that the expanse is connected with divine operations?
S.McC. Yes, that is the main thought in one's mind, for I think the great idea of the expanse in the mind of God is to make special room for Christ and the assembly, and the particular influence that they have in the sphere of rule. We shall see it worked out in the city in the Revelation.
{201}
A.P.C.L. So it is not simply the idea of expanse, but "*an* expanse" being a determined matter in the divine mind.
S.McC. I think it is important to see that. It is not 'and let there be expanse,' as if it were a general undefined thought; it is a very defined thought, "Let there be *an* expanse in the midst of the waters."
P.H.H. Is it at all significant that the expanse mentioned, involving mainly divine operations, as you say, comes in after God has called for light and made the division? Are His operations therefore in the light?
S.McC. I think that is the way we are to see it. If we apply it spiritually, as, of course, we have the right to do, verses 3, 4 and 5 would involve the presence of Christ in manhood. What a wonderful time it was when Christ came into manhood. God as it were saying, "Let there be light." John very carefully tells us, that "the life was the light of men." Following that, we get God making the expanse and dividing between the waters that are under the expanse and the waters that are above the expanse, no doubt leading our thoughts to what is linked with the position of Christ in glory.
E.C.M. What would you say as to the Spirit of God hovering over the face of the waters preceding the thought of light? Is that connected with the operational side in any way?
S.McC. I think it is. We might liken that to the whole testing period of man, after the chaos and dislocation had come in, all through the Old Testament we can see the Spirit of God hovering. You take the Psalms and the prophets, how they bring out that feature. I am now alluding to it in a general way. We can apply it, of course, in other ways, but the Odd Testament is like that. In the midst of the dislocation introduced by sin, the Spirit of God is hovering, but then we come to verses 3 and 5, and
{202}
they are suggestive of Christ coming into humanity. God causing light to come in. Then we get the expanse, followed by the ordered system of things linked with dry land appearing. Then we get the setting of the specific light, not light in a general way now, but light in a very specialised way, in bodies of light in the expanse.
J.T.S. You spoke to us recently of heavenly influence in the sun and the moon and the stars. Would that link a little with what we read finally, "Knowest thou the ordinances of the heavens? dost thou determine their rule over the earth?" And (without wishing to anticipate), would that bring us to the close of @Ephesians 1?
S.McC. It does. "The ordinances of the heavens," links with what was suggested in Matthew, indeed, we have a book, have we not, on 'The ordinances of the heavens,' notes of readings in Matthew? Matthew's great feature is to impress us with the rule of the heavens in that way, and how Christ and the assembly are viewed in relation to it.
J.McK. So that on the first day, in Christ, the division was absolute, but on the fourth day there remains this continual dividing of light and darkness.
S.McC. We get in the gospels, as Christ came into the world, specially in John, the immediate and absolute division between light and darkness. But then, as we come into the Acts and the epistles, where the expanse comes on to our view in a peculiar way as the sphere of divine operations, involving Christ in heaven and the Spirit down here in the assembly in relation to Christ there, we get the continuance of this thought, dividing between the day and night.
J.M. Why is the work of the second day not said to be good?
S.McC. We have often pondered that, and as it has been alluded to, there may be contemplated the
{203}
enemy's invasion of the expanse. I thought the chapter we read in Job threw some light on the matter. That is, God said there, in chapter 38: 8 -- 11, "And who shut up the sea with doors, when it burst forth, issuing out of the womb? When I made the cloud its garment, and thick darkness a swaddling band for it; When I cut out for it *my* boundary, and set bars and doors. And said, Hitherto shalt thou come and no further, and here shall thy proud waves be stayed?" That is a remarkable passage as entering into the creational side, indicating an element that God had to keep in control -- "thy proud waves" is a remarkable allusion. The expanse comes in in connection with the division of waters, and the point as I would apprehend and understand it, is that divine control comes into the operation to limit what would interfere with those operations.
A.J.G. In chapter 1: 31 it says, "And God saw everything that he had made, and behold it was very good." So that while what He made on the second day was not called good, yet is it not included in a general way in that final statement? Even though evil is permitted to come in, is it not permitted in order to bring out how completely God can control it, and bring good out of it?
S.McC. I think that helps us very much as to it. It is interesting, along with what you say, that in regard to the expanse on the fourth day, it says (verse 18), "And God saw that it was good." That is, He is referring to the expanse. While the expression "it was good," is held up in verses 6, 7 and 8, I think it is included in verse 18 and what you referred to in verse 31.
D.W.G. So would it be right to say that it is good, in result, as moral matters are dealt with in the expanse, and Christ and the assembly come into their right place?
S.McC. It is. That is, the result will show God's
{204}
complete triumph over evil. The enemy has come into the expanse -- how, when and where, what can we say? We have to leave it, for Scripture is rather silent on the subject, but Scripture clearly sets out that evil has invaded the expanse to interfere with divine operations. In the final thoughts in the Revelation, we can see the good result in the complete triumph over evil.
J.M. Do you think that the work of Christ on the cross would enter in some way into the second day?
S.McC. It must do. All things look back retroactively from the cross, and look forward in prospective to the cross, and the matter of dividing finds its supreme centre in what transpired there in Christ.
M.P.S. Does the end of verse 13 of @Job 38 "and the wicked might be shaken out of it?" connect with @Luke 10: 18, in which the Lord says that He beheld Satan falling as lightning out of heaven? That is followed by His praising the Father as "Lord of the heaven and of the earth."
S.McC. There we get a foreshadowing of what comes about in the ways of God. When we come to the Revelation, as we shall see, the enemy is cast out of heaven, he is cast on to the earth, and his activities then are directed towards what is on the earth. But in the meantime he is concentrating on the operations in the expanse, on the heavenly line, for Satan is especially concerned to hinder these operations.
J.B.S. Why is he called "the ruler of the authority of the air"? "And you, being dead in your offences and sins -- in which ye once walked according to the age of this world, according to the ruler of the authority of the air, the spirit who now works in the sons of disobedience," @Ephesians 2: 1.
S.McC. That is one of the passages that helps us to see that the enemy has entered the expanse. How long he has been in it, Scripture does not tell us, but he is in it, because the air alludes to the expanse,
{205}
the expanse bearing peculiarly on the atmospheric side.
A.W.G.T. Is the expanse co-extensive with what Mr. Darby calls 'creation's vault'?
S.McC. I do not know, of course, what Mr. Darby had in mind. We sometimes hear 'the vault of heaven' alluded to. No doubt, there is some link with the expanse in that thought.
E.M. When you speak about this vast expanse being under control, is it confirmed in @Ezekiel 1: 26, "And above the expanse that was over their heads was the likeness of a throne"?
S.McC. Yes, we shall see, in the course of the readings, how Christ appears in figure and in type in relation to the expanse in a peculiar way. So that we have the thought here as in @Ezekiel 1, of the waters that are *under* the expanse and the waters that are *above* the expanse.
W.R.M. It says, "God *made* the expanse." It is the first thing that He is said to have made. Wisdom and skill of workmanship would enter into that, do you think?
S.McC. I think so. That is why one referred to Ephesians as giving a wealth of knowledge in regard to the expanse as it bears on us spiritually, because it is in Ephesians that we get the acme of God's workmanship, in this setting. It says there, "we are his workmanship," not just His work, but we are His workmanship; all the resources of divine skill and wisdom enter into that workmanship.
P.H.H. Does this thought of the expanse and the operations in it test us as to how we are in it, whether we are in it sympathetically with God, or in some way allowing evil to operate?
S.McC. I thought we might see that, because the expanse is an indication to faith that God is going to stress the heavenly side. We shall find further on in Genesis, how God comes into a scene of idolatry and
{206}
calls a man out of it, and then operates on the line of the expanse, developing the heavenly side, in Abraham, Jacob and in Joseph. God wants us to be heavenly, and as another has said, the expanse is really the native air that faith breathes. Well, that is very important. Where are we breathing? and what are we breathing? We want to breathe this wonderful native air that belongs to the realm of God's operations on the heavenly line.
P.H.H. Do you think this chapter 1 would encourage us to be with God sympathetically in our minds and affections, so that we are prepared for whatever He may do in the sense of heavenly operations?
S.McC. That is what I thought. If we are breathing the native air of the expanse we shall have no difficulty spiritually when we come to the lights in the expanse in verse 14, and the setting of the two great lights, that is, with God's appointed channels and avenues for the diffusion of light. It is when we get on the earthly line, and under the influence of the enemy, that we get into difficulty about the great lights in the expanse.
C.H. What would you say about the fixity connected with the dry land coming after the making of the expanse?
S.McC. I think there is something suggestive in it, but we would value any help that you could give on it.
C.H. You spoke about faith, and the intervention of God in making the expanse, and in dividing between the waters above and the waters below. As brought into faith's realm we have what is fixed in the dry land, and fruitfulness as flowing from that.
S.McC. I think it helps greatly to see that, how this dry land appears and how the great matter of food comes in here. The dry land suggests an ordered state of things in which certain specific thoughts are going to be set out, as it says, "God called the dry
{207}
land Earth," because man is going to be formed out of that. It is a remarkable thing that in relation to what God calls Earth here, man is going to be formed out of it, according to @Genesis 2, and God sees that it is good. Then He says, "Let the earth cause grass to spring up, herb producing seed, fruit-trees yielding fruit after their kind." The point is food, to sustain life, comes into view.
A.P.B. Is it your thought that the land appears in the expanse?
S.McC. I would not put it that way. I would rather put it that the dry land appears in relation to the expanse; not in it, but in relation to it. The divine idea thus is that heaven is to control the earth. We should notice that, for men are trying to work it the other way round. They are trying to control heaven from the earth, but the divine and primary thought of God is that the heaven, or the expanse, is to control the earth.
W.J.T. Does that involve response, in that it says, "the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy"?
S.McC. I thought it was remarkable that that passage comes in there. Why does God allude to that, in the way in which He does, in that section in Job?
A.H. In verse 9 it says, "Let the waters under the heavens be gathered together to one place," that is defined, is it not, "under the heavens," showing the influence of heaven over it.
S.McC. I think it is a great encouragement, and comfort to take account of that, because men are afraid of the waters and of their breaking forth. Even while they go forward and deal with things that are really beyond their control, there is an inherent fear of the waters, and what will result if things get out of control, but God would assure faith, in this native air in which it breathes, that that is all
{208}
divinely controlled. The Assyrian may come into Emmanuel's land, and waters in torrential flow may jeopardise the whole position, but it is only to the neck, not over the head; @Isaiah 8: 8. God says, as it were, "Hitherto shalt thou come and no further."
A.P.C.L. Does Jehovah show in chapter 7 how He can use these resources to purify the earth as it would appear to get out of hand; and then in chapter 12 He calls someone from it in relation to what is heavenly in itself?
S.McC. It is very enlightening to see these features in Genesis. First there is the cleansing in relation to the earth, but then, when man departs further and degenerates into something worse than ever, into idolatry (for Joshua reminds the people that their fathers served the gods beyond the river, alluding to what followed the flood), God called Abraham out of it. He does not cleanse it, as He did in Noah's time, but He resorts to another method of operation in calling a man out of it, as beginning in him, as the head of the accepted race, the race of God, the wonderful operations that will produce such a result in God's world.
W.H.T. Could you say a little as to the principle of continual division?
S.McC. I thought in relation to these great bodies of light -- giving influence in the section from verses 14 -- 19, the sun and the moon, and the stars; what a power for good they are, and they are especially helpful when it comes to dividing between day and night. You remember how Daniel speaks of those that turn the many to righteousness that they shall shine as the brightness of the expanse; @Daniel 12: 3. What an influence for good Daniel and others were as they moved in the light of the expanse!
A.C.S.P. Does the repetition of the use of the expression "the expanse of the heavens" help us to get an impression of the greatness of what is heavenly?
{209}
S.McC. I think it does. It is not 'the expanse of the earth,' it is "the expanse of the heavens." And especially do we get an impression of what is heavenly as we come to Christianity and see the greatness that is involved in Christ in the expanse, in the heavens, as we are told, in @Acts 3, "whom heaven indeed must receive till the times of the restoring of all things."
Ques. Would @Psalm 19: 1 help, "The heavens declare the glory of God; and the expanse sheweth the work of his hands"?
S.McC. Yes, we shall see that in the course of our readings, how Christ comes into the expanse and how the assembly comes into it. @Psalm 19 shows us how the sun comes into its circuit in the expanse. It is a very interesting thing, from Genesis to Revelation, that you will always notice that linked with the thought of the expanse there is restoration and recovery. If you search the passages in which the heavenly side is alluded to, and the thought of the firmament and the expanse, you will find in the context, or near by, some allusion to restoration or recovery. I am thinking of @Psalm 19 particularly. The first half of it alludes to the marvellous influence in the expanse, the last half of it begins with "The law of Jehovah is perfect, restoring the soul."
W.R.M. Is Nebuchadnezzar's history a striking example of that? He had to learn that the heavens do rule, and he eventually lifted up his eyes to the heavens and restoration came about.
S.McC. There you see it. I think the thought as suggested in the book of Daniel should help us in these days. We have had 'The Times of the Nations' before us, and we are especially to see the bearing of the heavenly side in regard to all matters. Men may talk about reaching certain things, but we are not to be drawn into that kind of thing. The enemy would lure the younger ones into what is so spectacular on that line; but we are to repair into the expanse, into
{210}
the heavenly side, for that is the native air that faith breathes, as C.A.C. says.
P.H.H. You said a little while ago, in referring to the lights that there were certain channels which God used. Would you be free now to say a little more about that, in view of the fact that we have spoken of the sun and so on?
S.McC. I thought it linked with @Ephesians 4, where we have the moral universe and the features of it outlined for us. We have the great place that Christ has in the expanse, exalted above as Man, and then the subsidiary lights as seen in the gifts. Christ is the supreme light, and then the subordinate and subsidiary lights all enter into the work of the ministry. I think we are warranted in thinking of that. Would you agree with that?
P.H.H. Yes, indeed. I gather you are referring to the gifts, and comparing them with stars -- is that it?
S.McC. Yes. The sun suggests Christ, and the moon in a general way suggests the assembly, Israel may come into it in a dispensational way, but it particularly brings into our thoughts the assembly as shining in Christ's light; and then the stars bring out the diversified glory in individuals linked with the expanse.
P.H.H. So that if God sets them, as it says, in the expanse of the heavens, first of all He did it for His own pleasure, and then it is to command our respect in the way He does things.
S.McC. I think we want to see that, because there is a good deal of objection to the expression 'authoritative ministry.' But I think if we noted the bearing of the expanse, and the lights set in it, we would see that the great thing in mind is *rule*, and rule carries authority. These benign light-giving bodies have in mind rule and government, the ordinances of the heavens are linked with them.
{211}
J.McK. Would the idea of spiritual orbits come into the matter?
S.McC. It would, and now that you mention the word 'orbit,' it is a great thing that we should each be in our own orbit. If we are in our orbit we will not clash with one another.
J.McK. And an orbit cannot be questioned.
S.McC. It cannot. It is divinely appointed. That is why one had that passage read in @Job 38 as bearing on the expanse. Verse 31 says, "Canst thou fasten the bands of the Pleiades, or loosen the cords of Orion?" Can you do that? He says to Job, "Dost thou bring forth the constellations each in its season? or dost thou guide the Bear with her sons?" What has happened in Christendom is that man has attempted to control the ministry. But the Spirit of God refuses human control of the ministry in the assembly; it is divinely controlled in the expanse.
C.M.M. Does the idea of a constellation suggest that these individual stars, each according to his glory, are set together in the wonderful pattern according to the divine mind?
S.McC. I think it is very affecting that in these three-day occasions, brothers who serve can be together; not as trying to out-vie one another, but as working together in relation to the dissemination of heavenly light and influence among the saints. There is something very attractive about it.
C.H. Is not that specifically in the mind of the Spirit in this passage in Genesis? It says, God set them "to give light on the earth." It is not just a question of viewing the luminaries in an objective way, but the reason for which they have been set there is to give light on the earth.
S.McC. That is it. It is the particular bearing of them on the earth, where practical matters have to be worked out and practical difficulties have to be faced.
{212}
A.W.G.T. Is that confirmed in verse 33 of your chapter in Job, "Knowest thou the ordinances of the heavens? dost thou determine their rule over the earth?"
S.McC. So you can see that, as Paul goes up to Galatia to meet the difficulties in regard to the glad tidings. Would Jerusalem determine the rule over the earth? Never for a moment! Paul says that what he had was not from men, nor through man. He insisted on his own position in the expanse, and the related side of the expanse to his ministry.
G.H.S.P. Does Paul's conflict with the wicked spirits at Ephesus show how Satan was entrenched there, and how that was met in @Acts 19?
S.McC. We have got a little preview there of how what is wicked and evil will be cast out of the expanse. It is a great thing to get a sense of that in our souls, that as we pursue what is evil to the final thought of it, it *will be* met.
L.W.T. Might I ask about the two lights? Relatively one is great and the other is small, yet, is it beautiful the way they are spoken of as "the two great lights"? Does that bring out the distinctiveness of the assembly?
S.McC. Yes. It is almost paradoxical the way it reads. It says, "God made the two great lights, the *great* light to rule the days, and the *small* light to rule the night -- and the stars," The added allusion "and the stars" is very affecting. It is almost like an added touch, subserving the great thought of the sun and the moon, the great thought of Christ and the assembly.
W.J.T. In relation to your mention of authoritative ministry, do you think God follows up the authoritative ministry of Elihu which Job had not fully received?
S.McC. I thought so. That is God fully supports what Elihu had been bringing before Job, as speaking
{213}
in the power of the Spirit. God accredits it Himself. So that that section of Job is a remarkable section as to the way that God speaks to Job. He speaks about the sea in a way which gives us a measure of stability and comfort in the sense that things will be controlled. God says, "I cut out for it my boundary," not 'its boundary,' but "my boundary"; and then, "hast thou caused the dawn to know its place, that it might take hold of the ends of the earth, and the wicked might be shaken out of it?" It is not a question of angelic forces being sent here to put the wicked out; it is a question of dawn coming in, light coming in, and the wicked being shaken out.
J.McK. Is it interesting in chapter 38 that Jehovah appears to take over from Elihu? Elihu gives a good introduction in the previous chapter, now it is Jehovah speaking out of the whirlwind. Would that be something like the greatness of God in the rights of His own domain?
S.McC. I think it is, and it would be a helpful thing, you feel, for all of us to ponder this. Could God take over where we leave off? What you have referred to is very fine, that God took over where Elihu left off.
E.R.S. Is it to be noted that Elihu's name means 'God is He'?
S.McC. Yes, it carries the thought of 'El,' implying supremacy in power. The sense of the power that is linked with God should always be present in our souls.
R.G.B. The Spirit of God took over as Peter was speaking in the Acts, and confirms and adds to what he had effected by his word.
S.McC. It is remarkable how immediate the action is, there is no hesitation or let up. That is very fine in regard to ministry and service, that divine Persons can link on with it immediately.
A.P.C.L. Does the reference in @Philippians 2: 15
{214}
extend the matter further, to all the saints, "irreproachable children of God in the midst of a crooked and perverted generation; among whom ye appear as lights in the world"?
S.McC. That is a very fine reference which I thought we might allude to later. But it bears out what we are saying, and @1 Corinthians 15 too bears out the extension of the thought of the stars to the saints, the children of God. Star differing from star in glory is the thought in @1 Corinthians 15, but Philippians has in mind what we are in the world, shining as lights.
D.W.G. The note to the word 'appear' there is 'the rising or appearing of heavenly bodies.'
S.McC. That is very fine as bearing on our influence. What kind of influence do we have in our setting in the world? Is it a benign influence, an influence for good on one another and on men?
A.P.B. Did you not say earlier that in the Acts and the epistles we have this thought of separating the day from the night?
S.McC. I think God has caused the dawn to know its place, and it has taken hold of the ends of the earth. I suppose that would involve, as we would apply it, Paul's ministry. It is not only the Jewish side, but the ends of the earth. And then, "It is changed like the signet-clay; and all things stand forth as in a garment." That is, the figure of speech is to convey the silhouetting of everything on the horizon, as the dawn lays hold of things. We all know how things stand out in silhouette against the horizon as the dawn takes place. Well, Paul's ministry helps us as to all that, the way that things stand out and are detailed.
C.H. He was apprehended by a light out of heaven. It is remarkable that he should be thus converted, as we speak, to become the great servant of Christ and the assembly. It just speaks of it that way, "there
{215}
shone round about him a light out of heaven," @Acts 9: 3.
S.McC. It does. And the voice out of heaven, too, in the Acts, is interesting. There was the immediate impression that Paul got of the expanse, of what is heavenly, and it coloured all his ministry.
P.H.H. He would even bring Peter to book as to that, speaking about it in Galatians. Paul and Peter were, as we might say, stars, each one of them, yet Paul has to be looked to at the end, do you think?
S.McC. That is very striking, how Peter, as in his own orbit, accepts it in such a touching way. He later alludes to him as "our beloved brother Paul."
G.E.E. Would @Acts 20 bear on this, he discoursed until day-break?
S.McC. Yes, it would, and the many lights in the upper room all allude to the influence of what is heavenly in that particular setting, when Paul is so prominent. Then we get this verse 22, "Hast thou entered into the storehouses of the snow, and hast thou seen the treasuries of the hail." These are all allusions to the expanse, but the hidden reserves of the expanse to meet things; and it goes on to say, "Which I have reserved for the time of distress, for the day of battle and war?" Think of the hidden reserves in the expanse to meet the apostasy, and to make way for the holy city to come into the expanse, and to rule benignly with Christ for God.
E.R.S. Are they like God's armaments?
S.McC. Well, they are in that way.
L.W.T. So is all this section leading to what Job says in chapter 42: 2, "I know that thou canst do everything, and that thou canst be hindered in no thought of thine"? Is that what God has in mind to bring Job to in this section?
S.McC. Just so. I think that at the present time when men are talking out of bounds in regard to
{216}
reaching the moon and other things, the young people want to be drawn into God's expanse, and to breathe the native air of faith and not be drawn into all that side of things which God will meet with the hidden reserves of the expanse. He has treasured them up for the day of battle and war, that is coming.
M.P.S. May I ask about the whirlwind? Jehovah answered Job out of the whirlwind. Is that to be taken in contrast to the voice out of heaven which Peter speaks about, which would be more characteristic of our dispensation? Peter speaks about the voice "being uttered to him by the excellent glory," @2 Peter 1: 17.
S.McC. You can see how Peter had been affected in his soul by that heavenly scene, and God speaking out of it; because it was a heavenly scene. The mount of Transfiguration is a touch of the expanse in the gospels, and Peter was affected by it, and it comes out in the way that he speaks of it. It is interesting to see how touchingly God in wrath remembers mercy, as it says here, "Who hath divided a channel for the rain-flood, and a way for the thunder's flash; to cause it to rain on the earth, where no one is; on the wilderness wherein there is not a man; to satisfy the desolate and waste ground, and to cause the sprout of the grass to spring forth? Surely these are not mentioned for nothing, they are to remind us how that in the midst of God's governmental dealings, in wrath He remembers mercy. So with Nebuchadnezzar, as was referred to, it was a band of iron and brass, but it was in the tender grass of the field. The whole thing was modified by the circumstances in which it was. We have the reference there to the dew of heaven.
A.J.G. It says he was bathed with it.
S.McC. What a touch that is! It is not that God would send it arbitrarily or in a perfunctory way; the expression "bathed with the dew of
{217}
heaven" suggests the excess of heavenly influence, I think, whether we view it judicially or otherwise.
H.C. And does it come back to @Genesis 1: 11, where the first thing that the earth brings forth is grass, springing up?
S.McC. Just so, I think the expanse has a great relation to what the earth produces, and if there is to be the tender growth that we look for in our gatherings, there must be the maintenance of the holy and heavenly atmosphere as is linked with the expanse.
P.H.H. Can you entertain the thought that in our cases of discipline and sorrow we may not know what to do, but we may find comfort in the fact that God has resources which He can use, apart from ministry, to affect the persons who are in our minds?
S.McC. I think that is right. Oftentimes we wonder what can be done, but yet God is impressing Job. The three persons reasoned with him night and day, and never reached a result in regard to it, but Elihu brings in a word in the power of the Spirit. Then God links on with Elihu, and what God reminds us of is the hidden reserves and resources that He has in the expanse to make way for His own operations.
A.P.C.L. Is that suggested in verse 2, that apart from this knowledge there will be the possibility of us darkening counsel?
S.McC. I think so. "Who is this that darkeneth counsel by words without knowledge?" It is not the use of words, the use of words in itself will never bring about anything, especially as God refers to it here -- "words without knowledge." We may think, of course, that knowledge is conveyed in words, but it is striking that Jehovah says here, "words without knowledge."
A.P.C.L. I was wondering if that knowledge really was what Jehovah was seeking to impart to him as to what lay in His own resources.
{218}
S.McC. I think so.
W.G.L. What would you say as to Job's own reference to the constellations in chapter 9 of this book? He refers to the Bear, Orion, and the Pleiades.
S.McC. I think it is to stress the matter of divine control. In Revelation the Lord holds and controls the stars, and we must see divine control entering into these matters. Then there is the other thought, namely the unity in these constellations; they are referred to as under divine control. So that we are all saying the same thing; there is no disparity, as it were, in our view of the truth, and what we say as to the truth. Each is moving in his own orbit, but under divine control. There is plenty of room for everybody in the expanse! We do not need to be afraid that there will not be room for us; there is plenty of room in the expanse, but each is to be in his or her orbit, and thus divinely controlled.
L.W.T. "The stars from their courses," as we have in @Judges 5: 20.
S.McC. Quite so. It is remarkable how Deborah refers to that "the stars from their courses fought with Sisera." It is not only the stars giving light, but they are in the battle, in their courses.
H.M.H. Is it interesting that in @Ephesians 4 the reference to the gifts is preceded by the statement that He has led captivity captive?
S.McC. Yes, it is very interesting, because it shows that evil has been met in the expanse, in order that way might be made for these orbs of light suggested on the fourth day.
{219}
THE EXPANSE (2)
@Genesis 14: 18 -- 24; @Genesis 15: 1 -- 6; @Genesis 22: 11 -- 19; @Genesis 28: 10 -- 19; @Genesis 37: 5 -- 11
S.McC. In considering further the thought of the expanse as the sphere of heavenly power in relation to the earth and a sphere in which God's operations are proceeding, I thought tonight we might consider these passages which bring us to what is more concrete and practical, as bearing upon ourselves, in relation to the heavenly side. We considered in the earlier reading what was more general linked with the expanse and divine resources in it and there are of course other references that could be made, such as in Noah's time we have the windows of heaven; and the outlook of the ark, as we know, was towards the expanse, towards heaven. Then after Noah comes out of the ark, we have God's covenant with Noah, and the bow set in the cloud. That is another delightful reference to the expanse, and divine faithfulness as is suggested in the covenant. But time will not permit going into all that, so I thought we should come over to Abraham and see the new departure in the ways of God, where the heavenly scene opens in such wondrous fulness in the great type we have in this section of Genesis. Up to chapter 12 God was dealing with men generally, in a racial way; but when we come to chapter 12 we get the new departure in the ways of God. In these early chapters of Genesis we get the fulness of the ruin of man. Not only does the race, as the race, sink into the depths of idolatry and the worship of demons, but we have got idolatry in Shem, the line of Shem; showing the great degeneration that came in. The book of Joshua particularly refers to Shem and the idolatry that came into the line of Shem when they worshipped the gods beyond
{220}
the river. But God intervenes, not now in cleansing power as with the flood, but in a new kind of way, and from that point the heavenly scene opens up in richness and fulness in connection with Abraham. I thought we might begin with chapter 14, where we get this mysterious intervention representing, no doubt, part of the secret resources from the heavenly side that are linked with ruling influence, because Melchisedec is king of Salem. Abraham is returning from the conflict, and there is the rescuing of Lot, who had lost Sight of the expanse, whose outlook was governed by earthly things alone, for he had chosen the well-watered plain of Jordan. But Abraham, whose outlook was governed by the expanse, by what was heavenly, is returning in a victorious way and the hidden resources that are linked with the heavenly position came out to meet him in this great personage Melchisedec, because in Hebrews, the type of Melchisedec is brought in to establish the heavenly priesthood of Christ.
There are three great lines that run through these sections; first there is the line of blessing in connection with Abraham, both in chapter 14 and in chapter 22, where the angel speaks from the heavens. At other times God had come down to Abraham, visited him and spoken to him, but in chapter 22 the angel of Jehovah speaks from the heavens, and blessing is mentioned in a profuse way, in the second speaking. Then in chapter 28 we get Jacob and the dream, and the thought of the link between heaven and earth in the ladder, the angels ascending and descending upon it, and Jacob's remark as to the house of God and the gate of heaven brings in the thought of dwelling. It is not developed there, but there it is, the house of God and the gate of heaven. Finally in chapter 37 we get Joseph and the dream of Joseph, which brings in the great figures of speech linked with the expanse, the ruling side being particularly
{221}
in mind in Joseph; it opens up in his exalted position in glory a fulness that exceeds all that went before.
L.W.T. Is there any mysterious reference to Jerusalem, and the place it is to have in the expanse, in the thought of the king of Salem here?
S.McC. I suppose there must be some hidden allusion to it. It is interpreted for us in Hebrews, where the Spirit of God through the writer says, "first being interpreted King of righteousness, and then also king of Salem, which is King of peace," chapter 7: 2. The elements of the world to come are linked with this royal personage; and blessing comes to Abraham as maintained on the heavenly line.
A.J.G. Is it striking that in @Hebrews 11, in the section which begins with Abraham by faith "being called, obeyed to go out," finishes with "but now they seek a better, that is, a heavenly; wherefore God is not ashamed of them, to be called their God" (verses 8 and 16). Does that show how early the idea of expanse entered into the faith of those whom God called?
S.McC. It does. That section in @Hebrews 11 is a remarkable section as bearing on what we are considering. It shows how the heavenly side outweighs all that is connected with the position here below. Abraham as breathing the native air of the expanse, the heavenly, is thus completely superior to the king of Sodom and his advancements.
A.J.G. And do you think that the fact that Melchisedec is said to be "priest of the Most High God" was intended to impress Abraham from the outset with the idea of God being served, he himself being called to have part in that?
S.McC. So that it is interesting in regard to what you have said, that you have the dual reference in the great climax in @Psalm 150, "Praise God in his sanctuary; praise him in the firmament," or 'expanse',
{222}
"of his power." This thought of the priest of the Most High God, possessor of heavens and earth, I think would bear on that. What do you think?
A.J.G. Yes, I thought so. It says that Melchisedec said, "Blessed be Abram of the Most High God ... . And blessed be the Most High God." As though he would suggest to Abraham that he himself is to take up this service of blessing the Most High God.
S.McC. Just so. The sanctuary -- "Praise God in his sanctuary" -- links with what is special and limited in relation to the revelation of God; but the praising Him in the expanse involves the wider and more general sphere in which God is apprehended as operating in relation to His great thoughts, not only including the assembly, but including every family.
A.E. In the earlier meeting you made some reference to the expanse in connection with recovery or restoration. Would Abraham, as moving in the gain of the expanse, be used to recover his brother Lot?
S.McC. That is what enters into the context of the passage that we read. Abraham is on the line of recovering his brother. Which is a great thing. Lot represents, I suppose, the tendency with many, especially the younger ones, to view the well-watered plain of Jordan; whereas Abraham represents those that are maintained in relation to the heavenly line, and as maintained are effective in influencing such as Lot represents.
J.A.F. Is it significant that the first impression that Abraham would have of this heavenly system is one of blessing? I refer to verse 19.
S.McC. Yes. That is one of the main thoughts in reading this passage, and in the passage in chapter 22 we see how blessing is linked with this great section where Abraham is before us. Because Abraham is the heavenly man, unofficially. The heavenly side is
{223}
more seen in Abraham in a practical and concrete way than it is in Isaac, who is the heavenly man officially.
P.H.H. Would Lot, as being recovered, be recovered into this practical matter of blessing; Abraham being blessed, and God being blessed? Would that be in mind, today, for instance, in the great matter of recovery of persons, that they should be brought back into the best that we enjoy together?
S.McC. Yes. What an impression Lot would get in this scene. Perhaps we have never thought of Lot in this scene, but he must have been there. He must have been looking on, perhaps, and watching all that was transpiring; and yet later on he departs from it, which is a very humbling matter; but what an impression it *should* have put upon him, here, in one so great as Abraham, blessed by one so great as Melchisedec.
P.H.H. And would the fact of the Spirit calling him here, "his brother Lot," be a gracious movement to move himself into such a scene?
S.McC. Yes. It is as if heaven would credit him with the best; heaven would clothe him with the best thoughts in this section.
A.P.C.L. Is there a reason why the name of Jehovah is spoken of as the Most High at this point? It involves what is mighty and powerful, does it not, and yet it is referred to as the Most High?
S.McC. Yes. I thought there was a link with the expanse in the title, because the Most High brings in the thought of elevation. Of course it is a millennial title, and in the millennial scene the expanse that God originally made has a peculiar place; but I think the reference to the Most High God is to link our thoughts with the complete superiority of the expanse in a scene where the enemy is moving to hinder the divine right of way.
A.P.C.L. I was only thinking that while it may not exactly belong to this dispensation, yet the faith
{224}
of which you have been speaking should carry it fully, do you not think, in our affections as to God?
S.McC. It should. So that all the elements of the world to come are known and enjoyed now in the assembly. They affect the assembly now.
A.P.C.L. I am wondering whether some of our young people are fully alive to the importance of that side of the truth.
S.McC. Well, I think it is important that they should see it, as it is presented here, specially this thought in Abram of complete superiority to the advances of the king of Sodom as divinely fortified by one who comes on to the scene mysteriously. It is like what we have read of in the book of Job in relation to the expanse; God is saying, Can you explain these things? Can you unfold light as to these matters? Well, Melchisedec comes in in that mysterious way as a hidden divine reserve and resource to meet faith on the heavenly line.
R.D.H. It says that Melchisedec brought out bread and wine. Is that part of the reserves, and would you say a word on that?
S.McC. Yes, the remark of the Spirit through Moses is very interesting, that he "brought out" where did he bring it out from? Well, that is the point in Job. Where do things come from? Can you explain them? And "brought out" means that they are coming out of a sphere where God's supremacy is known, and honoured, for Melchisedec was priest of the Most High God.
C.M.M. Would the gospel of Luke help as to this title Most High God? I was thinking of the reference "the dayspring from on high has visited us, to shine upon" us, @Luke 1: 78. Would it link with the expanse, and God moving in that character, in grace?
S.McC. That is very helpful, because Luke would show how the influence of the expanse is to help us at
{225}
the present time. In Matthew it is in relation to the side of rule; and administration, but in Luke it is in relation to the service of God, the praises of God. So that Luke, as he opens his gospel, would bring us to heaven immediately and impress us with elevated surroundings far morally above the world.
W.G.J. You referred to the enemy trying to prevent the divine right of way. Is that seen in the Acts, where the female slave with the spirit of Python persisted in following Paul and Silas, and refers to God in this title, the Most High?
S.McC. It is remarkable how that title comes in in that section, and how Paul meets it, too. The heavenly line was coming in in Paul's service and Paul's ministry, but then you get this evil force that is really in the expanse, operating through this channel in the woman to hinder the divine right of way in Paul in opening up the greatness of the heavenly realm where the assembly in its relations with Christ is to be known.
C.H. Whereas here, as you say, Abraham is fortified to meet the overtures of the king of Sodom. The context, I think, confirms what you say, in verse 17, the Spirit of God records that the king of Sodom went out to meet him, and in verse 21 he said certain things. But in between that you get this divine visitation.
S.McC. It is very interesting that it should specifically say, in verse 17, that the king of Sodom went out to meet *him*, not to meet the company, not all the servants, trained as they were, nor to meet Lot. He knows what he can do with Lot, you might say, for the enemy knows what he can do with every one of us; but he is concentrating his attention on Abraham. If he can deflect Abraham, he gains a complete victory in the position.
A.C.C. Do you think after the conflict is perhaps the most dangerous time, and hence the need for
{226}
this ministration of Christ in the bread, and the Spirit to strengthen us secretly, so that we may not fall to the flattery after the conflict?
S.McC. Yes. Whatever the bread and wine signify, they are a means of strengthening and support. But they are brought forward in anticipation of the advances of the king of Sodom. It is an interesting thing that it says in verse 19, "he blessed him, and said, Blessed be Abram of the Most High God, possessor of heavens and earth." Now notice that in verse 22 Abraham takes on that language, although he adds a touch of his own; "I have lifted up my hand to *Jehovah*, the Most High God, possessor of heavens and earth." The allusion to God as possessor of heavens and earth is very fine at this juncture.
L.W.T. Is it striking that this makes Abraham independent of the king of Sodom, not only generally, but as to these very small details -- "a thread even to a sandal-thong"? Would that help us just now?
S.McC. It would, that is, as you come on to the heavenly line, things become very delicate and the lines become finely drawn; whereas with Lot, in the general setting, while he has certain things, like unleavened bread, and is called righteous Lot, there seems to be a strange lack of conscience with him as to certain things; so that he becomes enveloped in the affairs of Sodom.
A.J.G. Is it not rather striking that when the seventy return with joy after their victory over the demons, the Lord tells them not to rejoice in that, but to rejoice that their names were written in heaven? And then He immediately rejoices Himself, and addresses the Father as Lord of the heaven and of the earth.
S.McC. That is very striking. And the service of God comes in there, does it not?
A.J.G. It is very preservative, I thought. To
{227}
have part in the service of God would preserve from the inflation we are in danger of as our brother has pointed out.
S.McC. Just so. The Lord Jesus says, "I praise thee, Father, Lord of the heaven and of the earth." He brings in that thought of praise and engages in that feature of service as Man at that juncture, in the light of what had taken place in the dispossession of the power of the enemy.
P.H.H. Is Abraham's further vision, where he is told to "look now toward the heavens," to strengthen him in the progeny that was going to be heavenly, like himself, and able to enter into this matter of being supplied from heaven, and enter into the praise of God? In chapter 14 it is the "possessor," but now I wondered if his looking towards the heavens and God saying "so shall thy seed be" would link us on with the great heavenly company to engage in the praise of God in a heavenly way.
S.McC. I think it does. We have the reference in the opening verse of chapter 15 to the word of Jehovah coming to Abram. In chapter 14 Abram says, "I have lifted up my hand to Jehovah," the use of the name Jehovah there signifying that Abram was in the good of the relationship in which he stood to God. But then in chapter 15 we have "after these things, the word of Jehovah" -- not the word of the Most High -- "came to Abram in a vision, saying, Fear not, Abram; I am thy shield, thy exceeding great reward," as if to confirm him in this great position.
J.M. Is this the greatest reward that Abraham could possibly have? Does not this far exceed anything that the king of Sodom could possibly have done for him? Jehovah is Himself to be his shield, his exceeding great reward!
S.McC. Well, it means, speaking simply, that God was his portion. When we come to the development of the heavenly side in the type in the book of Joshua,
{228}
we find that the Levites had no territorial possessions. God was to be their portion. While a lot is made of Abraham's territorial possessions, yet this brings in a refined spiritual touch that lies behind all, "I am thy shield, thy exceeding great reward." The nearer we get to God, and the nearer we get to heaven the more God Himself becomes our portion.
J.M. Should not this help us in regard to the world and worldly associations and so on?
S.McC. I think it should. The heavenly line, the line of what is linked with the expanse, is to promote separateness with us, because Abraham is called out, and the path of faith involves that he is maintained in all that is suited to pilgrim life, and the pilgrim path. Therefore he cannot afford to be involved in things here.
E.C.M. Would @Hebrews 11: 16 help, where it says "but now they seek a better, that is, a heavenly; wherefore God is not ashamed of them, to be called their God"? Does that come in in a peculiar way with Abraham, as you suggest?
S.McC. I think it is to weigh very much with us, in our minds and hearts. It says in @Isaiah 60, "Arise, shine! for thy light is come." Ephesians is our light; it is the light of the expanse -- the heavenly side, and that is to outweigh everything in our souls. It is not only that the truth has been unfolded in the ministry, affecting us greatly in an objective way, but it is to affect us subjectively in regard to our path through the world.
J.McK. Do you think that the elevation of the title the "Most High" would find a moral answer in the worshipper, that he would be elevated?
S.McC. That is the point, I think. What strikes you about Abraham is his moral superiority in a general way to circumstances; although we do get the going down to Egypt, yet, in a general way, he is
{229}
maintained in moral and spiritual elevation in the path of faith.
G.H.S.P. Does what is royal come out in Abram in this chapter? Is he really reigning in life? I wondered whether the Spirit of God, in stressing the thought of kingship through the chapter, was helping us to take in the thought that early on in soul experience, true royalty is to attach to those in whom God is operating.
S.McC. I think it is, and Romans helps us very much in regard to that. The great thought of blessing in Romans has in mind our reigning in life, that we are superior to our circumstances, and it is on that line that we come into the glory, as it says, "we boast in hope of the glory of God." Now notice that in chapter 15 there is another added touch by Abraham. We have seen that in chapter 14, verse 22, while he takes on the language of Melchisedec he adds an impression he has of his own, "I have lifted up my hand to *Jehovah*, the Most High God." Then in chapter 15: 2 we get, "And Abram said, *Lord* Jehovah, what wilt thou give me?" That word is the plural of Adon, which is very significant as coming in here.
W.H. Does his reference to Jehovah suggest a peculiar intimacy with God, that supported him through all the testings?
S.McC. I think it does; it is a sense of relationship that is present in his soul. Lot did not have that sense of relationship, and therefore he came under the corrupting power of the world in Sodom. And if we do not have the sense of relationship as moving in the path of faith in relation to the heavenly line, we shall succumb to the overtures of the world.
J.T.S. We have in @James 2: 23, "Abraham believed God, and it was reckoned to him as righteousness, and he was called Friend of God," Does that stand over against what we have in the next chapter,
{230}
that whoever will be a friend of the world is the enemy of God? Friendship of the world is enmity against God. Have we the two sides there?
S.McC. What an honourable reference that is to Abraham, that he is called Friend of God! I think Jehoshaphat, too, refers to that in a peculiar way when he brings in the thought of love in @2 Chronicles 20: 7, "Hast not thou, our God, dispossessed the inhabitants of this land before thy people Israel, and given it for ever to the seed of Abraham, thy friend?" Mr. Darby gives the added note, in the margin, 'who loved thee.' What a reference to Abraham! It says in the New Testament, "But if anyone love God, he is known of him," @1 Corinthians 8: 3. Abraham was known of God as loving Him.
P.H.H. Does that link on at all with this title 'Lord Jehovah'? Is 'Lord Jehovah' the expression, we might say, called forth in Abram's soul as being near to God, and owning that everything can come from Him?
S.McC. I think so. The use of the plural form is very interesting, because later on in chapter 18 we find the visitation brings in the plural side, but here the plural side is in Abram's soul before the visitation comes, which is very interesting to notice.
J.T.W. Is that somewhat the same as @Exodus 6: 3, where God said, "I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, as the Almighty God; but by my name Jehovah I was not made known to them"? How was it that Abram could use this word so soon?
S.McC. The point in that is that God had not revealed Himself in that name as a name of special relationship, as He did with Israel with whom He took the name of Jehovah as a name of special relationship; but it does not mean to say that He was not referred to as Jehovah. God selected that name as the name of special relationship with Israel.
{231}
The name with Abraham, was Almighty God; that was the revealed name to Abraham. Now chapters 12, 13 and 14 give us the thought of the heavenly call and its practical bearing upon us, and chapter 15 brings in the suggestion of the right seed. It is a kind of a blending point between chapters 13 and 14, and 15, 16 and 17. Chapter 15 brings in the idea of the right seed; we must keep to the right seed. Then chapters 16 and 17 determine the true mother, the right mother. It is not only important that the right seed should be there, but the right mother should be there.
L.W.T. In regard to these persons now you are bringing before us as coming into the expanse, is the family thought linked with them particularly? You have referred to the seed, and now the mother, and reference was made earlier to the brother.
S.McC. You find wonderful amplification of family thoughts on this line. It is interesting to notice that in relation to the epistle to the Ephesians, for Ephesians gives us spiritually the expanse, and it is in that epistle that family thoughts are brought out in their richness and fulness.
C.H. Is the effect of that seen in Abraham in that his eye-level was raised in chapter 15 as compared with chapter 13? He is told to lift up his eyes in chapter 13, but it is very largely horizontal, but in chapter 15 he is told to lift up his eyes again and to view the stars; he is to look now towards the heavens. Do you think experiences such as you have indicated in chapter 14 are calculated to help us to look a little higher, to have our vision elevated to consider more what is in the heavens?
S.McC. That is very helpful. It is the first time that we get Abraham looking toward the heavens, or that he is asked to look towards the heavens, as if God takes account of what had transpired, and is so pleased with him that He would lift the level of his view in
{232}
that sense. He is not only to look toward the heavens, but the stars are referred to; it is a remarkable touch, that God should refer to the stars.
A.P.C.L. What have you in mind in that?
S.McC. I think Abraham is one of the stars.
C.H. Is it not connected with the seed?
S.McC. Just so. That is, the stars would bring in the saints. Abraham being part of them, the heavenly company in @Hebrews 11, of whom it is said, "God is not ashamed of them, to be called their God" (verse 16). They are all part of the stars.
A.P.C.L. And then is there not a reference to the extent of it in the word "if thou be able to number them"? Would not God bring out the great vastness of the extent which is really beyond us in calculation, connected with what is in the expanse?
S.McC. That is one of the great thoughts linked with the expanse. It is particularly affecting in Ephesians that you get such expressions as "the unsearchable riches of the Christ," and "the love of the Christ which surpasses knowledge," and God who is "able to do far exceedingly above all which we ask or think." On the line of the expanse, on the line of what is heavenly, things go far beyond finite capacity.
A.H. The reference in @Isaiah 40: 26 may help, "Lift up your eyes on high, and see! Who hath created these things, bringing out their host by number? He calleth them all by name; through the greatness of his might and strength of power, not one faileth." That refers to the stars, does it not?
S.McC. How Isaiah would impress us with the majesty of God in relation to that scene and that setting all the way through his book. Now in chapter 22, while we are speaking about all that we come into on the line of expanded view and outlook, it is very affecting to think of Christ in His humanity coming into such limited circumstances, circumstances
{233}
in which He was bound by His devotion to the will of God. Over against the thought of the expanse, we get in @Genesis 22, the ram caught in the thicket by its horns, and that should touch us very much. The only way that we could come into the largeness and extensiveness of the expanse was by Him coming into the limitations suggested in that type.
A.W.G.T. Does verse 9, where it says, "and he bound Isaac his son, and laid him on the altar" confirm that?
S.McC. Just so. How touching it is in regard to Abraham on the heavenly line! Faith was moving on this high level, and Abraham is prepared that nothing shall be between him and God. If it involves what is nearest to his heart, he is prepared to part with him in these relations with God. It is a question of God and Abraham, and nothing coming in between.
F.W.T. Is there a link between chapters 15 and 22 in what the Psalmist says in @Psalm 147: 4, "He counteth the number of the stars; he giveth names to them all"? Is God naming Abraham here as a star?
S.McC. He is, and it is very interesting how the names come into this chapter, and especially one particular name that shines out, as you know, when we come to the end. We just have in a bracketed remark of the Spirit of God through Moses "(And Bethuel begot Rebecca)." (verse 23). What a touch that is following the calling from the heavens, not only once, but the second time! How much the idea of the second time opens up! Then we have the richness of the blessing, and finally the thought as to Rebecca.
J.T.S. Is there some suggestion in this word, "and hast not withheld thy son, thine only son," to "He who, yea, has not spared his own Son," @Romans 8: 32? Then have we the extension of blessing in the stars of heaven and the sand that is on the seashore; and again, "and in thy seed shall all the nations of the
{234}
earth bless themselves"? Have we the whole range of blessing now, as the outcome of the surrender of Christ?
S.McC. It involves, as you might say, all the families, whether in heaven or on earth. It is like the great thought of @Ephesians 3, and the many families named of the Father. Our brother referred to Abraham's eye-level being lifted, and we might say here his eye-level is extended again, in relation to the many families, like we have in @Ephesians 3, the great vastness of the divine domain.
M.P.S. Is there some significance in Abraham dwelling at Beer-sheba at the close of this incident?
S.McC. I think there is. We have Beer-sheba referred to in chapter 21, "And Abraham planted a tamarisk in Beer-sheba, and called there on the name of Jehovah, the Eternal God," chapter 21: 33. Now here is another touch. You find that knowledge in divine names is very full with Abraham; it is constantly enlarging. So that now we get, not Abraham just planting a tamarisk and calling on the name of Jehovah; but we get him dwelling at Beersheba, the well of the oath.
P.H.H. Would the term 'mountain,' in this chapter, be somewhat of a corresponding feature to the heavens?
S.McC. I thought it was. It is a link with the Most High God, and a link with the expanse on the elevated line. It has a link with the earth, but brings us into the elevated sphere, into the native air in which faith lives.
P.H.H. It is not merely that Abraham is now looking towards the heavens, but do you think the mountain would suggest an ascending step on our part?
S.McC. Yes.
R.G.B. Is there some suggestion of the arrangement into which the Persons of the Godhead have
{235}
entered in the working out of things in relation to the expanse, in this chapter?
S.McC. I think there is. I think the holy covenant that John's gospel impresses us with, the arrangement that the Father and the Son have entered upon, the Spirit too, is all projected on to our view in shadow and in type here. Is that what you have in mind, the holy arrangement in @John 17, and the other chapters?
R.G.B. Yes, I was thinking how over against the limited circumstances into which Christ has come, we have unfolded in John's gospel the wonderful affections and relations between the Father and the Son in the working out of things.
S.McC. And if God has not held back in regard to the best that He has, what about us? Because the holy covenant or arrangement between the Father and the Son is to affect us; and in the spirit that marks us on the heavenly line we are to be like Abraham. We are to let nothing come between us and our links with God. However great the demand of divine love, however much the severity of the test, of the fire and the knife, there is to be nothing come between us and God who is to be our eternal portion.
J.M. Can we think of the fragrance of the burnt-offering coming into the expanse for God's pleasure?
S.McC. Well, the first suggestion of that comes in as Noah comes out of the ark, in relation to the new world, as if in the fragrance of the burnt-offering God brings in the great thought of the bow in the expanse, as if it affects God. And now here, we have got the fragrance of the burnt-offering affecting God, so that we get this speaking the second time, and the enlargement that comes with the second time. Then Isaac and Rebecca come in, adding to the fulness of what is before us, because Rebecca was not to be attached to Isaac except in the scene where Isaac
{236}
was as the heavenly man. Now we come to Jacob and it is interesting how God put an impression on Jacob at the outset as to the expanse. It is a dream, but God is seeking to affect Jacob and He puts a touch or impression on his spirit in regard to the expanse, or the heavenly line, because it says, "he dreamed, and behold, a ladder was set up on the earth, and the top of it reached to the heavens."
A.P.C.L. Is that in a certain sense God's answer to Shinar?
S.McC. I was thinking of that very thing. In @Genesis 11 we have the unity of men in lawlessness in their enterprise to build something that reaches to the heavens, but here it is in the assembly as we might say, amongst the people of God, those that God has certain relations with and rights in regard of.
C.H. There seems to be something of a drop in the experiences of Jacob compared with Abraham. Can you help us as to that?
S.McC. Well, there is. I think the teaching of it is that when we come to Jacob we have the earthly side more emphasised, it is the disciplinary and educational side more, and we know that on that side there is a good deal that is humbling comes out in our hearts.
C.H. He does finish as a worshipper.
S.McC. That is what we want to see with Jacob, that while there is a good deal extraneous comes out in him, he finishes up in what we might call the glory of the expanse. He is like the sun in its strength, worshipping on the top of his staff, and able to name things rightly.
A.P.B. Would you say something about the ladder being set up?
S.McC. It is very interesting that it does not say the ladder was dropped down. We might have written it that the ladder was dropped down but it is put, "And behold, a ladder was set up on the earth." I
{237}
think God is going to show what He can do in a man like Jacob, linked with the earthly side, and how He can bring him to the summit, as our brother has referred to it; the summit is "Jacob ... worshipped on the top of his staff," @Hebrews 11: 21.
C.H.T. Is that why the ascending is mentioned before the descending?
S.McC. Just so.
C.H. Is it a fact that the truth is made substantial in us by discipline?
S.McC. That is the line that we have to see in Jacob, and it is the line of dwelling. The house comes in, not in relation to Abraham, nor in relation to Isaac; the house comes in in relation to Jacob, that difficult side of things, which is very interesting to notice.
E.C.M. Is there not a beautiful touch in @Psalm 47: 4, "He hath chosen our inheritance for us, the excellency of Jacob whom he loved"? Is not the disciplinary side necessary in view of bringing out the excellencies of Jacob according to the Psalm?
S.McC. I think so. We want to see in our souls what is linked with Jacob on this line, because there is a basic side in Jacob that there is no gainsaying. Amidst all the crookedness and all the deceitfulness that marked Jacob, there is a basic side in him in contrast to Esau, that God can go on with and build upon. Now we all, especially young believers, want to see where we are basically. We do not want to be like Esau, who had no regard for the blessing; but Jacob, with all that marked him, had some instinct and intelligence in relation to the blessing, and it was a basic feature that entered into his salvation.
L.G.B. Had he been breathing the native air of the expanse as dwelling in tents with Abraham and Isaac?
S.McC. I am sure, as it is pointed out in @Hebrews 11: 9, that Abraham dwelling in tents with Isaac
{238}
and Jacob, the wonderful air of what was heavenly would be very bracing for Jacob there, and a great means of salvation to him.
A.J.G. Would you say that the truth of the house of God is brought in as a great regulating element with us, regulating us in our conduct practically?
S.McC. I think it is. We find, when we come to chapter 35, after Jacob had spent so much time in Padan-Aram, that God again appeals to him in regard to the house, and we see Jacob moving in relation to the house in deportment and in manner that is suited to it. So that you get the cleansing and the removal of the idols all on that line.
L.W.T. Had you any thought as to the gate of heaven, in connection with the house of God? You referred to the windows of heaven earlier.
S.McC. It is a very interesting reference here. What I was referring to a little while ago was the basic link in Jacob's soul with the expanse. The great idea in the expanse is that it is to control the earth. @Psalm 115: 16 tells us that, "The heavens are the heavens of Jehovah, but the earth hath he given to the children of men." Jacob has a sense of the relation of heaven to the position that he has on earth, and I think the *gate* of heaven alludes to that.
J.McK. Jehovah standing above it would imply God's confidence in His own work, that Jacob should reach that household-wise.
S.McC. I think that reference is very affecting, "And behold, Jehovah stood above it." God does not need a ladder to go up and down; but God is standing above it, and the angels of God were ascending and descending upon it. It is a very touching thing that God links on with us in this way, the great link between the expanse and what is on earth is in this ladder; and then we have the providential orderings of God through angelic means.
{239}
W.L.M. Does the ladder suggest progress in steps in that way, detailed experiences?
S.McC. No doubt there may be something of that in the ladder; it is an unusual reference here, for it is not that Jacob is going up and down, it is the angels of God ascending and descending upon it, but the angels do not need a ladder. So there must be some reaction in Jacob's soul in regard to it.
W.D. Is there a result reached with Jacob in the vow that he makes? Do you think it is the effect of the expanse producing the vow, and the tenth that he gives?
S.McC. I think there is something in that. The more we are on the heavenly line, the more there will be a release of any pent-up love or affection that may be with us basically. There is a good deal of pent-up love in believers, but it needs to be released, and you get a release here in Jacob. It is not a full release, but God will even take a partial release, and He will make something of it. He takes Jacob up on the terms that Jacob proposes.
E.C.G. Is there some reference to the expanse in chapter 32, where after a period of wrestling with Jacob, it says the sun rose upon him, as if he had reached something in his soul?
S.McC. The reference there is very interesting; it would point to the light of Christ in the type, shining upon the believer as going through that struggle.
J.McK. It is interesting at the beginning of chapter 32 that it says the angels of God met him, without saying how they served him. But presumably he was on the upward way.
S.McC. Yes, it is very interesting. "Jacob went on his way; and the angels of God met him. And when Jacob saw them he said, This is the camp of God." What a striking reference! Where did Jacob get that? "This is the camp of God. And he called
{240}
the name of that place Mahanaim," a name that is carried down in history.
P.H.H. Does that allude to what was basic in his soul, without his being able to say very much about it?
S.McC. I think so; and I think he now sees that God is on military lines. While He was on lines of grace in chapter 28, he now meets God on military lines, in the camp of God. God is not going to go on with his ways in Padan-Aram for ever, and so the wrestling follows. Now a word as to chapter 37. When we come to Joseph's history we find what corresponds to Ephesians, what one might refer to as the fulness in relation to the expanse. You get the fulness of the earth, but Ephesians opens up fulness on the heavenly side, and Joseph links with that on the administrative side, as one who is in the place of supreme glory, in a mediatorial position, next to the Supreme. Then chapter 49 refers to great enlargement and fulness as the line of Joseph comes on to Jacob's view. But in chapter 37 we get the dream that he had, involving the sun and the moon and the eleven stars bowing down to him.
R.G.B. In the reference in @Ephesians 1 to the heading up all things in the Christ, the things in the heavens come first and the things upon the earth come second. Is there any link with that and the chapter we have before us now?
S.McC. Yes, I think there is. Say something more.
R.G.B. I was only thinking of the universal position of dominion that is suggested in Joseph's position in this section, and the heavenly side taking predominance.
S.McC. Just so. The first dream links with the earthly side, "Behold, we were binding sheaves in the fields, and lo, my sheaf rose up, and remained standing; and behold, your sheaves came round
{241}
about and bowed down to my sheaf. And his brethren said to him, Wilt thou indeed be a king over us? wilt thou indeed rule over us?" That brings in more the earthly side. But the other dream brings on to view a great expanded realm linked with the expanse, the sun and the moon and eleven stars involving a great range of things that Joseph stands related to in a ruling way.
M.P.S. In the second dream Joseph is himself the object of the homage, whereas in the first, it is something that represents him. Would you say something about that?
S.McC. You mean it says in the first reference, "bowed down to my sheaf." The allusion is of course to the resurrection scene, and the Lord is seen in that setting. But when we come to the second, we get the full thought. It is not just representation, but the full thought, the sun and the moon and eleven stars bowed down to him.
J.McK. Is there some touch there as to the surpassing greatness of Christ, not only His greatness in the system, but the whole system subservient to Him?
S.McC. Just so, I think that is in mind.
A.W.G.T. Does it show the nearness in which Christ is known in the assembly as over against the general position?
S.McC. If we look at it that way, yes. If we look at it in relation to Israel in regard to what has been referred to, Christ will not reign personally here *on* earth -- He will reign *over* the earth, but there will be a prince of the house of David, a representative of Christ in kingly and princely power in Jerusalem according to Ezekiel. But still there will be the yielding to *Him*, it will be Christ's pre-eminence. In the sphere of heavenly dominion alluded to, Christ personally is there, not a representative -- "God and
{242}
the Lamb shall there the light and temple be," (`74:7) as Mr. Darby alludes to it in his hymn.
M.P.S. Does the second dream involve ascension as well?
S.McC. Yes, it involves the heavenly position. Resurrection does not take us to the heavenly position, but ascension does.
P.H.H. Is it something like @Revelation 12, where the male son has complete dominance over all; whereas the sun and the moon and the stars are subsidiary to that? It is Christ Himself, is it not?
S.McC. That is it. So we come to the thought of rule here. We had *blessing* in Abraham, and *dwelling* in Jacob, in the reference to the house of God. Bethel; now we come to this great thought of *rule*, and it involves the man-child caught up to God and Satan cast out of the expanse -- a remarkable thing, ensuring that evil will be cleared from the expanse.
A.J.G. Do you think that in this dream, where even the sun, as well as the moon and the stars, is bowing down to Joseph, that there is some possible answer to it in Ephesians, where it says that He has ascended up far above all the heavens?
S.McC. I think there is. The thought of the ascending up above all heavens is that He is gone beyond the created sphere. The sun is hardly a type of Christ here, it is linked with the created sphere, especially in the expanse, but Christ has gone above all that, impressing us with the greatness of His Person.
J.McK. "Bowed down to me" is not Christ exactly as part of the divine system, it is Christ personally, is it not, involving His deity? It is not simply that He is one of the heavenly bodies, but the whole heavenly system bows down to Him.
S.McC. That is it. As Mr. G, has said, Ephesians views Him as above the whole created sphere. He is so great. He is not in this passage seen as the sun
{243}
as in @Genesis 1 that we began with. He is above all that, and Ephesians views Him in that light, so great is He in His Person.
A.P.C.L. As these two dreams are presented, is not the second one more testing than the first? As to the first, they say, "Wilt thou indeed rule over us?" But as to the second, "Shall we indeed come ... to bow down ourselves to thee?"
S.McC. It is very striking how it comes to this expression, "Shall we indeed come, I and thy mother and thy brethren, to bow down ourselves to thee to the earth? And his brethren envied him; but his father kept the saying." While the father made that comment, there is something in it that arrested him.
G.E.E. Are these touches of supremacy to represent to us a climax to be reached in the exercise? I was thinking of your earlier reference to "Jehovah stood above it," and then here, the bowing down.
S.McC. Yes, I think that the thought of supremacy enters into the final end of all the operations in the expanse, whether it be supremacy in regard to Christ or supremacy in regard to God Himself. It is one of the great objectives in the designing of the expanse and in the working out of the operations in it.
{244}
THE EXPANSE (3)
@Revelation 4 entire; @Revelation 10: 1 -- 4, 8 -- 11; @Revelation 15: 1 -- 4
S.McC. For the benefit of those who were not here yesterday it may be said that we are considering the thought of the expanse, as it is referred to in @Genesis 1. We read the section in @Genesis 1 linked with the second, third and fourth days; taking account of how the expanse is presented there as a sphere or realm of heavenly power in relation to the earth. We also read and considered part of @Job 38, in which there are remarkable allusions to the hidden reserves and secret resources of God linked with the expanse to meet things as they arise and to supply what is needed, where it is needed. In the second reading we considered Abraham and Jacob and Joseph, and how the thought of what is heavenly is emphasised in the new departure in God's ways in calling out a people from a world of idolatry, as Abraham was called, and separated from that scene and those conditions of idolatry. One thing that is linked with the thought of the expanse is division, separation, and in Abraham we see how God separated a people to the hopes that are suited to the majesty and the love of Him who called them. We saw the great features of what is heavenly in that section bearing upon Abraham, the thought of blessing, so rich and so full, that comes into chapter 14 through the ministry of Melchisedec, and into chapter 22 based upon the burnt-offering. Then in Jacob we noticed the early impressions that God put upon him as to the gate of heaven, and the house of God, and also the intimate link between the expanse and what is down here, suggested in the ladder set up upon the earth. Then in Joseph we have his dream in regard to the great and vast system of things that is subjected to His supremacy, reference
{245}
being made in the reading, in a touching way, to the fact that in Ephesians the Lord is viewed as having gone above all heavens. We have the great supremacy of Christ in the scene of glory, so that the sun and the moon and the stars are all subject to Him as typified in Joseph. It is thought now that we should consider the last book in the Scriptures, and see in it the bearing of the expanse and what is heavenly upon the whole question that has arisen in connection with evil and lawlessness. As the choice hymn we sang yesterday so aptly puts it --
<blockquote>"Evil's challenge, long permitted -- <br>Met by Thy supremacy -- "(`101:3)</blockquote>
One of the striking things about this book is the way that divine supremacy meets the evil long tolerated and allowed. Men, in infidelity and unbelief, challenge God as to why He allows the evil to continue if He be God, but, in the permitting and allowance of the evil, what a range of moral glory, and glory linked with divine operations has come on to view! The taking up of Israel, the tabernacle and the temple glory, the coming in of Christ, the incarnation and the work of redemption, the ascension into glory, the coming of the Spirit and the formation of the assembly -- all that enters into the period of evil's challenge long being permitted. This book would show the great result as evil is met by divine supremacy, and the throne set in the heavens imparts a wonderful touch as to divine majesty, in the setting in which it appears in chapter 4. We should see the various features that are linked with it and how, in the end of the chapter -- however glorious the position in which the elders may be and however distinctive their place and what attaches to them as indicated in the many crowns -- all is absorbed in the splendour and majesty of Him who continues unchanging, and in the great note of homage and worship. Then in chapter 10 it is in mind to see the way in which
{246}
Christ is presented as coming in in relation to the little opened book, and all the features of the expanse that are linked with Him in the type or figure of the angel, as it says, "I saw another strong angel coming down out of the heaven, clothed with a cloud, and the rainbow upon his head, and his countenance as the sun, and his feet as pillars of fire, and having in his hand a little opened book." The "little opened book" is connected with the wealth of the glory that is linked with the expanse, it having to do with the practical bearing of the truth upon us down here, as the eating of it in the latter part of the chapter indicates. Then latterly we have the great and wonderful sign seen in the heavens. We get great signs before, but when we come to chapter 15 there is an adjective added, "I saw another sign in the heaven, great and wonderful." Then we get the "seven angels having seven plagues, the last; for in them the fury of God is completed," and then the wonderful scene of heavenly glory in the glass sea. Although the imagery bears on what is on the earth, it is linked with the heavenly position, and the company is referred to as "those that had gained the victory over the beast, and over its image, and over the number of its name, standing upon the glass sea, having harps of God." That is, the having harps of God warrant us in linking it with the heavenly scene. But we begin now with the great matter of the throne and then this afternoon we may see the feminine side in relation to the woman in travail, and then the Lamb's wife, all meeting evil's challenge long permitted. Then, perhaps, tomorrow, if the Lord should tarry, we may consider Ephesians and the fulness linked with the expanse as it appears in the spiritual teaching of that letter.
J.McK. Would you expect to find, in the book of Revelation, a complete answer and vindication of the design of @Genesis 1? In the ascription of praise
{247}
at the end of chapter 4, no part of the creation is excluded, all is to vibrate with the praise of Him that sits upon the throne.
S.McC. Yes, that is one of the main thoughts in having the whole chapter read, that we should see the great link with @Genesis 1. It is not only the redeemed company, chapter 5 brings the thought of redemption in, but it is the whole created scene and sphere, the whole vault of creation, resounding with the homage and worship of Him in whose glory all must be eventually absorbed.
R.G.B. Does the appearance so many times in this book of the title, "Lord God Almighty," have a bearing on the majesty of God in His operations from the beginning to the end?
S.McC. I thought it does, especially bringing Deity before us. Deity in a peculiar way is linked with this title in the book of the Revelation, entering into the operations in a significant way.
E.R.S. In @Isaiah 45 God speaks of Himself as creating evil. Would you say a word about that?
S.McC. What do you have in mind? Perhaps if we got a little what you were thinking about we might be better able to answer it.
E.R.S. I had in mind that it went beyond permitting. God permits it; but in Isaiah it says that He creates it.
S.McC. But you are not thinking of moral evil when you say that, are you?
C.H. Ought not the context of that scripture to be examined? It reads, "I am Jehovah, and there is none else; forming the light and creating darkness, making peace and creating evil: I, Jehovah, do all these things," @Isaiah 45: 6, 7. That is not evil in the moral sense, is it?
S.McC. I think it is very important that we should see that. Evil in a moral sense does not have its origin in God. It has its origin in the devil, in
{248}
Satan, who is the father of lies. We have to see just what is referred to there.
W.W.S. Is this not evil in the sense of calamity, standing over against the thought of peace?
S.McC. Yes, "making peace, and creating evil." It has to do with God's governmental operations in certain circumstances that are made in which in relation to Israel and the opening up of things, His glory shines. It is not creating evil in the sense of pride and lies and lust. Is that clear to our brother?
E.R.S. Yes, I think so, thank you.
J.T.S. Is there a similar word in @Amos 3: 6, "Shall a trumpet be blown in the city, and the people not be afraid? Shall there be evil in a city, and Jehovah not have done it?" The footnote is, 'Or "not have acted."'
S.McC. That is a similar reference. We could never think of God as creating evil in the sense of pride and lust and all that issues from that. Satan is the source from whom these things have sprung.
C.R.B. Would a verse in @Ezekiel 28 help, speaking of the king of Tyre (verse 15), "Thou wast perfect in thy ways, from the day that thou wast created, till unrighteousness was found in thee."
S.McC. That bears on what we are saying as to what he is as the source from which lawlessness springs. Lawlessness does not emanate from God, whereas righteousness does.
C.M.M. There is a verse in @Job 26 (verse 13), "By his spirit the heavens are adorned; his hand hath formed the fleeing serpent." Would that show the Spirit's operations in the expanse, the heavens, yet how this serpent has invaded that territory?
S.McC. Just so. So that leviathan is gone over in great detail at the end of the book of Job. The link with the expanse in the passage you refer to is interesting, whereas leviathan is linked with the sea, what is down here.
{249}
L.W.T. Does the wealth of scripture between the book of Genesis and the Revelation give us an impression on the one hand of the "long permitted"; but on the other, of the compressed nature of divine operations in meeting it?
S.McC. Yes. It is interesting to see how the feature of compression enters into the Scriptures. If man had had to do with the events that are outlined for us in the Scriptures, there is no library in Doncaster that would hold the books. But think of how God can eliminate details and focus our attention on the main points in His operations; we are greatly impressed with that.
A.J.G. So that the permission of evil for so long has become the occasion, has it not, for the longsuffering of God to be expressed? It says in @Romans 9: 22, "And if God, minded to shew his wrath and to make his power known, endured with much longsuffering vessels of wrath fitted for destruction."
S.McC. Very good. It touches the affections to think of God, how long He has waited, even in regard to the matter of sins and the passing by of sins. Think of how long God waited to be justified, till we come to @Romans 3, and yet the many sins that were passed by as we think of David and others. God waited all through the centuries until Jesus came and the work of atonement was made. He waited for His justification. It is very affecting to think of that, the long suffering of God.
J.McK. Is not this chapter, chapter 4, a vindication of the patience and operations of God, in that He not only has the throne unassailably, but there is a sympathetic environment of the throne and so much that is in keeping with it, in holiness, in the divine nature and in every attribute of God?
S.McC. I thought all that should help us in its practical bearing on ourselves at the present time, that we should see what this involves in our own links
{250}
with the throne in this majestic setting. There are the evidences of divine faithfulness and divine glory and the presence of the Spirit in the judicial way in which He is viewed, and the presence of the abiding state of purity and stainlessness, as another has alluded to it, and then the living creatures, and the ceasing not day and night saying "Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty." All this is written to be testified in the local assemblies, that there might be something effected by it.
J.McK. So that it is not simply a matter of God overturning evil in His might, but having resources in the assembly, working this matter out, and as we were interested in seeing, in dividing between light and darkness. Everything around the throne is thus sympathetically with God.
S.McC. And that is a great matter. Is it not striking that before we enter upon the overthrow of evil in the world, by the sweeping judgments of God, our eyes should be riveted on this view of the throne and Deity in relation to it, and all that is consistent with it?
C.M.M. Is there a veiled reminder of the rapture in verse 1; and the assembly's place in heaven?
S.McC. I thought there was, "Come up here." If we are going to get this view, we must understand what this "Come up here" means. In order to get a right view of the working out of the great operations of God, we have to see them from this point of vantage.
A.C.S.P. Is there something important in the stress on the fact that the One is sitting?
S.McC. I think so. I think it contributes to the majesty, that there is no thought of undue haste. Although we have the lightnings and the thunders going forth from the throne, yet, we have the One sitting on the throne, and then we have the elders, too, around the throne, in holy restful composure.
{251}
W.W. Is it significant that we have always to remember that Satan is only a creature?
S.McC. Yes. It is very important to remember that; Satan, in that way, is limited; whereas the God that is before us in relation to the throne in all His majesty here is unlimited, either as to constant unchanging Being, or in regard to operations; He is not restricted or limited like Satan. Satan is not omniscient. God is.
J.M. Is there not something comforting for us in chapter 1, where we have, "Grace to you and peace from him who is, and who was, and who is to come; and from the seven Spirits which are before his throne; and from Jesus Christ, the faithful witness." Are the resources of the throne involved in that, in view of the present dispensation and the finalising of God's thoughts in regard to the assembly?
S.McC. I think they are. And we must take account of our dispensation, although literally and dispensationally this refers to the post-assembly period. But there is another view of it that we are to take account of, namely the protracted view in the Revelation, and in order to get the protracted scale, as J.N.D. refers to it, we have got to "Come up here." That is, we have got to get the view from the expanse, from heaven, in regard to how all these matters work out.
G.H.S.P. Is there any moral link in that connection with the throne standing in the heavens, and the way those that bear responsibility locally are addressed as stars in the earlier chapters? I am asking for help about the reference, for example, in the last verse of chapter 1, where the seven stars are said to be angels of the seven assemblies, and the way that element is addressed in each assembly. I wondered if there was any link in the elevated idea, bearing on what you were saying yesterday about the stars.
S.McC. I think there is a distinct link. We have
{252}
the remarkable way in which the symbols come in in the opening of the book, even as to the Lord Himself. His countenance being as the sun in its strength; and then the allusion to the stars, in relation to the assemblies, all bears on what we have before us.
A.P.C.L. This chapter opens "After these things." Do you think that it is necessary for us to pursue with the Lord what has gone before in the previous chapters, if we are to get in any sense an entrance into this side of the truth?
S.McC. I thought so. You are thinking of "After these things" in its moral bearing. I think there is something that we are to notice in that. As we are prepared to move with the Lord Jesus in His judicial capacity, and face the whole matter of public failure in the history of the assembly, and also to be with Him in regard to what He has in Philadelphia, then we are ready for what we have here.
D.W.G. Would you say a word now on verse 2, "Immediately I became in the Spirit"? Would you say something about that exercise of becoming in the Spirit?
S.McC. I think it is very affecting, in the book of the Revelation, to see the different ways in which the Spirit is available. It is very touching that the Spirit is so near by John, and so near by others. I mean, for instance, in that reference in chapter 14: 13, "And I heard a voice out of the heaven saying, Write, Blessed the dead who die in the Lord from henceforth. Yea, saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their labours; for their works follow with them." One of the most affecting things in the book of the Revelation is the nearness of the Spirit to the saints, and His availability for the different situations in which divine operations are working out.
D.W.G. In dealing with @Genesis 1 yesterday, you said much about faith; now have we the Spirit available, and an exercise that we should take up,
{253}
to become "in the Spirit," so that we may be entirely sympathetic with the throne? Is that the idea in it?
S.McC. Yes, I think so. What now engages us involves a realm of spirituality, where Deity is seen in such majesty in relation to the great thought of divine supremacy that the throne brings in. It necessitates not only faith, but also spirituality.
A.J.G. Why does it say that the four living creatures are in the midst of the throne, as well as around it?
S.McC. It is a striking reference. The elders, as you notice, are round the throne in verse 4, but the living creatures are in the midst of the throne. As I understand it, they represent, from our side, what forms an integral part of the throne in its operations. The living creatures would allude to how the throne operates on the earthly side, because they would represent the earthly or creative side. What would you say yourself?
A.J.G. I think that helps. I wondered if it showed how thoroughly identified with the throne the Lord would have the saints at the present time.
S.McC. That is what was in one's mind in referring to it.
A.J.G. It is remarkable that later on, one of the four living creatures gives to the seven angels seven golden bowls full of the fury of God. It is very striking how completely God would bring living creatures, in the saints, into sympathy even with His fury.
S.McC. Just so. It is very interesting to see that while on the one hand we have angelic service strongly represented in this book, this matter of the living creatures in the midst of the throne shows how we come into it and are bound up with the meeting of evil by divine supremacy. I think that is the great thought. We shall see it more this afternoon, in the catching up of the man-child; that it is that which
{254}
leads to the casting of Satan out of the expanse.
P.H.H. I would like to ask a little more on the matter of 'becoming in the Spirit.' We are accustomed to desiring the Spirit's power, in services like teaching and preaching and His power in the service of God. Would you say a little more about becoming in Spirit in view of our being in heaven, or taking this heavenly view?
S.McC. I think it is very important, because I am sure you feel, as well as I do, that the more we go on, the more we are impressed with the need of the Spirit at every turn. And in these meetings, and other meetings, you feel that if you do not have the Spirit constantly supporting and being made room for, we shall never get anywhere. In this matter of the throne and divine majesty in the expanse as viewed here, we need the Spirit to understand what is referred to here in all the imagery that is employed to convey divine thoughts.
P.H.H. John seems to be immediately more or less at home in the midst of it all. He is not asking questions, but seems able to absorb these figures and what they mean.
S.McC. That is very striking. John is not falling on his face here as he did in the beginning of the book when the Lord appeared. It says there in chapter 1, "And when I saw him I fell at his feet as dead." But there is none of that here; there is no falling before the throne as dead here. As becoming in the Spirit, John is in keeping with the whole scene of majesty, and the elders too. Not only is the one sitting on the throne in the heavens, but there are the twenty-four elders sitting, clothed with white garments.
A.P.C.L. Would the matter of becoming in the Spirit be in one sense our side to @2 Corinthians 12. Paul's experience as a man in Christ, caught up as far as, or to the third heaven? Would that be our
{255}
right, whereas this, becoming in the Spirit, would be the way in which we put ourselves in the way of that?
S.McC. I think so. I do not know that we can say too much about it, at least speaking for oneself, but the only way that we can arrive at abstraction, is by this way; it is very affecting to think that the Spirit is so near and so available. John does not call upon the Spirit here, and the Spirit does not make any movement of Himself towards John; as it is recorded here. It says, "Immediately I became in the Spirit," as if the Spirit was waiting and available for him in regard to this move.
A.P.C.L. It is as the result of an invitation, whereas @2 Corinthians 12 is like a sovereign matter, is it not -- "caught up"? Here there is an invitation and something required on John's part to put himself into the way of accepting it.
S.McC. Well, I thought these meetings, and what we are considering, might be something like that. It is like an invitation to "Come up here." I believe heaven is entering into such meetings as these to invite us up there; I mean spiritually. Actually, of course, we shall go at the rapture, but spiritually we are to be drawn into this native air, in which faith lives and breathes, so that we might, as being at home in it, understand the greatness of the operations that are in mind.
G.E.E. Would becoming in Spirit in chapter 1 bear more on the moral side in view of its references to the seven assemblies; but now it is in relation to the whole range of divine government, as centred round the throne? Would that help on the line of sympathy, do you think?
S.McC. Just so. He became in Spirit in chapter 1, and then he gets the view of the Lord as Son of Man in judicial habiliments, and then the whole matter of church failure is faced. But here, it is in view of the scene in which there is a fixed state of purity and
{256}
stainlessness, as suggested in the glass sea like crystal.
J.A.W. Would the reference to the elders in this chapter have some reflection on the exercise of eldership on the local assembly now?
S.McC. I think it has. And we should note the fact that it is twenty-four elders, not twelve elders but twenty-four elders which, of course, immediately brings into the mind David's system, and the operation of headship as seen in David, when the twenty-four courses were designed; all that would come into mind suggesting the distributed experience among the saints. If we look at it dispensationally it includes the Old Testament saints as well as the New. If we look at it morally and spiritually, it refers to the distributive side throughout the localities.
R.G.B. Is there a judicial side to the service of the Spirit that is important? I wondered if the judicial activities of the Spirit entered in some sense into the ministry that accompanied the revival, in the exposing of the evil that is in the clerical system.
S.McC. I think it is important that we should see the Spirit in this relation. In reading this passage this morning one was very much impressed with this view of the Spirit, "seven lamps of fire, burning before the throne, which are the seven Spirits of God." The book opens with a view of the Lord Jesus whose eyes are "as a flame of fire; and his feet like fine brass, as burning in a furnace." We can understand that readily in regard to the Son of Man into whose hands judgment is committed, but do we understand this judicial side in relation to the Spirit? I am sure there is something in what you suggest as to the early days of the revival. One has often thought of J.N.D. being like Samson, in @Judges 15, tying the torches to the tails of the jackals and sending them into the standing corn, the standing shocks, and setting fire to them. It is like some of the articles that J.N.D. wrote, showing the great
{257}
power of Nazariteship meeting orthodoxy, and the corruption of orthodoxy, as was manifest then.
C.H. Would not the Spirit help us into a better understanding of the attributes of God which really come into prominence by the way heaven has met the sin question?
S.McC. I think he would, because we need to understand more and better what is consistent with God and all that He is, both in His attributes and in His nature. So that we have this sympathetic company that "cease not day and night saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty." I think the "seven lamps of fire, burning before the throne, which are the seven Spirits of God," would help us in our arrival at that and entrance upon it.
C.H. I was only thinking that the better understanding of the attributes of God would give greater substance to the eventual praise, because we know the God whose attributes they are.
S.McC. That is it.
M.P.S. Does the fact that there are a number of extended titles given to the Spirit in the scriptures connect with this thought of the seven Spirits of God?
S.McC. Yes, I think, as has been pointed out before, it alludes to the fulness linked with the Spirit and His presence and the different ways in which He is referred to. It is fulness in relation to the judicial side here.
P.H.H. Might I ask about the suggestion of completeness in this chapter? There is first of all what you are speaking of, the seven Spirits of God; then there are the four living creatures and the twenty-four elders, and then the completing touch at the end about all that creation has had in view and is now arrived at. Would you say that in our being in the Spirit, or becoming in the Spirit, we may get away from the breakdown which has come in, in regard of man's view of divine Persons, man's view
{258}
of the assembly, and so on, and be engaged with the completeness of what is in the divine mind and what is being arrived at?
S.McC. I think it is important to see that from this chapter, especially after the whole history of the assembly has been gone over, we have this voice, "Come up here" and then, "Immediately I became in the Spirit." It is really what you might call a spiritual door out of the ruin and confusion and dislocation; so that we see the Being who is above all the dislocation. We have the fixed thoughts linked with the unchanged and constant Being who is referred to here, the glass sea, for instance, like crystal. There is something in that that links with what we are referring to, for one thing you will have noticed in Mr. Darby's writings and in his hymns is this great thought of the "glass sea, like crystal." It suggests a condition of stainlessness, of abiding purity, what is unsullied and unalloyed, despite all that there may be on the lower level, and it is through the Spirit that we come into that. On the one hand, we see God in His majesty standing out, and on the other hand, all that is consistent with God and His majesty that surrounds the throne in keeping with it.
P.H.H. In what sense do the four living creatures present themselves, and act, in regard of this scene? It says, "the first living creature like a lion, and the second living creature like a calf," and so on. Do they present the line of the ways that God has used to arrive at His end?
S.McC. I think so. I think they bring in, in keeping with the objective view of the throne and divine majesty, the subjective side in us. Thus as the throne works out in its operations, the thought of the lion and the calf and the face of a man and the flying eagle, represent certain conditions or features that are produced in the saints.
A.P.C.L. And it says that they are "full of eyes,
{259}
before and behind," and "round and within." Does that indicate the necessity for constant vigilance, as being affected by divine majesty?
S.McC. It does. The four references there are remarkable, "before and behind," and then later down, "round and within," showing how, as to ourselves where vigilance is needed, the thought is complete. There is no part lacking, you might say, or no part unprotected and unguarded, would you think?
A.P.C.L. I thought that. But then so many people take refuge behind saying that they do not see things. Do you think this is how vision really is developed?
S.McC. It is. It is not that they have got one eye or two eyes; it is striking how in the imagery it says "full of eyes" in verse 6 and in verse 8, I think that is where we are greatly tested.
P.H.H. You said this bore upon the subjective exercises in the saints. Could you please add a little to that?
S.McC. I think it does, because what leads to disaster in any of our spiritual histories is the lack of what is seen in the living creatures, that is, the attributes, of course, as suggested in them. For instance, we have the thought of power in the lion; well, that is a great feature. Then there is the thought of the firmness in the calf; and the face of a man suggests the thought of intelligence, and then the flying eagle brings in the thought of rapidity in movement and elevation in movement. All these are very important in regard to our state of soul, if we are to be preserved from disaster, would you think?
P.H.H. Yes. I was wondering whether the remark about persons not seeing could be linked with the lion. It says elsewhere, "he turneth not aside for any." That is, if there is truth in a matter, it becomes a principle to us; therefore the seeing of a thing is
{260}
urgent. Would it be in that sense that the eyes, for instance, are to be contemplated as something parallel working in us? We see a principle, and then firmness comes in and so on.
S.McC. I think so. And as you follow it through, you have the matter of firmness. That is, if firmness is not present we may be deflected. Then the thought of the face of a man involves that things are not done blindly, they are worked out intelligently; and then, in the reference "like a flying eagle," we have the dignified, elevated, and rapid movements that are suggested in the eagle. You get in this book the thought, for instance, of a time when there shall be no more delay. It says in chapter 10: 6, when the strong angel comes in, "that there should be no longer delay." It is the idea of the eagle, that things are to go through.
E.C.M. Is that not confirmed in @Ezekiel 1: 12 where it says, "And they went every one straight forward: whither the spirit was to go they went; they turned not when they went"?
S.McC. Just so. "They turned not when they went." We were noticing in Scandinavia in connection with the book of Deuteronomy and the teaching there, that in regard to the sentence of the judge, they were not to turn to the right nor to the left. In matters of judgment amongst us some might think if we could only take the middle road or turn a little bit, turn some way to the side; but there was to be no turning to the right or to the left.
L.G.B. Is there any suggestion that what is objectively contemplated in Christ is now subjectively formed?
S.McC. I think so, because I think these features were seen in Christ in the gospels. The reference would be, in these creatures, to what is now reproduced in the saints in answer to what was set out in Christ in the gospels.
{261}
L.W.T. Is it interesting that there is an allusion to the Spirit in a judicial sense at Pentecost in the parted tongues as of fire? Is that in view of the subjective results in the saints?
S.McC. I thought so.
C.W.O'L.M. Could you say a word, please, in relation to the fact that these living creatures ascribe peculiarly to the greatness of the Lord God Almighty; and it is when they do this that the elders fall down? They seem to give stimulus to the whole matter.
S.McC. They do. It is interesting how they precede the elders in regard to that matter of ascribing glory to God; they say, "Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty." The elders seem to come in, following that, as if the features of life working out in the saints make way for this great thought of the supremacy of Deity; and the elders are drawn into it, their crowns cast down before the throne. Whatever distinction we may have on the line of blessing or whatever we may have acquired in experience with God in His ways, all that now is a secondary matter. All is absorbed in the great supremacy of God, the elders coming in following the action of the living creatures.
A.C. Would you say that the meeting of evil and the intrusion of it in the assembly was met by Peter in @Acts 5 and also in @Acts 8? He said, "Why is it that ye have agreed together to tempt the Spirit of the Lord?" I wondered whether or not the features of the living creatures were seen paramountly in Peter in that way; he would maintain holiness in the house of God.
S.McC. We see it there. I think in regard to the four living creatures preceding the elders in this matter of the worship of God, it is very interesting, because there has been a good deal of difficulty amongst us in some parts as to the worship of God in His supremacy; and perhaps it is due to this kind
{262}
of thing that is suggested here. What leads forward in this matter is not experience. In judgment and administration, experience would lead in the application of rule, but what leads forward in the service of God here is life in the saints, free from the trammels of creed or ritual; it is life working out as absorbed in the majesty of Deity as referred to here.
J.M. Is it not interesting to see that in the end of chapter 5, it says "the four living creatures said, Amen; and the elders fell down and did homage"? They can come in at the end, as well as give a lead at the beginning.
S.McC. It is important to see the balance and the mutuality there are in these thoughts. And in relying perhaps on our experience we may be inclined to disparage life in the saints. Whereas in the light of @Revelation 5, in connection with experience, we must be prepared to follow the lead of life in the saints and merge into this great matter that means so much to God, that He is worshipped for what He is in Himself in His unchanging Being.
L.G.B. Is the link confirmed in the book of Nehemiah, where it says, "Thou quickenest them all; and the host of heaven worshippeth thee," @Nehemiah 9: 6? The reference follows the thought of quickening, flowing from life.
S.McC. That is, life leads in the matter.
A.P.C.L. Is there a touch of intelligence in what they say in this living way? Chapter 1 it is "who is, and who was, and who is to come," but here they bring to bear the matter as they see it, and they say "who was, and who is, and who is to come."
S.McC. That is very striking. You might have thought. Well, it would be the elders who would bring in that touch first, as to "who was," because the "who was" brings in the historic side, and the elders have to do with the historic side, the side of experience. But the living creatures are not remiss
{263}
in that, they say "who was," which is the historic side, and then "who is," that is the unchanging, abiding, constant Being of God.
L.W.T. They have eyes behind as well as before. Does that link with the view of the historic side?
S.McC. It does. And "who is to come" would link with the eyes "before."
W.F. Would you say why the feature of prostration is so strong throughout the whole book of the Revelation?
S.McC. I do not think that we are to be afraid of this matter of prostration, because we are the creature, and Deity is Deity, God is God. While we are introduced into the most infinite blessedness in family relationship to God, we are to see that prostration is always befitting when it comes to divine majesty.
Now chapter 10 is a reference as we know to Christ in the figure that is before us; and it is interesting how He is viewed as coming down out of the heaven; that is, we have to remember that in these sections, evil's challenge is being met, and He comes "down out of the heaven, clothed with a cloud, and the rainbow upon his head" -- notice the rainbow in both the chapters that we have read -- "and his countenance as the sun, and his feet as pillars of fire" -- note the fire running through all the sections that we have read -- "and having in his hand a little opened book." Now the little opened book, as we understand it, refers to what is to work out as appropriated by us in affecting us inwardly, and that is an important matter.
P.H.H. You are thinking now of appropriate feelings accompanying the ministry?
S.McC. Yes, and involving a right sympathetic constitution in us in relation to God and what He is doing in completing the mystery of God, as it says in verse 7, "the mystery of God also shall be completed." What is the mystery of God? This is not Christ and the assembly exactly, although that
{264}
would come into it. The mystery of God is just what we have been referring to, how evil has been allowed, permitted and tolerated, and all the challenge it has raised to God's universal supremacy. The mystery of God is about to be completed, and the eating of the book would bring us inwardly into sympathetic accord with all that is involved in it.
A.P.C.L. Once again we have this matter of direction in verse 8, "Go, take the little book which is opened in the hand of the angel, ... And I went." Is that a similar suggestion to chapter 4?
S.McC. It is. It is very striking how it says in verse 9, "And I went to the angel, saying to him to give me the little book." That is, it is a question of how far we are prepared to go. We might think, Well, the angel was there, and the voice out of the heaven had referred to the book. Would not the angel hear it and would he not immediately give John the book? But that is not the point. How far are we prepared to go? John went to the angel, saying to him to give him the little book.
J.B. How far would verse 10 go? "And I took the little book out of the hand of the angel, and ate it up."
S.McC. I think it is to show the importance of the truth coming home to us, that we are not just hearing a lovely song or dwelling on great matters that hold us merely entranced in our minds as we go through the Scriptures. We are dealing with matters which the little opened book suggests that are to affect us inwardly. It is the truth working inwardly, bringing about bitterness; it is sweet first of all in the mouth, but there is bitterness in the belly, suggesting division between things as it enters and affects us inwardly.
J.McK. It is all in view of a prophetic word. Is it not instructive that all this comes between the sounding of the sixth and the seventh trumpets? It is as though God would give a crowning word in
{265}
prophecy whilst He delays the sounding of the seventh trumpet.
S.McC. That is very interesting. One of the important features of the book of Revelation is that you get, interspersed at different intervals, certain companies and certain peoples that are secured before the judgment is completed. And so, this is one of them. In chapter 7 we have another; we have the company there that is secured before the judgments are completed. Then we get this chapter coming in, intervening, as you say, between the sixth and the seventh trumpets; and then in chapter 15 that we read there is another intervention.
A.B.P. Is there a link between the book that we have here and the book in chapter 5? The book in chapter 5 was taken out of the right hand of Him that sat upon the throne, and there is the little book here. Is there some correspondence between the two?
S.McC. There may be a link between them in a certain way in relation to the rights of God, but in regard to the book in chapter 5, there was only One that was able to take it. It has to do with the working out of the rights of God on the earth, and John wept when he saw that no one was able to take it. But there was One that was able to take it. With the little opened book, it is little and it is opened; which gives some indication as to it.
W.G.J. Would the inward result of eating the little book be in response to seeing the One with the rainbow upon his head, linking on with the waters of judgment that had come in in Noah's time? I was thinking of the way you were talking of learning to separate, and divide between things. God had come in in judgment. He had tolerated the evil that there was in men, and then He comes in in the waters of judgment and sets His bow in the heavens afterwards.
S.McC. So that all these figures such as "clothed with a cloud," and "the rainbow upon his head,"
{266}
and "his feet as pillars of fire," would all have a reflexive force on John, as contemplating it and taking this little book.
G.E. Would there be some link with this matter of division in the word in @Hebrews 4 as to the word of God, and its penetrating character, reaching down to the inwards?
S.McC. I think there is. It is a bitter matter, when the truth or when the word of God gets into the inward parts. But it is very essential if there is to be effectual ministry in bringing in the mind of God.
A.P.C.L. Is it not remarkable, too, that he was told that that is what would happen. It is not that God presents things to us and then we find them bitter, but does He not present them in that bearing and, as we are obedient, we find that it is exactly as He says?
S.McC. Just so. We are challenged therefore, as to whether we are prepared to go that way and to take the little book or whether we are taking the way of least resistance. That is, getting through the best way we can, without being searched too much inwardly, without being challenged too much inwardly. The more we have to do with the truth, the more we are challenged as it comes in to the inward parts.
R.G.B. Is it very affecting that it says in verse 7, "as he has made known the glad tidings to his own bondmen the prophets," as if there are those that God has that are fully sympathetic and completely available to Him? Would it challenge us as to whether we are numbered among them?
S.McC. Yes, it would. "His own bondmen" is a very affecting reference in this sense.
A.C.S.P. In the "little opened book" is there some suggestion that while we are in the presence of matters so great, there is what is being brought within our range to help us?
{267}
S.McC. That is it. It is not beyond us, it is 'little.' It stands over against the pretentiousness of man and all that links with what is coming in in chapter 13, where we have the man of sin, setting himself up in the temple and saying that he is God. The little book stands over against all that.
{268}
THE EXPANSE (4)
@Revelation 12: 1 -- 12; @Revelation 21: 9 -- 27; @Revelation 22: 1 -- 5
S.McC. These sections that we have read in this book introduce us to a great realm of administrative and governmental glory; first as seen in Israel, if we take account of the actual symbolic meaning of the woman clothed with the sun, and the moon under her feet, though we may apply it in relation to what is seen in the assembly. The male son which the woman brings forth, that the dragon is ready to devour, and which is caught up to God and to His throne involves, as we have often heard, not only Christ, but the assembly; Christ and the assembly. And immediately that is so, the presence of Christ and the assembly there, we have the clearing of the expanse. There was war in the heavens and Satan who had entered the expanse, with the many votaries of his activities and power, is cast out into the earth. He had sought to interfere with the great operations that the expanse was designed in view of. Then in the last section we have the way that the assembly, the Lamb's wife, as the holy city, comes on to our view in connection with the millennial scene. Everywhere the relation of the city is seen in connection with the earth. God's prime thought in connection with the expanse, as we contemplated in @Genesis 1, is now arrived at in the final side of things in the Revelation. We have Christ and the assembly associated with Him in the blest administration of that day, culminating in the service of God, as in the last section that we read in chapter 22; and the thought of the Lord God shining upon them and they reigning to the ages of ages. We thus see how the whole challenge which evil has thrown up is met, and met victoriously, and the saints come into it.
{269}
It is a wonderful thing that we should get a hold of in our souls, how the saints come into it. The travail in chapter 12, no doubt suggests the suffering way in which the saints come into it now.
J.McK. Would there be some answer in this chapter to @Genesis 1, in that the fourth day, with the heavenlies, the sun and moon and the stars. God is committed to that before He makes man? I was thinking of the way you are speaking of, that this position in the heavenlies is rectified; the other sign in verse 3 of @Revelation 12, and the imperial character it takes in the heavenlies, is answered by the male son.
S.McC. Yes. It is striking how the chapter opens with the great thought of the woman clothed with the sun, and the moon under her feet, and the twelve stars; but the great objective is the male son who shall shepherd all the nations with an iron rod. That is, the objective is arrived at through this range of glory linked with the woman in the suffering position. The side of suffering of course does not come into @Genesis 1, but abstractly the great realm of administrative and governmental glory in the sun and the moon and the stars is before us on the fourth day. The suffering involves what followed in the way that evil raised the challenge.
L.W.T. Is it striking that the matter of travail followed the introduction of evil? Has the matter of travail here a positive bearing?
S.McC. It has, having in mind the great matter of heavenly rule and influence which the expanse suggests in relation to the earth. So that the process is in mind in this chapter, from the divine view. That is, it is not the detail that we find in other chapters as to the beasts, the Roman Empire, and the man of sin; we do not get all the detail gone into here; but we get the abstract view given to us. Yet, while
{270}
it is an abstract view, it involves such practical exercises, such concrete matters with us.
W.W.S. May I ask if the bringing in of the thought of Christ and the assembly in the presence of such opposition as set out in the red dragon, must essentially involve suffering?
S.McC. I think it does. The suffering line is present from the beginning onwards.
A.J.G. As soon as sin entered the world, God said that the answer to it would be in the seed of the woman. Does this line of travail come in with the saints as self is more and more displaced by the work of God, in order to bring in the features of the true man?
S.McC. It is very striking in that way how these thoughts that appeared in the early chapters of Genesis now reach a full positive result in the end of the Revelation. They are met by divine supremacy, you might say; not only divine supremacy in relation to the throne in the heavens, but divine supremacy in what the woman suggests.
A.J.G. So that the great vessel of administration in the end, in the millennium, is entirely a creature vessel, which is a remarkable triumph for God, is it not?
S.McC. It is. That is the wonder of what we have in the Revelation, that God in His supremacy meets the whole challenge of evil in a creature vessel, but such a creature vessel that is perfectly competent to be alongside Christ in the administration of the glory.
R.H.Jr. Why do we get the full title of Satan here?
S.McC. So that we do not mistake who is in mind. Whatever form Satan takes, the Spirit of God through John His servant, would impress us with all his characters, diverse as they are.
M.P.S. May I ask as to the persecution? The
{271}
great red dragon stood before the woman, in order that he might devour her child. After he was cast out of the heaven, he persecuted the woman.
S.McC. There are two things to notice: in the beginning of the chapter he stands *before* the woman, he is in front of her, but in the end of the chapter he is behind her, and he is following her with the great stream of influence by which he hopes to divert her and overthrow her. I refer to verse 15, "And the serpent cast out of his mouth *behind* the woman water as a river, that he might make her be as one carried away by a river." He could not hinder divine supremacy as it manifests itself, as he stands *before* the woman, so that, in the latter part, he tries to move up behind.
R.D.H. Is there a link with @1 Thessalonians 4, where it says: "we ... shall be caught up together with them in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air," and then in chapter 5 it says, "When they may say, Peace and safety, then sudden destruction comes upon them, as travail upon her that is with child; and they shall in no wise escape"?
S.McC. I would like to get the link more clear as to the one in travail.
R.D.H. I was thinking of the contrast, we have the travail of the woman in Revelation, but then the travail comes upon the enemies.
S.McC. That is, the position is reversed, the travail there is not, as we have it here in the woman; it is the governmental side in those that refuse the truth.
J.A.F. Is there any connection between the exercises at the beginning of Matthew's gospel and what we have here? I was thinking of the line of Joseph's exercises bringing to light a situation of which it could be said, "God with us."
S.McC. There is a distinct link between Matthew's gospel and what we have here in these earlier chapters,
{272}
because we know that the feature of the dragon is there, ready to devour the male son. Israel is in mind, of course, in the woman, in the mother here, but then, Matthew being the assembly gospel, we are at liberty to transfer these thoughts (keeping before us what actually is in mind) to what works out amongst the saints now. If government and administration according to God are going to reach a completed result, we must be prepared for the line of suffering and travail.
L.W.T. Do you think that the reference in verse 12 to the devil knowing that he has a short time, might have some application, in an anticipative way, to the present time in the closing moments of the saints here? May we have to face some special attacks of the enemy, knowing that his time is short?
S.McC. Yes, and particularly the direction of his hatred and enmity towards the woman which bore the male child. No doubt, he realised what the woman meant, and he could see, in what was transpiring, that his whole position of supremacy in evil was involved. And when he fails through being met by divine supremacy in what is good in the catching up of the male son to God and to His throne, he turns his attack upon the woman which bore the male child, that is, what the saints are as in this line of suffering.
R.G.B. Is there a tribute to the greatness of divine power to preserve what is of God in the reference to the place prepared by God in the wilderness?
S.McC. That is a beautiful touch, "And the woman fled into the wilderness, where she has *there* a place prepared of God." We often delight to speak of the place that the Lord has gone to prepare for us in the Father's house. He has gone to prepare us a place; how precious that is, we shall soon be there, but do we think sufficiently of the place that is
{273}
divinely prepared for those faithful to the truth here below and that are prepared to stand by administrative and governmental principles that make way for divine supremacy? Do we realise that sufficiently? It is a great thing for the young ones that are coming on to realise that. They are coming out of school and they have got to make their living and it is a very difficult time, for there are these associations and unions and the like. What shall they do? Well, we cannot hold up our hands and say that nothing can be done and that we will just have to take the line of least resistance; there *is a place* prepared of God, in the wilderness, where we will be nourished.
A.B. Is that same principle seen with the midwives in the beginning of Exodus? God prepared them houses.
S.McC. Does it not show how God is prepared to take care of those who consider for Himself and who are prepared to suffer at the risk of their lives?
C.R.B. I wondered if we could also think of @Ephesians 6 in connection with our struggle, and the allusion there to the spiritual power of wickedness in the heavenlies. The exhortation is, "brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the might of his strength" (verse 10). Is that something like the place prepared in the wilderness?
S.McC. Very good. "The might of his strength." It is not in the might of our own strength or resource; everything hinges for us, in these difficult circumstances, in the might of the Lord's strength. I think it is a very fine reference. And the woman was not told to go there; that is the interesting thing. It says, "And the woman fled into the wilderness, where she has there a place prepared of God." Apparently she knew of it.
A.W.G.T. Who are the 'they' that nourish her there? It says, "that they should nourish her there a thousand two hundred and sixty days."
{274}
S.McC. Well, these 'theys' are very interesting. They are like the nameless 'theys' in the Chronicles, who buried the kings; they are able to take account of the history of each and bury him accordingly. There are other 'theys' that we find in Scripture, those who are God's secret reserves, so that however difficult the position is, God has His secret reserves.
E.C.M. Does it fit in a little with Matthew, again, the One who has all power given into His hands in heaven and upon earth is the One who says, "And behold, I am with you all the days, until the completion of the age." I am thinking of the link with "all the days."
S.McC. Yes. We can count on the Lord's support in the testimonial position every day.
A.P.C.L. Is there a link in any sense with the abode of His holiness in the wilderness, in Exodus? Would this place that has been prepared on the public side help us to fit in with the abode of His holiness in the wilderness?
S.McC. I think it would, because you can rest assured that this would be a clean place, a holy place. It is not any kind of place, but it is a place prepared of God. You are thinking of what it says in the song of Moses, in @Exodus 15, as to the place prepared. There would be a link in that way with what we have here.
W.J.T. Would you say a word as to "the two wings of the great eagle," according to verse 14?
S.McC. That is another link with Exodus, for all the imagery that we have in the book of the Revelation links with the historical books, with Exodus and with Kings and with Chronicles and Ezekiel. It is as if John is drawing from the vast reservoir of what there is in all these phases of the testimony and clothing the expressions here with them.
F.C.G. What is in mind in verse 16, "the earth helped the woman"?
{275}
S.McC. It says in verse 15, "And the serpent cast out of his mouth behind the woman water as a river, that he might make her be as one carried away by a river. And the earth helped the woman, and the earth opened its mouth and swallowed the river which the dragon cast out of his mouth." It is a very interesting thing to see how the earth functions at different times. In the time of the rebellion of Korah, Dathan and Abiram, the earth opened its mouth to receive the lawless persons. But here, the earth is helping the woman. It is some reference to what is in the providential area that makes way for the woman as persecuted by Satan.
C.H. Could we have a little more help as to the question of tribulation, or travail, connected with the male son?
S.McC. I think it is a very important thing in regard to all the exercises that are being faced universally in the working out of matters in our localities. It becomes very real. The brethren will recall the address given by Mr. Taylor at Croydon, after the meetings there, on 'Generations in the Book of Genesis,' as to the sober side of things linked with travail in this setting, and how tribulation enters into all our current local matters, in view of a completed result for God. What would you say yourself?
C.H. I was wondering whether it particularly had in mind the idea of representation and the continuation of the testimony. It is not just a question of the feminine side involving the formative work of God in the soul, but rather that work taking shape in the testimonial sphere.
S.McC. Just so. And the male son has in mind the continuation of things on the administrative line here. It is not exactly the service of God, it is the administrative line, the line of rule and government.
L.G.B. In that connection, is it interesting that there is power to bring forth? You reminded us in
{276}
London, last year, of the scripture in @Isaiah 26 where they had brought forth but wind; but here there is power to bring forth.
S.McC. We have often noticed how the enemy would seek to hinder things from being completed, from coming to a full result. He stood before the woman who was about to bring forth. That is, he is ready to interfere immediately and he will be satisfied if matters are not completed; because if matters are not completed, the enemy really has gained the day.
C.H. Pharaoh did not seem concerned about the feminine children, he was concerned about the male children. Is it that that he really fears? He cannot really touch the subjective work of God, but he can hinder, if he is allowed, the representation of God here.
S.McC. He can.
A.H. Would you say a word as to the first part of verse 4?
S.McC. That is a very serious thing to take account of, for it involves what we have been saying throughout these readings, how the enemy has entered the expanse and his influence has been extended in it. It says, "his tail draws the third part of the stars of the heaven; and he cast them to the earth." That is, he is out to interfere with the great elements of rule in the expanse.
C.M.M. Do we gather from this chapter that the assembly, being a heavenly vessel, as going to heaven, there is no more room for Satan there? The assembly belongs to heaven and is now taking up that place.
S.McC. It is very striking, is it not, that immediately you get the child caught up to God and to His throne, you get war in heaven? It says, "Michael and his angels went to war with the dragon." That is very striking. We get no instruction afforded us as to any command or anything; it is the catching up of the child to God and to the throne that precipitates
{277}
this action, "Michael and his angels went to war with the dragon." It shows what is linked with the place of Christ and the assembly in heaven.
J.McK. Why is it in the hands of angels? Does it imply a wonderful intelligence on their part, that they know what the issue is?
S.McC. I think it does. It is all the more striking in that Satan himself, having fallen from his first estate, and angels also having left their first estate, that we should get Michael and his angels going to war with the dragon.
J.McK. Do you mean that God meets the issue where the defection came in?
S.McC. That is it. That is, where things began originally, defection was found in Satan, as the prophetic scriptures point to.
J.B. Could we have a word on Mr. Darby's foot-note to 'fought' in verse 7? 'They tried to hold their ground, did not flee.'
S.McC. There is a lesson for us in that. It says, "Same word as 'went to war,' but this is the attack. Hence I have said 'fought.' They tried to hold their ground, did not flee." The result is that "he prevailed not, nor was their place found any more in the heaven. And the great dragon was cast out." The ground was held by Michael and the angels and the dragon finds no more place. It is very striking that so much is made of place in this chapter.
A.W.G.T. Does this warfare at all connect with the divine strategy? The woman does her part and then flees into the wilderness; then this angelic holding of the ground follows that. I wondered if it is one great coordinated movement.
S.McC. It does, and it shows a link between heaven and earth. That is, what is going on in the opening of the chapter, while it is a heavenly view and an abstract view of glory in Israel in a governmental position and administrative position, and Christ
{278}
coming of Israel, yet it is what is happening on the earth. But then the movements in heaven are coordinated, so that Michael and his angels come into the conflict. It shows that the conflict is one, it is not one battle above and one battle below; the conflict is one.
A.P.C.L. Do you think that this place that you have referred to should be more in our minds? I am thinking of the way in which Satan evidently mingles with the sons of God, according to the beginning of Job, and how in this section he is said to be the accuser of our brethren. But he is not only there in an aggressive way, do you think?
S.McC. No, he found a place there. Now that is a very searching matter as to how he found a place, but he did.
L.W.T. So is any accusation against the brethren here below really part of the conflict and the enemy's activity?
S.McC. We want to see that. Because he is anti-priest here as has often been noticed. Christ in His priestly station in the presence of God intercedes for us, but here we have got one who is against the brethren, as it says, "the accuser of our brethren has been cast out, who accused them before our God day and night."
J.M. Is it not instructive to see that before Satan is finally overcome and cast out, he is overcome by the brethren here? It says, "they have overcome him by reason of the blood of the Lamb, and by reason of the word of their testimony, and have not loved their life even unto death."
S.McC. Just so. This great voice in heaven that enters into this whole paragraph is very interesting, because it involves those that are there, that is, the saints are raptured in the light of the child caught up to God and to His throne. And the voice that is heard in heaven proclaiming this, "Therefore be full
{279}
of delight, ye heavens, and ye that dwell in them," involves those that are there, the saints.
A.C.S.P. Does the reference that there was no place found any more in the heaven for the devil and his agencies suggest that God is reaching a full result, and using all the room He made now for His own pleasure?
S.McC. That is it. The expanse, in its original and primary setting, was that God should have full room for the vastness and greatness of His operations, especially involving Christ and the assembly. But the enemy entered into the expanse and sought to hinder the operations, although God continued with them. But now we are reaching finality and there is no place found any more for him in the heavens.
K.F.S. Could you explain why John, just in this scripture, uses the plural word, saying, "be full of delight, ye *heavens*"? John usually uses the singular; He speaks of heaven and *the* heaven.
S.McC. I think what is in mind here is the full thought, involving the whole heavenly sphere. As we know, there are different heavens. Paul speaks of the third heaven, for instance, indicating that there are other heavens. The expanse is linked, no doubt, with the atmospheric heaven, physically. But this has in mind the whole heavenly sphere.
A.P.C.L. He personifies it, too, does he not? He says, "Ye heavens," as though it is something that in God's mind should be responsive to Himself as cleansed.
S.McC. Yes.
J.B.S. Would you say that God deals with evil in a certain sense in stages, first of all in heaven, and then Satan comes down to the earth and he is dealt with there?
S.McC. Yes. As evil comes up, it is dealt with in that sense, and as the enemy transfers his operations to the scene here below, he is met down there. So
{280}
that while it is Michael and his angels above, when we come down to the latter part of the chapter, it is the providential agencies that are used to make way for the persecuted saints.
J.McK. So that the war is continued with "the remnant of her seed, who keep the commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus."
S.McC. And it is very striking the change of strategy. Mr. Darby says in the Synopsis on @Ephesians 6, that we should be more afraid of the enemy's stratagems than of his power. In the first part of the chapter he stands before the woman that he might devour her. That is, it is a violent, ferocious action; but when we come to the latter part of the chapter, it is a very subtle action. The river speaks of influence, it always does in Scripture, an influence for good or an influence for bad. Sometimes we may be preserved in a ferocious, violent attack of the devil, but we may succumb to the more gentle side of influence, which the river suggests.
G.E.E. Is that why all these titles of Satan come in in verse 9, suggesting a variety of activity?
S.McC. Yes, so that we should not be deceived with any of his strategies. Whether it is in the form of the dragon, or in the form of the serpent, or "he who is called Devil and Satan, he who deceives the whole habitable world." Paul says, "We are not ignorant of his thoughts," @2 Corinthians 2: 11.
M.P.S. Would you say something about the two things in verse 11, "the blood of the Lamb," and "the word of their testimony," in connection with what you have just been saying?
S.McC. It is a very touching reference, "the blood of the Lamb," and it would help us to see the great leverage that the blood of the Lamb has in the souls of those that overcome. The Lamb is a touching reference to Christ who suffered even to death, and the blood would affect those that had been in the
{281}
position of suffering. So that they overcame him by reason of the blood of the Lamb, and by reason of the word of their testimony.
A.J.G. Does not the blood of the Lamb provide a perfect answer to all the accusations?
S.McC. It does. You mean the accusing them before our God day and night?
A.J.G. Yes. There is a perfect answer to all the accusations, and although some of the accusations might be true, they are met by the blood of the Lamb, and they can afford to go on with the word of their testimony, can they not?
S.McC. That is right. Because we know that in accusations, if it were not for the blood of the Lamb, where would we stand? There is nothing, of course, more demoralising in conflict than an accusation which cannot be met, but this is met by reason of the blood of the Lamb which has cleared them entirely. Now we go over to chapter 21, which gives us the great final thoughts as to the expanse in relation to the millennial world. It is very affecting to see how the assembly, as the Lamb's wife in the form of the city, is moved on to our view. We see, too, its relations with the earth, because the nations walk by its light, and the kings of the earth bring their glory to it, and the leaves of the tree are for the healing of the nations. As has often perhaps been noticed, the assembly maintains her own heavenly distinctiveness; whereas, on the earthly side, in Jerusalem below, according to the prophet, the nation that will not serve the King, Jehovah of hosts in Jerusalem, will perish. But in the heavenly city, the assembly, we have her true distinctiveness in grace maintained, so that the leaves of the tree are for the healing of the nations.
G.H.S.P. Is it at all significant that the angel which shows John the bride, the Lamb's wife, is specifically said to be "one of the seven angels which
{282}
had had the seven bowls full of the seven last plagues"? Would that suggest that there must be some appreciation with us of God's governmental and judicial dealings preparatory to the appreciation of the real glory that comes before us now?
S.McC. I think it does. That is, in meeting evil's challenge God would have us with Him in it, so that we fully understand what is being met, and it has an answer in our souls. It has been met in our souls, in the truth of the glad tidings, and in the assembly exercises. The challenge that evil has thrown up is thus met in our souls individually and in the assembly in our corporate relations. So that we are with God in the matter of the expanse and His great thoughts in it.
C.H. Is the reference to "a great and high wall" part of the meeting of all that has come in, so far as the saints are concerned?
S.McC. Yes. It is very striking that what is distinctive about that wall is that its building was jasper. We were reminded of that, although we did not allude to it, in the first scripture we read this morning, where it says, "and upon the throne one sitting, and he that was sitting like in appearance to a stone of jasper and a sardius." That is, there is an affinity in the wall with God Himself, and the outshining of His glory.
W.G.J. Is this affinity seen in her shining? It is like "a most precious stone, as a crystal-like jasper stone."
S.McC. Just so, and also, it says, "the first foundation, jasper," It is very interesting that the first foundation is jasper, and the last foundation is amethyst. The amethyst pointing to the heavenly side.
C.H. Is the great triumph that she comes down out of the heaven from God, having the glory of God?
S.McC. I think so. And the glory of God no
{283}
doubt is reflected in all these stones and their variegated beauty.
F.C.E. Could I ask about verse 1 of this chapter, where it speaks of "a new heaven and a new earth"? How does that fit in in relation to the expanse that we are speaking of?
S.McC. The expanse that we began with in Genesis l, literally of course, involves what is physical; and all that is terminated, that passes away. The millennial scene brings in God's complete triumph in relation to it, that what He began with, He ends with in His ways. In the new heaven and the new earth, we do not get any detail as to what composes it, but we do know that the assembly, in her heavenly position and place, carries through. So that spiritually, the thoughts of the expanse go through on the inward side; not on the outward mediatorial side of administration and rule, but in the inward side, what is linked with God's glory in it.
E.C.M. Is there something in the fact that John was carried away in the Spirit? I am thinking of the difference between "I became in [the] Spirit."
S.McC. Yes, it is an interesting reference here, that he does not become in Spirit here. "He carried me away in the Spirit," and then you will notice, in chapter 22, as has often been noticed before, "he shewed me a river of water of life." When it comes to the final view of things in relation to the expanse, and its relation to the earth, it is not a question exactly of what we voluntarily come into, it is a question of what we are drawn into, brought into. God will bring us with the Lord when He comes again. We may think of our coming again with Him, but you will notice that in Thessalonians the word is, "For if we believe that Jesus has died and has risen again, so also God will bring with him those who have fallen asleep through Jesus." That is a divine action that comes into the final side of things linked
{284}
with the appearing and the display of the glory.
A.H. Referring to the stones once more, is it not instructive to see that the anointed cherub is invested by God with, I think, ten different stones, whereas when we come to the wall of the assembly, we have twelve? In both instances it says, "every precious stone," but the assembly exceeds what God had committed to the anointed cherub originally.
S.McC. It is very striking that we should have the link in the stones in this section and in Ezekiel. It shows God's complete triumph in the expanse in relation to him who had found such a place there, and God has reached His triumph, as was pointed out earlier, in a creature vessel, but such a creature as the assembly is, so near to Deity.
R.G.B. Would the references to "the Lord God Almighty is its temple," and then "the throne of God and of the Lamb" being in it, stress the outstanding distinctiveness and quality of vessel that the assembly is, and its nearness to God?
S.McC. It does, I think it specially helps us to see that in the assembly we have got the acme of divine workmanship. What has resulted from divine operations is seen in it, "The Lord God Almighty is its temple, and the Lamb," We have got a creature vessel great enough for the Deity to be its temple. It is a marvellous thing when you take account of it in that sense.
C.M.M. Would you say a word about the golden reed please? Would that be in accord with your thought as to everything being secured according to divine glory? Will everything in that scene stand the measurement of the golden reed? Could you link it with @Ephesians 4?
S.McC. Just so. The golden reed as a measure is very interesting and then, corresponding with that, the cubic measure, the length and the breadth and the height of it being equal, is very interesting too.
{285}
There is a link in that way with our first scripture, where we have the divine side in the woman clothed with the sun, and the moon under her feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve stars, but then the travail and the result brings in the substantial side, the cubic side; so that what we have in the city is not just an abstract thought, it is a substantial thought.
W.F. Evidently in the holy city everything is measured by the golden reed, whereas in chapter 11 the court is cast out. Would you distinguish there, for us, please?
S.McC. The court in chapter 11 has to do with what is without, whereas the golden reed has to do with the city which, of course, is of God and heavenly.
W.F. Is it a great triumph that everything in the city comes up to the divine standard?
S.McC. Just so. Mr. Darby makes a touching allusion to the city as of God and as heavenly. He says, 'It might be of God, and earthly. It might be heavenly and angelic. It is neither. It was divine in origin and heavenly in nature and character.' That is very fine in regard to the city.
A.J.G. So that even in writing to the Corinthians, Paul says, "Of him," that is, of God, "are ye in Christ Jesus." That brings in the heavenly side, does it not? Is he not seeking to impress them with the dignity of their position, as of God and in Christ Jesus?
S.McC. It is very striking how Paul moves on that high level towards the Corinthians despite what marked them. The way he views them and clothes them is like what we have in the beginning of chapter 12, and also what we have here in the city. He approaches them from that high level.
A.P.C.L. In verse 23 it says, "for the glory of God has enlightened it." It is not only that it is a vessel, of which the lamp is said to be the Lamb, but the glory of God has enlightened it. Would that
{286}
refer to all that has been done substantially in its formation?
S.McC. So that that would have a backward, retroactive reference, would it not?
A.P.C.L. I thought that, and bearing even on what you were saying as to the exercises in Corinthians.
G.E.E. What is the force of so many references to the Lamb put alongside these exalted thoughts as to the glory of God?
S.McC. Have you ever noticed in Mr. Darby's hymns, so exalted in their sentiments, how the Lamb is brought in? It is very interesting to notice that, because I suppose if some of us brought in 'the Lamb' in assembly service, we might be thought out of place. But the Lamb is a touching allusion, I think, to the One who is the Centre of the sphere and the realm, who has acquired the place in our affections by the way of suffering love.
C.W.O'L.M. Is there any teaching for us in that connection in the fact that on the gates, the names of the twelve tribes of the sons of Israel are inscribed, while in the foundations, we have the twelve apostles of the Lamb? Is administration to be carried out in the dignity of sonship, but underlying it all is the thought of suffering?
S.McC. I think it is. And I think also added to that great thought is "the glory of God has enlightened it." That is, the names of the twelve sons of Israel being inscribed in the gates, means that the assembly is intelligent as to every thought of God that has come into His ways, and the assembly cherishes every thought of God. And then the angels are at the gates. Well, what a touch that is! The angels are the great agents of providential government and administration and, in their original place, were higher than man as to rank, but now they are subserving this creature vessel, attending upon it. What
{287}
a touch it gives as to the great result of God's workmanship in the assembly, the city!
A.P.C.L. It appears that this is not seen as a result of going into the gate, and heaven; but it is from the great and high mountain. Is this possible therefore, for us to view now as it comes out actually?
S.McC. I think it is. That is, we have got to get on to this elevation. The mountain would link us on with what is heavenly, but it still is the link with the earth, in that way.
G.H.S.P. Would the mountain at all link with the thought of the overcomer, and the way the name of this city is written on the overcomer in Philadelphia?
S.McC. I am sure it would. One was thinking earlier of the link between the promise to the overcomer in Philadelphia and what we have here. That is, it is like a mountain in that sense. It is an eminence that stands out, a pillar in the temple of Christ's God, the name of Christ's God written upon him, and the name of the city of Christ's God, and Christ's new name. What an eminence it constitutes, as you think of it! And from that exalted view, the line of overcoming, we can take account of God's complete triumph, that in the expanse, into which evil entered to impede the operations of God, evil has been completely cast out, and in its place is this benign influence for good that sheds its rays on the whole scene below.
L.W.T. Is the triumph over evil emphasised in the last verse of the chapter? "And nothing common, nor that maketh an abomination and a lie, shall at all enter into it." It is as though evil cannot enter into this creature vessel. Is that a wonderful triumph for God in the expanse?
S.McC. It is. It helps us to see the impregnable character of the city. It is not a question of doors or gates or bars to keep out things; it is what the city is as formed in the divine nature. The holiness that
{288}
is there, and the love, would be repellent of anything that is not in keeping with it.
D.W.G. And as we see that, are we really brought to the moral exercise of verses 14 and 15 of chapter 22, "Blessed are they that wash their robes, that they may have right to the tree of life, and that they should go in by the gates into the city. Without are the dogs, and the sorcerers, and the fornicators, and the murderers, and the idolaters, and every one that loves and makes a lie"?
S.McC. Just so. Who would not like to go in by the gates into that city? Well, are we prepared to wash our robes? And the last verse that we read, "And no curse shall be any more" is very fine, because it is still the millennial scene, and yet we get this remarkable reference, that "no curse shall be any more." If we look at the historic side and the prophetic side, the armies will still be gathered together against the beloved city, but from the heavenly side you see the city's benign influence, "no curse shall be any more."
J.M. Is that where the triumph of God lies, that He brings in that which is eternal into the time scene?
S.McC. That is it. The assembly comes into the millennium from the eternal scene. She enters upon what is eternal at the rapture, and she comes into the millennial scene from that position, to influence it for God.
L.W.T. Is that why we get the new heavens and new earth anticipated in @Isaiah 65, which would really be a millennial matter?
S.McC. Just so. Isaiah's new heavens and new earth do not take us beyond the millennium, but you can understand it in the light of the city, and the presence of the city in it as we go back into Isaiah with the light we have in our souls as to the city of God.
{289}
THE EXPANSE (5)
@Ephesians 1: 9 -- 23; @Ephesians 3: 8 -- 21
S.McC. It is fitting that we should close the brief search we have sought to make together in regard to the subject of the expanse with what we have in this epistle, and especially what comes before us in the sections that we have read from it. We have only, as it were, touched the fringe of the subject, for it is a vast subject in the Scriptures. When we come to Ephesians, we are impressed with the fulness of God's thoughts that are now reached in the assembly in its relations with Christ, in the expanse as designed and made by God, having in mind His operations. And while they are wonderful in relation to the physical side of creation, how much more wonderful they are in relation to the spiritual and heavenly side, which is now to engage us. We cannot dwell on all the details of the sections that we have read, since they are very full, but it is particularly in mind in the first section to consider how the assembly, as the body of Christ, is linked with Him in the headship, in the wonderful influence which will affect the whole universe; for in the heavenly position, the assembly will affect every part of the universe and every family in it. We know that Christ's influence operates through the assembly and it should leave an impression, a fresh touch on our spirits and souls, as we see the uniqueness of the setting in @Ephesians 1. It is not what we have in Colossians, where Christ is "the head *of* the body, the assembly," but His headship here is *to* the assembly, which carries its unique distinctiveness, as bearing upon the universe bearing upon it in the way of influence and rule and administration. Then, in the last passage, it is in mind to see the assembly's great place, and what a subject of
{290}
interest it is to the principalities and authorities in the heavenlies. We have this marvellous vessel that is so near to Christ, no company ever could be as near to Christ as the assembly. Israel, however exalted God's thoughts are in regard to Israel, never has the place as the body of Christ, and does not know the intimacy that the assembly knows in that relation. And the principalities and authorities, all having their place in the expanse, are greatly interested in this vessel of vessels, in which there is made known the all-various wisdom of God, culminating, as the chapter works out in the features of divine operations that are projected on to view in the great thought of such fulness and result, "to him be glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all generations of the age of ages. Amen." We have often gone over and read and re-read these passages, but as we are subject to one another, and the Holy Spirit is free amongst us, we may get some fresh impression of the assembly's greatness as linked with Christ in all His greatness as Man, in this section. The full work of God is in mind; that is, the full thought of the expanse and divine operations in it being reached, we might say, in this letter, in these relations viewed between Christ and the assembly, and standing as they do in relation to the universe.
L.W.T. Is God's great triumph in the expanse seen by the things in the heavens and the things upon the earth being together headed up in the Christ? And does the assembly have a great part in that?
S.McC. It does. The casting of Satan out of the expanse makes way for the holy city, in its relations with Christ, to fill the scene, without any let or hindrance to divine operations in relation to this great thought of heading up. The thought of the city is a co-relative thought to what we have here, only it is John's way of speaking of it. The city does not convey quite the thought of intimacy and
{291}
nearness that the body does, but it does convey intimacy and nearness in another light.
C.M.M. Would you connect the expression "the heavenlies," so peculiar to this epistle, with the thought of the expanse?
S.McC. That is what is in one's mind, that the fulness in relation to divine operations in the expanse is reached in relation to the assembly in connection with the thought of the heavenlies, in this letter. We do not get any reference in Scripture to 'the fulness of the heavens,' or 'the fulness of the expanse'; we do get it in relation to the earth, "The earth is Jehovah's, and the fulness thereof," @Psalm 24: 1. But this chapter suggests the full result of God's operations, the full end reached in connection with His work, in the position of the saints in the heavenlies.
F.A.B. Would you please tell us the difference between head *of* the assembly and head *to* the assembly?
S.McC. In Colossians, where Christ is said to be the head *of* the body, the assembly is under His headship, but in @Ephesians 1, she is not *under* His headship, she is *with Him* in the headship.
J.McK. Would it be something like the body getting the gain of His headship in Colossians, but the body being instrumental in that headship affecting the universe in Ephesians?
S.McC. That is the point. She is associated with Him in the headship. It is just like the husband and the wife in relation to the family; the wife is associated with the husband in the headship. If the husband goes away, the great thought of the headship is worked out through the wife in relation to the family. That is the Ephesian thought and that is how the thought will stand in relation to the universe. The universe does not get the direct impulses of Christ; the universe gets the impulses of Christ and the guidance and direction of Christ indirectly through the assembly,
{292}
the body of Christ, which receives them directly.
J.McK. Is it interesting that in @Revelation 21, as soon as you have the bride adorned for her husband, you have the word "the tabernacle of God is with men"? Would that be the same principle working out, the impulses would be through Christ and the bride, the assembly?
S.McC. Exactly. That is John's way of putting it. It corresponds with what we have in Paul's ministry here, that the tabernacle is the medium of contact with the universe. The assembly is so great in her formation that she becomes the great medium of contact with all the families that are embodied in the thought of men in that section.
R.G.B. Is it your thought that the shedding forth of the influence of Christ through the assembly in that way, involves a peculiar delicacy and intimacy in her relations with Christ?
S.McC. Exactly. It is a wonderful thing, when you take account of it, that there is this thought of the body as it is seen in @Ephesians 1. While from one aspect, we have got two personalities in Christ and the assembly, from another aspect they are one. Union involves that they are one. So that it is not just a representation of the influence of Christ or the direction of Christ, it is the influence of Christ actually working out through the assembly, because they are one in relation to the thought of union.
J.McK. Does what you are saying stress the importance of the assembly, His body, His fulness?
S.McC. It does. That is, the bearing of it in that passage, as you would know, is towards the universe. In Christ we have the fulness of the Godhead in Colossians, but the assembly is the fulness of Christ towards the universe. That is, anything that is to be known of Christ in the universe is known through the assembly, it comes out through the assembly.
S.T. In @Proverbs 31, as to the woman of worth, it
{293}
says, "many daughters have done worthily, but thou excellent them all," Is that in relation to the influence of Christ?
S.McC. Yes, that passage and other passages in the Old Testament bring it up in type and foreshadowing, as we also have in @Psalm 45, "the queen in gold of Ophir"; she is associated with Him in rule.
A.J.G. Is it not a wonderful expression of divine wisdom and grace that God puts Himself in touch with the universe through a vessel which is herself a creature vessel, through Christ and the assembly, the assembly being united to Him?
S.McC. That is a marvellous thing, and that we should be part of that creature vessel is what is so affecting. It is a creature vessel in its make-up and capacity, yet holding things and standing related to things that are beyond creature capacity. God putting Himself in touch with men, through it, eternally. In the millennial world, the nations and Israel, the whole universe, will be affected by what works out through the assembly.
L.W.T. Would it be right to say that that influence of Christ is in no way diminished by reason of the creature vessel?
S.McC. Not in any sense. That is the wonder of it all. In the expanse that is laid out in @Genesis 1, we have the matter set out in principle, set out basically in @Genesis 1, but what must it be to the heart of God, as we reach Ephesians and see what is reached in the full result of His own operations in the assembly in relation to the expanse! There is a vessel in it in heavenly status equal to Christ, speaking reverently, as Man, alongside of Him, through which divine impulses can reach the universe.
A.J.G. In the typical presentation of this in @Genesis 2, we have the man as head of a great system, have we not, comprising heavenly and earthly; and then we have the woman brought to him, and she is
{294}
his counterpart, his like, to be with him in the headship?
S.McC. So that @Genesis 2, in type, is really necessary as the counterpart of @Genesis 1 to give us what we have here in that way, I mean by that, that in the sun and the moon and the stars, you do not have the thought of love or affection operating; they are bodies of rule and influence in the universe, and certain heat and other things are generated through their influence, but we do not have the thought of affection and love. But when we come into the realm in @Genesis 2, where the fulness of things works out in relation to the man and the woman in the garden, you get two beings, in whom there is affection for one another, reciprocal affection; as the man stands in admiration of the woman and the woman stands in admiration of the man. It is necessary, in the type, according to what we have in Ephesians.
A.W.G.T. In that connection, could you say something about the expression, "This time it is bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh: this shall be called Woman, because this was taken out of a man," @Genesis 2: 23?
S.McC. That is bearing on what we are speaking of in regard to the body; that is, the body is out of Christ. There are two thoughts, as we know, involved in Ephesians; there is the organic side in the body, and union in Scripture is not exactly linked with the organic side, union is linked more with the two beings that we have referred to, the man and the woman; the woman builded by God and brought to the man.
R.W. Would you say that chapter 4 of the epistle to the Ephesians starts at the top? In Solomon's temple, the two pillars had the lily-work upon the top; @1 Kings 7: 22.
S.McC. Yes, we are impressed with ornamentation
{295}
in regard to the system of things in Solomon. God sets out His great thoughts and then He indicates the means by which we arrive at them.
C.R.B. Could we have another word, please, as to the distinction between the body, the organic thought, and the other suggestion of the man and the woman, the two entities? I would like to be clearer as to that.
S.McC. Well, we have the thought in the body of an organic link with Christ, the body is animated by the life of its Head; but that is not exactly the thought of the man and the wife. Union is linked with the thought of the man and the wife, not exactly with the body and the head; although the thoughts are so closely related that it is difficult to distinguish. But union in Scripture, as presented from Genesis to Revelation, involves the woman coming to the man. Whereas, there is no journey contemplated in relation to the body.
A.J.G. Is the body a kind of constitutional thought, that it is "bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh"? Is that what is in your mind?
S.McC. That is it. The body is out of Christ in that sense. The idea of the body in relation to the Head does not involve a journey. The body is animated by the life of the Head, is quickened in that life; but when you have the thought of union, it is two personalities -- Christ and the assembly, and the assembly is conducted to Christ where He is; she comes where He is and is united to Him.
A.J.G. So that while you have God bringing the woman to the man in @Genesis 2, is it not perhaps rather more filled out in Rebecca in @Genesis 24? It says there, that "Isaac led her into his mother Sarah's tent; and he took Rebecca, and she became his wife, and he loved her." You get the fulness of the thought there?
S.McC. You get the fulness of the thought in
{296}
Rebecca. You do not get the thought of love in @Genesis 2; not that it is not there, because the type would point to the great reciprocal relations between Christ and the assembly in love, but we have to wait till @Genesis 24 to get the actual love that is linked with union.
J.T.S. In chapter 4 we have "the head, the Christ, from whom the whole body, ... " Would that be the one side? Then in chapter 5 we have, "that he might present the assembly to himself glorious," Does that at all give us the distinction?
S.McC. Yes, we see two lines of thought there, that help in regard to it. What does Mr. B, say himself?
C.R.B. I am thankful for what has been remarked. I was wondering if it is true that the body is a subsisting reality here and now, through the baptism of the Holy Spirit. It says, "in the power of one Spirit we have all been baptised into one body." That is in the Corinthian setting, the present, actual position; whereas, is union more linked in Scripture with the heavenly position?
S.McC. It is important to see that union is always linked with the heavenly position in our dispensation. We cannot touch union except as we reach the heavenly position, and it is by the Spirit. We do not have union in Romans, we do not have union in Corinthians, we do not even have it in Colossians, although the germ and principle of it is no doubt in these letters, but we have to come to Ephesians for the full thought of union.
J.M. Is not that brought out in @Genesis 24? Isaac must not leave the land, his bride must be brought to him where he is.
S.McC. Just so.
A.C.S.P. In the same connection, is it not to be noted that Abraham, in answering the question as to what would happen if the woman was not willing to
{297}
follow the servant, says, "Jehovah the God of the heavens" would see to all that?
S.McC. Very good, impressing us with how God comes into the matter. So that following all these references as to the assembly's links with Christ in the headship, chapter 2 gives us really the journey in one way from the divine side (Rebecca gives it to us from our side), "But God, being rich in mercy, because of his great love wherewith he loved us, ... has quickened us with the Christ (ye are saved by grace, ) and has raised us up together, and has made us sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus," Well, all that involves that we are brought to where Christ is; and God has done it, as it says later on, "We are his workmanship." God has come into the matter in view of the consummating of His thoughts in regard to the expanse.
A.P.B. Could I ask why, in the end of @Ephesians 1, the administration is connected with the assembly as Christ's body; whereas in @Revelation 21, the administration is connected with His wife?
S.McC. It is John's way in contradistinction to Paul's. He identifies the city as the Lamb's wife, the Lamb bringing on to view the suffering side in our thoughts, the Person who suffered, and the wife bringing on the sympathetic side. The body in Ephesians does not exactly bring in the suffering side, but the wife, as linked with the Lamb, does show the sympathetic link with that line. The administration is working out on that line, as we have it in type in Chronicles in relation to Solomon, the throne of ivory. That is, the administration is working out from the standpoint of the suffering.
H.M.H. Would you say a word, please, as to the setting in time of the end of chapter 1? Does it particularly refer to the day of display, in the millennium, or does it carry on through into eternity?
S.McC. We cannot limit verse 23 to what is provisional;
{298}
it involves what is eternal. The headship in verses 21 and 22, of course, particularly has in mind the millennial scene, but verse 23 involves the eternal scene, as well as the millennial scene, in the sense that throughout all eternity every impulse of Christ towards the universe will be through His body, the assembly.
C.M.M. Do you link verse 22 with "Let them have dominion" in @Genesis 1?
S.McC. Exactly. We have had the thought of dominion and rule linked with the sun and the moon and the stars, which is a co-relative line of the truth; but what we are engaged with now is what particularly brings in the thought of feelings and affection. The influences of Christ and the directions of Christ are not working out arbitrarily to the universe, they are working out through a vessel that is His fulness, that is the expression of His feelings and His affections.
J.M. Is that why in this prayer Paul prays that we should be enlightened in the eyes of our hearts? Are not the affections involved in these great thoughts as well as the intelligence?
S.McC. I thought so. I thought there was in this section a gathering up of the passages that we have considered together. We have "the administration of the fulness of times," the heading up of all things in the Christ, the things in the heavens and the things upon the earth; and it links with what is in mind in @Genesis 1 in the expanse. Then "the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory" links with the call of Abraham, and the separating of Abraham to heavenly hopes as we have referred to it, and as J.N.D. says of the hopes: 'that suit the majesty and the love of Him that calls us.' That is what we are impressed with in this section, the Abrahamic side, the heavenly calling involving sonship, involving heaven. Then the latter part of the chapter is working out to what we have in Revelation when
{299}
principalities and powers are subjected to Christ and the city along with Christ influences the age.
D.W.G. May I ask again for a little more help on verse 23, "the fulness of him who fills all in all"? I am thinking of the scripture in @1 Corinthians 15, "That God may be all in all," which we understand to be eternity.
S.McC. Yes. Say a little more.
D.W.G.. I am enquiring for help. I have been interested in what you have been saying as to verse 23 of @Ephesians 1 not being limited to the millennium but going on into eternity. I am just wondering how that works out in view of the scripture in Corinthians where God is said to be all in all.
S.McC. I think the expression in @Ephesians 1: 23, "who fills all in all" is to remind us of the greatness of the Person that is before us here. It is to remind us of His deity, although what is said of Him is said of Him as the exalted Man; for the assembly is united to Him as the exalted Man. The whole bearing of this section from verse 17 to the end is man and God. Man in the exalted position as seen in Christ. Yet we have this reference to His deity, because only of One who had part in Deity could that expression be used, "who fills all in all." But the assembly is not united to Him as God; the assembly is united to Him as the exalted Man.
J.T.S. Would you say a Word as to chapter 4: 10 please, "He that descended is the same who has also ascended up above all the heavens, that he might fill all things"? What would that convey to us?
S.McC. You get all *things* there, you do not get all things in @Ephesians 1: 23.
J.T.S. I am thinking rather of the Person.
S.McC. @Ephesians 4 is thinking of the system. The expression "that he might fill all things" has in mind the vast system of things that Christ has His place in relation to, as the exalted Man. That
{300}
expression also involves His deity in that He has ascended up above all the heavens. But in @Ephesians 1: 23 it is "the fulness of him who fills all in all." Now it is not said that God fills all in all. In @1 Corinthians 15, in regard to what was referred to, it says, "that God may be all in all." In Colossians we have the thought that Christ is everything, and in all. God is not said to be everything, and in all, but Christ is said to be "everything, and in all." And God is not said to *fill* all in all, whereas Christ is said to *fill* all in all. And Christ is not said to *be* all in all. God is said to *be* all in all, in the coming day; the "all" is the all of supremacy. All these variations help us as to what is involved.
J.McK. Does it bring out the great feature of instrumentality. God operating through Christ and through the assembly?
S.McC. That is what is in mind, 'Filling' is an illuminating word; there is no thought of filling in @1 Corinthians 15. You have the thought of what is *full* in @1 Corinthians 15, but not the thought of filling. That is, it is the supreme "all" in @1 Corinthians 15, but in @Ephesians 1, it is "who *fills* all in all."
G.E.E. Would this touch of Deity in verse 23 in relation to Christ, also help to elevate in a glorified way, the thought of the assembly though a creature as nearest to Deity?
S.McC. It does. Because this is not said of Israel; it is not said of the angels, nor of any other family. It should thus help us to see the greatness that attaches to the assembly in this light.
A.H. Is the thought of equality in your mind in the matter of the body's relation to Christ?
S.McC. Just so. That is why I alluded to the type in @Psalm 45, where you have got the full thought of equality in the queen, "upon thy right hand doth stand the queen in gold of Ophir." That bears on
{301}
what we have here, and the same with the woman builded by God in @Genesis 1. There is no thought of any disparity, no thought of any lower status in regard to the position; the assembly is equal to Christ as Man in the exalted position.
A.W.G.T. Is that why Mr. Taylor referred at one time to horizontal love as related to Christ and the assembly in this scripture?
S.McC. Yes, in the relation of union it is not a question of vertical love, it is a question of horizontal love between two persons in the position or status, speaking reverently and guardedly, of equality.
F.W.T. Did not Mr. Coates use the expression of the assembly in this way as subject to Christ, but with no thought of inferiority?
S.McC. Well, chapter 5 shows that the assembly is subject to Christ; but we do not have the thought of the assembly, in @Ephesians 1, being like the authorities and the dominions and the principalities subjected to Christ. That is, when it says, "and has put all things under his feet" the assembly is *not* included in that.
R.G.B. So in the word "gave him to be head over all things *to* the assembly," the preposition 'to' is important there, is it not?
S.McC. It is, it illuminates the whole matter. The headship of Christ is thus *towards* the universe *through* the assembly. It is what His headship is *towards* the universe *through* the assembly.
A.C.C. Would you allow for the distinctiveness of Christ, that the assembly as His body is a matter of derivation; whereas there is not that thought with the Lord personally? Will there ever be a distinctive place with Christ personally, while there is this oneness in nature and status?
S.McC. Whatever position you may view Christ, you must always make room for His uniqueness, and this added word, "who fills all in all," is just to bring
{302}
that in. But we should not bring the thought of subjection into this scripture in relation to the assembly, because the assembly is not viewed as subjected to Christ in this passage. We have got to take the scriptures in their context, in their bearing, and see how finely things are defined. In chapter 5 the assembly is said to be subjected to the Christ, but here, it is the equality of the assembly's *status* with the exalted Man, in the administration of things towards the universe.
C.H. So that the question of equality relates to status and not to what is personal?
S.McC. That helps to elucidate the thing.
C.H. Did not Mr. Raven say that the fulness is not so great as the thing itself? So that the particular place and personality of Christ is guarded in that He fills all in all.
S.McC. So that what we have been dwelling on in regard to equality has to do with this matter of status. Because when you come to Christ's personal greatness that always must stand by itself in its uniqueness; but in the status here, and the assembly's position with Christ in the headship, there is no thought exactly of any under position. She, because of her greatness, is on equality with Christ as the exalted Man. The great thing to see, in regard to the subject that we are considering, is the way that the assembly is in this unique position. We are not only to think of it objectively, but we are to think of its bearing on us now and the saints universally in this wonderful link which the assembly has with Christ. So that things that transpire in one part of the world affect other parts of the world. It is the most wonderful thing that it is possible for us to apprehend.
G.H.S.P. Does this wonderful link of chapter 1 enter into the reference to the knowing the love of the Christ in that final section of chapter 3?
{303}
S.McC. I think it does. You will notice that there is a distinct link between the two sections, in that it is said of the love of the Christ, that it "surpasses knowledge." It is another link like "who fills all in all." We are reminded of the greatness of the Person.
E.C.M. In chapter 1 we have "the fulness of him," that is Christ; but in chapter 3, "that ye may be filled to all the fulness of God." Would you say a word about that?
S.McC. In chapter 1 it is the fulness of the exalted Man. We love to think of His humanity in the gospels, how wonderful it is! This letter alludes to "the stature of the fulness of the Christ." But to think of the fulness linked with humanity, or manhood, in the exalted position is a wonderful thing, and the assembly is the fulness of the exalted Man. But when we come to @Ephesians 3, "the fulness of God" alludes to the outshining of God; the assembly could hardly be the fulness of God. The fulness of God will be seen shining out in Christ, not in the assembly, although the assembly is filled *to* it.
A.H. Does the thought convey the special measure that the assembly has as the most glorious vessel connected with the divine system?
S.McC. I think that is what is to weigh with us. In designing the expanse and having in mind to make room for His great operations, there is no doubt that God had in mind Christ and the assembly, and the place that they would fill. It is a wonderful thing when you take account of it in this way, that of God it is said, Whom the heaven of heavens cannot contain. Yet our Lord Jesus Christ came into manhood and He was competent for the fulness of the Godhead to reside in Him; all the fulness was residing in Him. Think of the greatness of that thought! And then when we come to the thought of the assembly, and the greatness of Christ's manhood, the assembly is great enough to be the fulness of
{304}
Christ as Man in the exalted position. These are wonderful thoughts.
W.G.J. Is the use of the expression "the heavenlies," intended to impress us with the vastness of the expanse into which we have been brought?
S.McC. I think it is. And the references to the body of Christ in that relation are to show that geographical distance means nothing to us.
L.W.T. So that in each of these passages we have the reference to "all the saints." Is that to enlarge us in our thoughts as to the universal position?
S.McC. Just so. I mean in regard to distance you can go home and get on the telephone and you can talk to Australia and you can talk to America. Well, people say, That is wonderful! But does it impress us sufficiently as to what is infinitely more wonderful, that there is a vessel in the assembly, in which there is living contact with every part of the world. Not by letter, not by correspondence, but a vessel, the body of Christ, animated by His life, as quickened in it; and the impulses of that linked with His direction as Head affecting every part of that vessel.
R.G.B. Does the Spirit have a peculiar place and glory in relation to that and its maintenance?
S.McC. He has. It has always affected me that in the moral universe, the features of which are brought before us in @Ephesians 4, the first item that should be mentioned is the body. It says, "There is one body." And then you get "and one Spirit." While that has a provisional bearing, in relation to the moral universe, yet it is a wonderful thing to take account of this fact, that while the Spirit has not become incarnate like the Lord Jesus (the Lord Jesus became incarnate, He came into human form; the Spirit has not come into human form), yet He has a vessel in which His presence is as actually felt as the presence of Jesus was felt when here amongst men. That is a wonderful thing, that the Spirit is linked
{305}
with the body. I think, while we often speak of the honour that God has accorded Christ in giving Him the assembly, it is a wonderful thing for the Spirit, that the Spirit is in the body which He formed by His coming and in which He has got uninterrupted liberty.
F.A.B. Is what you are saying amplified in chapter 4? You have that in mind, no doubt; but I was thinking of the expression "its self-building up in love." It does not so much refer there to Christ, but to the body as being a vessel capable of building itself up in love. Is that right?
S.McC. That is what it says. It all impresses us with the greatness of this organism. The organism is a wonderful thing, and we need to be more and more conscious of it. I am sure we do.
J.McK. Could we ask for some more help as to this matter of the fulness? In chapter 1 you are stressing that it is in view of the whole universe being affected, but in chapter 3, did you say that it is connected with the outshining of God, "filled to all the fulness of God"? In chapter 1 it is a stated matter but in chapter 3 it appears to be a process.
S.McC. It is a complete matter in chapter 1, but it is a matter in process in chapter 3, which brings out the skill and refinement of divine operations. The strengthening inwardly, "in the inner man," would suggest the great formation in the assembly; then we have, "that the Christ may dwell through faith in your hearts," and then, "to know the love of the Christ which surpasses knowledge." It is all entering into this matter, "that ye *may* be filled even to all the fulness of God."
J.McK. The three Persons entering into the matter.
S.McC. All the three Persons entering into the matter, which shows us what a prime matter it is, especially bringing out the greatness of the assembly's formation and capacity.
{306}
J.McK. Now, will you tell us what is the objective in chapter 3? I think we have seen something of the objective in chapter 1, but what is the objective in chapter 3? Is it God-ward?
S.McC. It is God-ward. It is the service of God, the praise and worship of God being in mind. What must it be to Deity to have a vessel into which there has entered the operations of every one of the Persons of the Deity! What must it be to them to see such refinement that there is such an answer towards God that affects all the families, as is in mind in @Ephesians 3?
W.W.S. Would the objective be in any way set out in that word, "to him be glory in the assembly" and so on?
S.McC. That is what we are referring to; it is the God-ward side.
C.R.B. I was just going to refer to the principalities and authorities in the heavenlies. It would be helpful, would it, if you would just say a word as to the place they have had in the expanse and what they now see in this glorious vessel?
S.McC. When you go down through the ages and think of what was seen in Israel and especially what was seen in Davidic and Solomonic times, the marvellous glory and resources and wisdom that there was in Israel, the principalities and authorities have no doubt taken account of all that in their observance. But now something has come on to their view which amazes them, as I understand it; so that it is said of them, in regard to the assembly that is formed in this dispensation, "in order that *now*" -- the word 'now' is to be noted -- "to the principalities and authorities in the heavenlies might be made known through the assembly the all-various wisdom of God." So that while the expanse has been invaded by evil influences and evil power, yet principalities and authorities in the heavenlies are seeing now how God is working
{307}
towards the clearing of the expanse of all that, in matters that work out in the assembly.
G.H.S.P. Would it be right to say that the invasion of the expanse and all the moral exercises that have resulted from that bear on this word 'depth' which comes into the end of @Ephesians 3?
S.McC. I think it would. It is a remarkable word as it comes in here. We have been referring to the height as linked with the divine domain in the passages that have come before us. But in this passage, we get this added touch of depth, and how much enters into that, as we think of the dip between the two eternities, the dip down into time and all that has come into love's ways, as divine operations have proceeded according to the divine pattern.
C.H. And does it suppose that the measurements are taken from the centre? In @Revelation 21, to which we referred yesterday, they are taken by an observer, but here it would seem the observer takes his level as from the centre.
S.McC. That is very interesting. We are in the very centre of the divine domain here, as the Christ, the Centre of it, is dwelling through faith in our hearts, and we look out upon the whole domain, and the measurements are from that point of vantage. It is not, as you say, an external view of it; it is an internal view out to the great scope of the divine domain.
C.H. Does it not enhance the particular place that the assembly has of association with Christ, and the intelligence that marks that vessel, that she is able to apprehend, at least, the four dimensions from the position in which she is found?
S.McC. I think it does. It is not only, you might say, from the standpoint of chapter 1 that she is looking out on the universe as the vessel of Christ's fulness and thinking about what that means to the whole universe; but here, she is looking out from the centre on the whole divine domain with the great
{308}
God-ward result in mind, that the section contemplates.
R.G.B. Is that supreme evidence of divine wisdom and love and power, that not only is there a vessel that is suited to have part in rule and influence, but a vessel suited for the response to God in fulness in affection and feeling?
S.McC. I think that is the point. It is interesting to see in that relation the difference between chapter 3 and chapter 1. In chapter 1 you work out from the richness of the family setting into the great broadened sphere in the universe of rule and administration in connection with the headship of Christ and the assembly. In chapter 3 you work in from the thought of administration into the great centre of the divine domain, with a view to the result God-ward, where there is such richness and refinement of feeling that belongs to the assembly's formation.
J.McK. In chapter 1 is the universe somewhat before God, but in chapter 3 is God the Centre of all?
S.McC. He is.
<blockquote>"Our God the Centre is, <br>His presence fills that land," (`72:2)</blockquote>
aptly describes it.
J.T.S. You stressed earlier, in regard of the being filled, that it is "*to* all the fulness of God," not 'into.' Perhaps you would say a little more to help us on that.
S.McC. I think it is helpful to see the preposition 'to,' that we are brought up to it, filled to it; so that there is not a want in any one of our souls. The fulness of God represents the outshining of Himself in Christ. Well, we might say, That is far beyond us! No, it is not! Although we are marked by creature capacity and understanding, through the majesty of divine operations we are filled to it, so that there is no sense of a lack in the presence of it. We are completely satisfied and at rest in the presence of what we know to be infinitely beyond us.
A.J.G. I think Mr. Taylor has referred to the fact that we know the love of the Christ which surpasses
{309}
knowledge, as that which holds us in the presence of this immensity of thought, so that we are not lost in it.
S.McC. Just so. It has a great steadying effect. The first night we were in Doncaster we were looking at the thought of the Christ in the epistle to the Ephesians. It is an interesting thing how much is made of the Christ. While He is officially the divine Operator, I am sure there is more in it than the thought of the official Operator, because it says, "and to know the *love* of the Christ." In operations we do not generally think of love and affection in the operator, but I think it is brought in here to give a unique touch.
A.J.G. Do you think it not only includes the known love of the Christ for the assembly, which the assembly enjoys, but also that we are impressed with the love of the Christ for the Father entering into all His movements?
S.McC. Just so, and the love of the Christ for God, for God is Christ's God, and we are to remember that. There is the perfect answer of man towards God in Christ, and He says to the overcomer in Philadelphia, "I will write upon him the name of my God." I think the love of the Christ would have a bearing that way as well as towards the assembly.
G.M.S. Reference is made in the scripture to Christ being "at his *right hand* in the heavenlies." Is it not touching to think of this great subject of the expanse, and the Lord as Man in this wonderful place in it?
S.McC. It is. We are to be impressed with the majesty that is linked with that side of things. Hebrews uses a unique expression, it speaks of "the *greatness* in the heavens," @Hebrews 8: 1. It all links together.
K.F.S. It says who "has made us sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus," Does
{310}
that convey the thought of being at home in the expanse?
S.McC. It does. That is, we are at home in the presence of divine dove and what divine love has reached and we are restful in it. We are no strangers to it, we are restful in the scene.
L.W.T. Does the last Psalm give us an impression as to how this response is to fill the universe, beginning at the centre and widening out to everything that hath breath?
S.McC. It would. I think "Praise God in his sanctuary; praise him in the firmament of his power" or "the expanse" is a remarkable reference to the inner side and the outward side. We have been speaking about the two sides. The firmament is the great expanse linked with the outward side, while the sanctuary is the inner position, you might say, where God particularly dwells; and there is praise in both spheres.
TENDERNESS
@Isaiah 53: 1 -- 3; @Genesis 29: 16, 17; @1 Chronicles 22: 1 -- 5; @1 Chronicles 29: 1
In reading these passages tonight one has in mind a certain feature of the humanity of Jesus, linked with the thought of tenderness. I want to speak of it first of all, as it is referred to in connection with Himself in the prophetic writings in the book of Isaiah, where the prophet alludes to Him as "a tender sapling" before Jehovah. Then I want to refer to how that feature comes out in the assembly in the Gentile world in relation to Paul's ministry as typified in Leah. Leah, as we know, is a type of the
{311}
assembly in relation to the Gentile world. And then I want to refer to that feature as it is to appear in us individually as it is suggested in the passages in Chronicles, where it appears in Solomon, first in relation to the house, in what we might call the rough side of the building and the construction, the nails and the iron and the joists; and then latterly from the palatial and refined side of the dwelling place of God as in @1 Chronicles 29 where it says, "this palace is not to be for man, but for Jehovah Elohim." It is important that our souls should be nourished on this feature of humanity as it is seen in Jesus, because it is so contrary to all that is around us in this modern age especially, where, in the world controlled by the enemy of all that is spiritual and divine, hardness seems to have such a place. Where, in the life of teenage the enemy seeks to make it important that we should not be 'soft' as they say around us, but that hardness and self-confidence should be developed. Hardness has its place in a certain relation in God's affairs, but not in what is linked with our lives generally, as growing up before God and in the development of the work of God in us. Paul said to Timothy that he was to endure hardness as a good soldier of Jesus Christ. Hardness is all right in army life. The rigours of army life, involving the open fields of battle and the strong disciplinary measures and routine, call for hardness, not only in man's world, but in God's world, in the world of His testimony. It is important that hardness should be endured in that relation. But what the enemy is seeking to do is to bring hardness into families, hardness into the assembly, hardness into young souls, where tenderness should be present. Amenability to be divinely impressionable is a great thing. Every one of us should earnestly desire not to lose it. If we feel that we are not marked by an impressionable state of soul and of heart we should greatly desire it. We
{312}
shall see, when we come to Leah, that one feature of the Gentile world is hardness. You remember how Paul alludes in @Ephesians 4 to certain things that occur in the Gentile world because of hardness, the nations walking in the vanity of their mind, being darkened in understanding, and by reason of the hardness of their hearts having cast off all feeling. That is the Gentile world. But, as we shall see, into the Gentile world has come the operations of God to secure a company in which there will be correspondence to the humanity of Jesus in this feature of tenderness. There are many features of the humanity of Jesus that we do well to contemplate and feed upon. What must it be to God to have, in this modern age, persons that are like Jesus! If we could only get a sense in our souls of how precious and pleasurable in the sight of God the features of that kind of humanity are, we would perhaps lend ourselves more to the skill of divine operations so that over against the adversative circumstances and difficult material that we afford, there might be wrought in us the features of that humanity. Isaiah in this chapter is referring to what the Lord was in His humiliation. You will remember what the writer of the epistle to the Hebrews says about Jesus in the priestly station and office in glory, that "such a high priest became us, holy, harmless, undefiled, separated from sinners, and become higher than the heavens," @Hebrews 7: 26. Think of that expression "become higher than the heavens"! It is not an arbitrary act; it seems as if the features of His humanity provide a moral basis for that wonderful position of exaltation which He fills.
We do not often think of these features of the humanity of Jesus such as tenderness, and also, for instance, the feature of 'harmlessness.' What a wonderful feature of the humanity of Jesus harmlessness is! What a challenge it is to any of us as to
{313}
whether we are harmful in our influence. Could it be said of us that we are harmless? You will remember how the letter that brings before us Christian experience, Philippians alludes to the children of God as harmless. It is a feature of the children of God, that they are harmless. Are we harmless, or are we careless about what we say and what we do; not bothering about who may be damaged, or who may be impaired by our careless conversation, or deportment, or behaviour? How important it is that we should be like Jesus in that feature of His humanity, that we should be harmless. When we think of the apostle Paul and of all the things that they accused him of at Corinth and the way that his enemies spoke of him, yet when he writes the second letter he draws attention to this feature of humanity as seen in himself, and his service among them; he says, "Receive us: we have injured no one, we have ruined no one," @2 Corinthians 7: 2. What levitical skill and quality in service is seen in Paul! Think of that feature of harmlessness! When we go out at night, young people, is our conversation harmful or is it harmless? It is so easy to stir up the propensities of the flesh in one another; and especially those that are older, that have to do with those that are younger, how important it is that we should be like Jesus, that we should be harmless, that we should injure no one, that we should ruin no one. There are persons whose influence has been ruin to some, leading them into the paths of carelessness and the paths of sin and shame. How important it is that we should be harmless, like Jesus, and harmless as the children of God. And then this feature of tenderness. What a feature it is! It says, "he shall grow up before him as a tender sapling." He is alluding to the arm of Jehovah. He is alluding to divine intervention in Jesus, and he comes to this chapter that is so replete, so full with references to the moral glory of Jesus. How
{314}
we need to be nourished, in the midst of all that obtains around us, on the features of humanity as seen in Jesus and especially this feature. You will remember that we had today how in the midst of difficult circumstances there was a place that was prepared for the woman in the wilderness and it was a place where she was to be nourished. It was not a place where she was to be instructed; she was an instructed woman, for, "clothed with the sun, and the moon under her feet," speaks of all that attached to the former glory under the old covenant, and the "twelve stars" refers to that. They all would speak of her intelligence, her apprehension of the place in relation to the great operations of God in administration and government. So that it was not a place exactly for instruction. Thank God for the places of instruction. Thank God for the fellowship meetings and the three-day meetings and all the meetings. But, dear brethren, let us think of the nourishing. She was to be nourished. And what better nourishment could be afforded any one of us than the food that the humanity of Jesus affords, the features of which humanity are so wondrously delineated in the holy record in the gospels. A tender sapling! What it must have been to God, as we think of Jesus in Luke's gospel, as we think of all the stages of human growth physically, as they were seen in Jesus -- the Babe, the Boy, and the Man -- the tender sapling growing up before the Lord. Think of what it must have been to God! Think of what it was to God to have an Elizabeth and a Zacharias walking blameless in all the commandments. Think of what it was to God to have a Simeon, under the touch and impulse of the Spirit, ready to move at divine direction. Think of what it was to God to have an Anna, in her aged years, so burning in holy desire in regard to the subject that filled her mind and thoughts as she spoke to all those that waited for redemption in
{315}
Israel. Think of what all that was to God, and Mary herself, in her subjection, the bondmaid of the Lord, ready for what the Lord would do. But think of the coming into the midst of all this, and the growing up in the midst of it all, this tender sapling! What food for our affections! In the early years of Jesus life, He was a Babe, and what a Babe! As we go back into the secret inner history of the years that are linked with His humanity here, as the Psalms prophetically afford us an inlet into them; what must there have been for God? "Thou art he that took me out of the womb; thou didst make me trust, upon my mother's breasts," @Psalm 22: 9. Think of what all that was for God. The food that it was to God, as God refers to His food in the Old Testament, "My bread for my offerings," @Numbers 28: 2. Think of what it was to God as He comes into the realm of human language and can speak of His food! Think of what humanity was in all its normality in Jesus, over against its abnormality in the world as ruined by sin; the fair creation that God had designed and made, ruined by sin, and human life in it so affected and dislocated by sin. What must it have been to God and to His affections to take account of these stages of tender growth in Jesus -- the Babe and the Boy! There are boys and there are girls here tonight; it is wonderful to think that Jesus was a boy like you, sin apart. He was five years old, He was eight years old, He was ten years old, He was twelve years old; and so on up the line of the years. So that, whatever your problems may be, whatever your difficulties at school may be -- and sometimes in our early years we have many problems -- remember that the One who is our Priest on high is the One who was in these circumstances of human life here below. And all the energy of His sympathetic love exercised towards us in priestly service, is, if I might say speaking reverently and soberly, enriched by His
{316}
human experiences here below. He knew what it was to be under the influence and control of parents; we are living in a day when natural affection is cast off. Thank God for the assembly, the realm of salvation, where the tenderness of family links in what is instituted by God is preserved and maintained. While Christianity involves what is spiritual, it does not impair what is natural in the sense in which I am speaking of it. Indeed, as by the power of the Spirit we take up the relationships in what is natural, there is an added glory to them that there could not be in unregenerate men. How thankful we ought to be that we are in the realm where this kind of humanity is known and appreciated! It is appreciated in heaven, but it is appreciated here below. A tender sapling! Think of it! As we grow up we tend to get crystallised and tend to get hardened and we begin to draw away the shoulder; we want to assert our own rights, we want to be left alone and to do as we please and to choose what we like and to go where we think best ourselves. It says of Jesus that He went down to Nazareth with His parents, and was in subjection to them. Think of the grace of it! On the one hand, there was the assertion, in such a conscious way at twelve years old, of His sonship, as he says, "did ye not know that I ought to be occupied in my Father's business?" and on the other hand, accepting the circumstances into which through grace He had come, and so it says, "And he went down with them and came to Nazareth, and he was in subjection to them," Oh, the tenderness that is seen in Jesus! The tender sapling! Think of what this prophet says of Jesus earlier on, "The Lord Jehovah hath given me the tongue of the instructed, that I should know how to succour by a word him that is weary. He wakeneth morning by morning, he wakeneth mine ear to hear as the instructed," chapter 50: 4. We have often thought of Samuel, how
{317}
God wakened Samuel's ear in the tenderest stages of life, but think of what it must have been to God to have the ear of Jesus, in the perfection of a humanity in a condition that had never before been seen under His eye here below; for there never was a condition in the world like the condition of the humanity that Jesus came into, and there never will be again. He laid it down in death never to resume it, but the traits of that humanity, the grace of it, is carried forward into the new order of things, for the traits of that humanity belonged to an order of manhood that came out of heaven, and what food these traits furnish for our souls, "A tender sapling"! You want to know how this feature of tenderness can be preserved? I believe it is on the line of the scripture I have read, our morning by morning links with God. How do we awaken? Does God awake us? Or does the alarm clock? I speak soberly, dear brethren, and reverently. It says of Jesus that God awakened Him, "He wakeneth morning by morning, he wakeneth mine ear to hear as the instructed." It was not just one morning, "He wakeneth morning by morning." I speak reverently and guardedly and soberly, but think of what it must have been to God when Jesus was asleep. Jesus slept, as we do; He was "wearied with the way he had come" according to @John 4, and He slept in the boat, according to @Luke 8. Oh, mystery of mysteries, wonder of wonders, that Jesus who is over all God blessed for ever, should come into that condition of humanity where He could taste and know all the circumstances that we experience, sin apart. You can understand how God was watching every movement of Jesus; and, as He slept, think of how God would be watching for the morning! We often speak about our watching for the morning, but have you ever thought of God watching for the morning? He was watching for the morning with Jesus, so that He could waken His ear. He could give Him a word,
{318}
in season, to speak as the instructed. Oh, those tender links with God! And they are to affect us as we feed on them, dear brethren. How do we waken? What comes into our minds when we awaken? How did we go to sleep? Were we reading a novel in a secret room, maybe, where our parents did not see us, where we may have had it under the mattress, or hidden in some crevice? Was that how we went to sleep? Or did we go to sleep committing our souls into the hands of Him to whom we can say "Preserve me, O God: for I trust in thee," @Psalm 16: 1. Think of how God has delight in waiting for the morning in the life of a person like that, so that He can waken our ear and that He can give us a word. How does ministry come? How do words in season come, if not through God wakening our ears in the morning? There is nothing like the morning to get an impression, when the body has been rested in sleep. God does not deprive us of sleep. He giveth His beloved sleep, as it says, "It is vain for you to rise up early, to lie down late, to eat the bread of sorrows: so to his beloved one he giveth sleep," @Psalm 127: 2. It is a wonderful thing, the normality of the life of piety in its relations with God. And think of God waiting for Jesus to awake, when He could waken His ear to hear as the instructed. And the Lord Jesus conscious of it. I am not seeking to be sentimental in speaking on such a holy subject as the humanity of Jesus, far be the thought, but this is the Spirit of Christ, in the prophet, giving us the words of Jesus prophetically. "He wakeneth morning by morning, he wakeneth mine ear to hear as the instructed." So that as we are awakened we should be like Jesus. We should have a conscious sense of God entering into the awakening, God having to say to us, for He loves us. He loves us so much that He would delight to waken our ears and commune with us and we with Him. How blessed to nestle into the
{319}
warmth and the fulness of our relations with our Father and our God in these circumstances. How Jesus knew them! "He shall grow up before him as a tender sapling." What it must have been to God over against all the hardness around on every hand! He was a root out of a dry ground. The soil, as it were, added nothing to Jesus; it imparted no sap to that tender sapling. Where did the sap come from? The sap came from heaven. It came from those wonderful links with His Father and His God. His humanity was nourished in that relation, for Judaism afforded nothing to Him. In the midst of the teachers and the doctors of the law, it says He was hearing and asking questions. Where did His knowledge come from? He was like the root out of dry ground; the ground was arid, as far as He was concerned, and yet that root out of dry ground becomes this tender sapling. We are to be helped to see that our circumstances, however much they may seem to be against us and devoid of what would help us spiritually, as our relations are right with God, they are intended to develop us in this feature of the humanity of Jesus -- tenderness.
I want now to refer to Leah in Genesis. It is very striking that it says of Leah that "the eyes of Leah were tender." As I said, dear brethren, Leah represents what the assembly is as in Paul's ministry. Rachel had the first place in Jacob's affections. The Lord Jesus came to His own -- Rachel -- but they received Him not, but in the ways of God, Leah was given to Him. She was the hated wife, as we have often had our attention drawn to it, and in the book of the Acts we can see how Leah was hated; on the Jewish side there was the hatred of Leah. She is a type of the assembly as in the Gentile position in relation to Paul's ministry. "The eyes of Leah were tender." That is, this correspondence with Christ's humanity comes out in Leah, not in Rachel. It says,
{320}
"Rachel was of beautiful form and beautiful countenance," and @Romans 9 shows the beautiful form and the beautiful countenance of Rachel as in the divine mind, as it speaks of "whose is the adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and the law-giving, and the service, and the promises" (verse 4). What beautiful form and what countenance which would link with the glory. But Leah brings in the tender side; she brings in that side that corresponds with Christ on the line of tenderness; so that we get, in Paul's ministry in the Gentile world, a development of the truth of the body. You do not get it in the Jewish world, in the world of the twelve. The great idea of the body, the organism, the delicateness and the sensitiveness of it, the tender relations between one another, is developed in the Gentile world through Paul's ministry. Not that I am saying it was not there in the early days of the Acts, but I am referring to the way that the scripture presents the truth of the assembly as the body as it comes out in the Gentile world, in the tender, delicate, sensitive, balanced relations of the saints between one another, and between the assembly and Christ, as in Colossians and Ephesians. We know that in the basic and foundational epistles, Romans and Corinthians, the relations of the body to the Head are not brought forward. We have no allusion in the foundational epistles to the body's relations with the Head, the great point in the basic and foundational epistles in the body being our relations with one another. In Romans this is to save us from independency, and in Corinthians it is to save us from clericalism and the operation of man's will in the assembly of God, the anointed vessel. But in the matured epistles, in the epistles that bring on the heavenly side and bring in the formation that belongs to the assembly, we have the delicateness and sensitiveness and tenderness of the assembly's links with Christ in the wonderful
{321}
organism of the body. What the body is to Christ, as Head and the impulses that come into the assembly from Christ, how delicate they are! How wonderful! All this, I think, is linked with the Leah side. Because you will notice that we get in the children that are born of Leah, first Reuben, which means 'See! a son'; that brings in the tender side which is well set out in Solomon as we shall see. You remember what he said in @Proverbs 4: 3, "I was a son unto my father, tender and an only one in the sight of my mother." Sonship, as nurtured in right parental settings, brings in that wonderful feature of tenderness, and Leah was one of those that built the house of Israel. We are told in Ruth in regard to Rachel and Leah, "which two did build the house of Israel," chapter 4: 11. There is no bickering referred to in the book of Ruth, no feelings of rivalry there, but as the line of David is coming on to view, introduced through the marital links of Boaz with Ruth, we get the great thought of the building of the house of Israel. Solomon is a product of that for he comes into the house of Israel, and in that section in Proverbs he is tender and beloved in the sight of his mother. Then we get the thought of Simeon, meaning 'hearing.' What tenderness is needed in hearing the word of God! We have been speaking about the Lord Jesus, in Isaiah, having His ear wakened morning by morning and hearing. We want to be good Simeons! We want to be ready to hear; we want to be like Samuel, young brethren, "Speak, Jehovah, for thy servant heareth." It is Leah that brings in these features. Then it says another son was born, and he was called Levi, which means 'united.' No thought of division, no thought of distance, but the idea of uniting comes in, which is a great word in Christianity. Not that I am going to apply it to union in the exalted side, in Ephesians; but the germ of it is in the word 'united.' It brings in much into the spiritual mind.
{322}
Levi comes in on the line of Leah. How Paul's ministry develops the thought of what is united even in @Romans 7, there is the thought that we should be to another. The idea is that we are united to Him who is raised from the dead. The germ of union is there. Then in @1 Corinthians 6: 17 we have "But he that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit." These are wonderful thoughts, dear brethren, and they all come in in relation to Leah, by way of Paul's ministry, all on this line of tenderness. What an impression you would get of tenderness with Paul as you read his delicate language in the epistle to Philemon and the love letter to the Philippians! What delicateness, what tenderness! "My brethren, beloved and longed for, my joy and crown," @Philippians 4: 1. What the saints were to him! All this comes in on the line of Leah, not on the line of Rachel. Then the last is Judah, meaning 'praise.' Think of how the assembly gospel brings in the line of tenderness in connection with the praise of God. Think of how Jesus Himself in praising the Father, the Lord of the heaven and of the earth, in @Matthew 11: 25, had before His soul's view the babes, the tender impressionable state, that subject of divine operations in those who had heard Him. Then as He comes into Jerusalem in kingly and royal rights and glory, the children are there, and He says, "Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings thou hast perfected praise." Think of how Paul's ministry makes way, like David's, for every stage of growth in the family of God. Think of what Timothy was to Paul. Think of the tenderness, and think of how the praise of God is linked with that side of things in Paul's ministry.
I want to say a word now as to Solomon. It is a glorious section that we have read from, and it is linked with the fortieth year of David's reign. If we take an extended view of this whole section from chapter 22 to the end, it is linked with the fortieth
{323}
year of David's reign, and what a time it was, what a time of glory. You might say, Well, the glory is so great, there is so much doing, so much activity, so much preparation, so much construction and plans for construction on hand, that this feature will be passed over. But at the very doorway into this section it is mentioned, and at the very exit from this section it is mentioned; I refer to chapters 22 and 29. Is it not striking, dear brethren, that after the iron and the nails for the doors and the joists and the brass in abundance are mentioned, David should say, "Solomon my son is young and tender." I would speak to the 'Davids' here; I would speak to the line of experience in the assembly. In having to do with the nails and with the iron, so essential in construction, and the joists and what is referred to in the brass, involving matters that come up in regard to sin and the dealing with sin, and the principles that enter into the holding of things together, let us never forget that which is, as it were, in the foreground, in relation to it all: "Solomon my son is young and tender." You will remember how the Lord Jesus said at the end of John's gospel, "Feed my lambs." Think of that! A gospel that begins with such a vista of glory as to the Person of Christ, ends with such a touch of tenderness, "Feed my lambs." We need to think of the lambs of Christ's flock, dear brethren, in our gatherings. Now, in chapter 29, it is not so much what is connected with our side and the application of the truth and maintaining what is due to God, but it is God's side, it is the palatial side. It is the side of refinement now, and we have this word: "David said to all the congregation, Solomon my son, the one whom God has chosen, is young and tender, and the work is great." Let us not think that the young people are to be kept out of this matter. You may say the ministry is beyond me, the truth is above me, but
{324}
Solomon is right in the midst of it, young and tender. That is what we love to see. What a sight to heaven to see the living creatures and the features of the living creatures allied with the twenty-four elders in the maintenance of all that is due to the throne, in consistency and in keeping with it. What it is to heaven to see the young and the old going on together as seen in David and Solomon. David the one in whom the ripened fruits of spiritual experience with God are seen, and Solomon the one in whom the features of tenderness, impressionableness and amenability to divine touch are seen. How wonderful these things are, dear brethren! The palace which is for God, which is so great, requires these things. God loves these thoughts in His palace. There is what David represents and what Solomon represents but they all fit into the great thought of the assembly in its majesty and glory, as the greatest creature vessel, the vessel that is nearest to Deity, the palace which is for God, and not for man. Think of the blending of these precious thoughts. It is like the half-opened flowers alongside of the cherubim in the walls of the house in @1 Kings 6: 29.
May God help us as to this feature of the humanity of Jesus -- tenderness, and may more room be made for it in us and amongst us, for His Name's sake.
