{#Selected Ministry - Volume 1}
{1}
<h1>Selected Ministry - Volume 1</h1>
MUSINGS ON THE EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS
J G BELLETT
Chapters 1 and 2
The epistle to the Hebrews strikingly illustrates one quality of the Book of God. It may be read in various lights; yet no one ray interferes with another. In six or seven ways this epistle could be read with the greatest ease. I will specially look now at the first two chapters. It opens the heavens to you as they now are.
How blessed is the introduction of such a thing to the heart! You look up and see the physical heavens above you; but it is only the superficial heavens you see. This epistle introduces the inner heavens to you, and not in a physical, but in a moral character. It introduces us to the glories surrounding and attaching to the Lord Jesus, now accepted in the heavens. We are thus enabled to see the heavens in which He has sat down, what He is about there, and what will succeed those heavens. When the Lord Jesus was here, we learn in @Matthew 3, the heavens opened to get a sight of Him. There was an object here then worthy of the attention of the heavens. He returned - and the heavens had an object they had never known before - a glorified Man. And now it is the office of our epistle to show us the heavens as the place of this glorified Man. And as in @Matthew 3 we get the heavens opened to look down at Christ here, so in the Hebrews you get the heavens opened that you may look up at Christ there.
{2}
But supposing you ask, Is that all the history of the heavens? Have you gone to the end? Indeed I have not. In chapters 4 and 5 of the Revelation, we get the heavens preparing for the judgment of the earth. Then at the close of the volume, I find the heavens not only the residence of the glorified Man, but of the glorified church. What a book it is that can present to us such secrets as these! It is a divine library. You take down one volume from your shelf, and read about the heavens; in another volume you read of man in ruins; take down a third and you read of God in grace; and so on, in precious, wondrous variety.
Now we will set ourselves down before chapters 1 and 2. "When he had by himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high". That is just taking up the pledge I gave - that the epistle is going to open to us the heavens. The Lord has been here purging our sins, and He has gone up to occupy the heavens as the Purger of our sins. Supposing I had been to a distant country, I might describe it to you so as to fill you with delight, and with desire to visit it. But when the Holy Spirit comes and shows you the distant heavens, He does more than this - He shows you that your interests are consulted there. Our Representative is seated in the highest place, and seated there in that very character. Is it possible to have a more intimate link with the place? It is a wonder we are not all on the wing to get there as soon as we can! To think that because He came to die a wretched death for us, He is seated there! I defy you to have a richer interest in the heavens than God has given you.
Now in verse 4, we see that not only as the Purger of our sins, but in the verity of His Manhood He is there,
{3}
seated above the angelic hosts. We have seen already what an interest we have in Him as the Purger of our sins. Now the chapter introduces Him to us as the Son of man above angels. Man has been preferred to angels. Man in the person of Christ has been seated above angels, though it be in Michael or in Gabriel. The whole of chapter 1 is thus occupied in giving you two sights of Christ in heaven. What two secrets they are! The Purger of our sins, and very Man, like ourselves, seated at the right hand of the Majesty on high.
I read the first four verses of chapter 2 as a parenthesis. Do not you like these parentheses? The Holy Spirit speaks for our understanding. We see friends when conversing together, turning a little aside to converse about one another; so the apostle speaks here - 'I am teaching you wonderful things. Do take heed that you let not such things fall on a careless ear'. We must not be mere scholars. If we are disciples of a living Master in the school of God, we shall have our consciences exercised while we are pursuing our lesson. That is what the apostle is doing here. That parenthesis falls on the ear most sweetly and acceptably.
But though a parenthesis, it opens a new glory to us. How the field of Scripture teems with fruit! It is not a thing you have to till diligently and get but little fruit. That parenthesis contains another glory of Christ. (Surely we ought not to need exhortation!) He is seated there as an Apostle - my Apostle. What does that mean? He is a preacher to me. God spake in times past by the prophets, He is speaking to us now by the Son; and Christ in the heavens is the Apostle of christianity. And what is His
{4}
subject? Salvation. That salvation which, as the Purger of our sins, He wrought out for us; and which, as the Apostle of our profession, He makes known to us. There is more furnishing of the heavens for you.
Then verse 5 returns to the theme of chapter 1. It goes on with the distinctive glories of Christ, as super-eminent, above angels. "For unto the angels hath he not put in subjection the world to come". What is "the world to come"? It is the millennial age, which we read of in @Psalm 8. We have three conditions of the Son of man here. "Thou madest him a little lower than the angels;" "thou crownedst him with glory and honour;" "and didst set him over the works of thy hands". So that the world to come is not put in subjection to angels, but to the Son of man. Now you find that you have an interest in this glorified Man. I was saying that if I went to a distant land and described to you its scenic wonders, you would desire a sight of them. But this epistle shows you that you have a personal interest in these glories. Is there a single point that the Son of man has travelled in which you have not an interest? The apostle traces it here for you. So that again I say this epistle is opening the distant heavens to your view, and showing you the glories that attach to Christ, and that you have an immediate, personal interest in those glories.
In verse 10 a new thought comes in, "to make the captain of their salvation perfect through sufferings". Only pause here for a moment. It became the glory of God to give you a perfect Saviour. Do you believe it? What thoughts rise in the soul when we come to that! Are you in possession of Him, so that you never in a single thought are tempted to look beyond Him? We have got an
{5}
unquestionable, infallible salvation, one that will stand the shock of every coming day.
From verse 11, we further see our interest in the glorified Man. "Both he that sanctifieth and they who are sanctified are all of one: for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren". Not ashamed! Tell it out that earth and heaven may hear! This glorified Man has brethren - the elect of God. He is "not ashamed", because of their dignity. Not merely because of His grace, but because of their personal dignity. He has appointed me a share of His own throne. Is He ashamed of His own doings - of His own adoptings? Do not get creeping, cold thoughts as you read Scripture. Our thoughts of Christ should be such as to take captive our old man - to bear us on eagles¬ wings. "In the midst of the church will I sing praise unto thee". Christ raising and leading the song of the ransomed ones, and not ashamed to be found in their company! "And again, I will put my trust in him". He did that when He was here, and we do it now. "And again, Behold I and the children which God hath given me". There is our interest in the glorified Man.
Then we return to see what He was in humiliation. "He took not on ... angels; but he took on ... the seed of Abraham". He left the angels where He found them. The angels excelled in strength. They kept their first estate, and He left them there. Man excelled in wickedness, and He came and linked Himself with man. Then verse 17 introduces us to another glory that attaches to Christ in the heavens. We see Him there as our High Priest, ever waiting with propitiation for sins, and succour for sorrows. The epistle teems with divine glories. It is massive in
{6}
glory, and ponderous in the divine thoughts that press into its short space.
Chapters 3 and 4
We were observing that one leading characteristic of this epistle is that it gives us a look into heaven as it now is - not as it was in @Genesis 1, and not as it will be in @Revelation 4 or @Revelation 21. The heaven of @Genesis 1 had no glorified Man in it, no Apostle, no High Priest. The heaven of Hebrews has all these. That being the general character of the epistle, we looked at the Lord Jesus as in that heaven. Then we were observing how the Lord is there as a glorified Man - as the Purger of our sins - as our Apostle preaching salvation, and as the High Priest making reconciliation for sins. Every page is fruitful in casting up the glories of the Lord Jesus, now in heaven.
Now we will take up chapters 3 and 4. Having been introduced to the heavens, where Christ is, and to the Christ that is in those heavens, chapters 3 and 4 turn a little round on themselves, and look a little sharply at us and tell us to take care now that we are travelling along the road in company with Him. The first thought is that we are to consider Him in His faithfulness. The exhortation here is commonly misunderstood. For what are we to consider the Apostle and High Priest of our profession? Is it to imitate Him? The religious mind says so. But that is not the point of the passage at all. I am to consider Him as faithful, for my sake, to God; faithful so that I might be saved eternally. If I do not consider Him so, I have more than blunted the point of the passage, and lost the sense of
{7}
grace. The word should be not "was faithful", but 'is faithful', or 'being faithful'. Not in walking down here, but now in heaven. I look up and see Him discharging these offices, faithful to Him that appointed Him. What business have I to imitate Him in His high priesthood? I am to consider Him for my comfort.
What a constellation of grace there is in all that! The grace of God that appointed Him, the grace of the Son that discharges the work, and the grace that opens chapter 3, is infinite in magnificence. Could there be more sublime exhortation, or more divine doctrine? We get the Son, in the highest heavens, there seated as the Purger of our sins, the Apostle and High Priest of our profession, and could any exhortation be more divine than that which tells me to sit still, and look at Him in His faithfulness up there?
Then in verses 3 and 4 and onward, we get further glories unfolded in contrast with Moses. The first dispensation is here called a house. It was a servant, to serve a coming Christ - Moses and the house are identical. All the activities of that dispensation were worth nothing if they did not bear testimony to a coming Christ: therefore it was a servant. When the Lord comes, on the other hand, He comes as a Son, to claim that which is His own as His own; and the whole thing now depends on this - will the house, over which He is set, be faithful to Him?
What is your faithfulness? To continue in confidence and hold the rejoicing of the hope firm to the end. 'Christ for me, Christ for me!' I will take nothing but this all-sufficient Christ. Cling to Him day by day, till the wilderness journey is over. Then you are part and parcel of that house over which He presides as a Son. He not only
{8}
presides over it, but He claims it as His own - a dearer thought. It is quite right to be subject to Him, but He tells you to lie near His heart. Faithfulness is not merely being subject to the headship of Christ. If I am lying on His bosom, then I am faithful. So that when the Spirit comes to exhort, in chapters 3 and 4, He has not left the high and wondrous ground of chapters 1 and 2.
Then, having come to that point, He turns aside to @Psalm 95. If you begin to read at @Psalm 92 and read to the close of @Psalm 101, you will find it a beautiful little millennial volume. It is exhortings and awakenings of the Spirit of faith in Israel, summoning them to look forward to the rest of God.
How is that brought in here? The wilderness journey of Israel is a beautiful, lively picture of the journey the believer is now taking from the cross to the glory. People sometimes, at the opening of chapter 4, turn it on themselves. But rest to the conscience is not the thing that is thought of at all. It assures us that we are out of Egypt and looking towards Canaan. The danger is, not lest the blood should not be on the lintel, but lest we should break down by the way, as thousands did in the wilderness. It never calls you to re-investigate the question of having found rest in the blood, but to take care how you travel along the road. When He speaks of rest, it is the rest of the kingdom He talks of, not the rest of the conscience. Then He calls the whole age through which we are passing one day - "To day". It was a short day to the dying thief, a short day to the martyred Stephen. A longer day to Paul, and a longer day still to John; but let the wilderness journey be short or long, it is one day, and you are to hold
{9}
by Christ to the very end. If you are to be partakers of Christ, you must hold fast to the end.
Now, what is the Christ of verse 14? A Christ crucified? No, Christ glorified. You are made partakers of Christ in the kingdom if you hold fast by Christ crucified. Let this "to day" ring in the heart and conscience every hour. Holding to a crucified Christ is my title to the rest of a glorified Christ. Two things contest this with you - sin and unbelief. Do you not recognise these two enemies as you pass along? Shall I continue in sin? Am I to give place to one wrong thought? I may be overtaken, but am I to treat them other than as enemies? Then unbelief is an action of the soul towards God. You and I do not know what saintly character is - what it is to be between Egypt and Canaan - if we are not aware that those two things stand out to withstand our passage every day.
Chapter 4 still pursues the subject. The Christ of chapter 3: 14 is the rest of chapter 4; Christ glorified - rest glorious. He has us out of Egypt. The exhortation attaches to a people out of Egypt. We have left the blood-sprinkled lintel behind. The glorious Canaan is before us. Take heed lest you come short of it. "Unto us was the gospel preached, as well as unto them". The gospel, not of the blood of Christ, but of the glory of Christ. It took one form in the ear of the Israelites and it takes another form to us; but to them, as to us, rest was preached.
Then He beautifully falls back on the Sabbath rest of the Creator. The blessed Creator provided Himself a rest after creation. He promised Himself a rest in Canaan, after bringing them through the wilderness. Adam disturbed His creation-rest. Israel disturbed His Canaan-rest. Is He,
{10}
therefore, disappointed in His rest? No; He has found it in Christ. The secret of the whole Book of God is, God retreating into Christ, when man in every way had disappointed Him. Christ is the One who has worked out that rest, and who holds it now, and it remains with Him both for God and for His saints. "Therefore it remaineth that some must enter therein". It is no longer a fallible thing, depending on Adam, or on Israel, therefore let us take care that we do not come short of it.
Now we get two ways in which to use Christ. We had two enemies in the end of chapter 3, now we have two uses of Christ in the end of chapter 4. We are to use Him as the Word of God, and as the High Priest of our profession. Is that the way I am using Him? These two uses stand opposed to sin and unbelief. Let the Word of God discern the thoughts and intents of the heart. Instead of giving place to your lusts and vanities, invite the entrance of the two-edged sword, that makes no allowance for a single bit of sin. And when you have dragged out the enemy - found some favourite lust lying in this corner, and some unsuspected vanity in that, what are you to do with them? Take them to Christ, and let His high priesthood dispose of them, in the mercy and grace that are in it.
There we pause for the present. We have seen the heavens opened, and looked in, and found there a Man arrayed in glories, every one of which I have an interest in. Then comes the exhortation. Two enemies beset you - take care. Instead of yielding to them, make use of the two-edged sword; and when you have found them out, take them to Jesus. There is a beautiful suitability between the Christ that is exhibited up above, in chapters 1 and 2,
{11}
and you and me as we are exhibited here below, in all the characteristics of chapters 3 and 4.
Chapters 5 and 6
We will read now to verse 10 of chapter 5; and from there until the close of chapter 6. We may observe that the apostle turns aside to a parenthetic warning. He is full of that style; and our style with one another is full of it. Such little breaks and interruptions in a discourse are always grateful to us.
In the first ten verses of chapter 5 a most weighty matter is introduced to our thoughts. In the first verse we get a general abstract thought of priesthood. It is that thing which serves men in their relationships to God. Then the character of service is presented to us - "That he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins;" that is, that He may both offer what is pleasing to God, and effect expiation for us before God. He stands to conduct our interest with God in whatever form. He is "taken from among men" that He can have compassion on the ignorant, and on them that are out of the way. He is not taken from among angels, therefore we read in Timothy, "the man Christ Jesus". God, in ordaining a Priest for us, has chosen One who can have compassion. We find at the close of chapter 7 that the Lord Jesus was separate from infirmity. But the priest here was one who by reason of infirmity could sympathise. The Lord Jesus had to learn how to sympathise, as well as to learn obedience by the things which He suffered.
Under the Old Testament scriptures, two persons are distinctly set in the office of the priesthood - Aaron in
{12}
@Leviticus 8 and @Leviticus 9, and Phinehas in @Numbers 25. The difference between them was this: Aaron was simply called into the priesthood; Phinehas acquired a title to it. When we come to the Lord Jesus, we find that both these, Aaron and Phinehas, are seen in Him. He was called of God, as was Aaron. Aaron was a mere called priest. The priesthood of @Numbers 25 stands in contrast with Aaron's. Phinehas was not called, as was Aaron, but he acquired his title. How did he do this? He made an atonement for Israel in the day of their great breach, touching the daughters of Baal-Peor, and enabled the Lord to look with satisfaction again at His erring camp. Phinehas stood forward to avenge the quarrel of righteousness and to make atonement for the sin of the people. "And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Phinehas ... hath turned my wrath away from the children of Israel ... Wherefore say, Behold, I give unto him my covenant of peace ... the covenant of an everlasting priesthood" (@Numbers 25: 10 - 13). Nothing can be finer than this. You could not have a more magnificent light in which to read the Christ of God, than in that act of Phinehas. Aaron was never in this way entitled to a covenant of peace. So you have these two Old Testament lights in which to read the priesthood of the Lord Jesus. He was the true Aaron and the true Phinehas. Melchisedec was the third (@Hebrews 7).
Both these are brought out here. The blessed Lord Jesus was called into office, as was Aaron; but He was in office because He made an atonement. This earth was like the outside place of the temple, where the brazen altar was. The Lord Jesus is now seated in the sanctuary of the heavens, which God has pitched, and not man, because He
{13}
has passed by the brazen altar on earth. He has passed it by, and has satisfied it. Nothing can be simpler, and yet nothing can be more mysteriously grand. How did God bear witness to the satisfaction of the brazen altar? By rending the veil. Then it is an easy thing to pass in. If God has rent the veil, am I to let it be rent for nothing? If it be now rent I have as much right to go inside as the Israelites of old were bound to keep outside. By satisfying the altar He has passed by the rent veil into the sanctuary in the heavens. All that is brought out here. He glorified not Himself to be made a High Priest.
Why is it a matter of honour to be made a high priest? You will tell me that nothing can dignify the Son of God; and I grant it. But let me ask you, Do not men know what it is to have acquired honour, as well as hereditary honours? The son of a nobleman goes to battle, and may he not acquire honours as well as his hereditary family dignities? And tell me, which will he value the most? Those which he has acquired. He himself is more honoured by them. His hereditary dignities are his, and no thanks to him; but his acquired honours are more specially his own.
Divine things are illustrated by human things. Who can add anything to Him who is God over all, blessed for ever? But the Son has been in the battle and acquired honours that would never have been His, if He had not taken up the cause of sinners; and dear and precious honours they are to Him! That word "called" is very sweet in the original. God 'saluted', 'greeted' Him, when He seated Him in the sanctuary, as He greeted Him when He seated Him on the throne, "Sit thou at my right
{14}
hand" (@Psalm 110: 1). The epistle to the Hebrews shows, in the opened heavens, a throne as well as a sanctuary.
In verses 7 - 9 we find some very weighty truths connected with ourselves. "Who in the days of his flesh" (let us mark that with holy reverence), "when he had offered up prayers and supplications with strong crying and tears unto him that was able to save him from death". The scene of that conflict was eminently marked in Gethsemane. What was the transaction there? He properly shrank from undergoing the judgment of God against sin. "And was heard for his piety". He was heard because death, the wages of sin, had no claim on Him. His claim to deliverance was allowed. Instead of the judgment of God being sent to wither His flesh, an angel was sent to strengthen Him.
Yet He suffered death. He might have claimed His own personal exemption from it, yet He went through it. He learned obedience to His commission by travelling from Gethsemane to Calvary, and He now presents Himself to the eye of every sinner on earth as the Author of eternal salvation.
We see the Lord in Gethsemane pleading, as I may express it, His title against death. His title is owned; yet, though death has no claim on Him personally, He says, "Thy will be done". He might have gone from Gethsemane to heaven; but He went the rather from Gethsemane to Calvary. So, being made perfect there, He became the Author of eternal salvation to all who receive Him. Then, when the altar was satisfied, the sanctuary received Him, and there He is.
{15}
In creation God set a man in the garden in innocence; in redemption God has set a Man in heaven, in glory. There is a glory that excelleth. The glory in redemption leaves the glory that was once in creation as a nothing.
Now we have got down to verse 10. Observe that the language of verse 10 is taken up in verse 20 of chapter 6, and the argument there has not advanced beyond this verse 10. Supposing, then, I were to take you to chapters 1 - 3 of 1 Corinthians, you would find the apostle there hindered in his teaching. 'You are carnal; I cannot teach you the rich treasures I have stored up for the church'. It is so here; only there the evil that hindered was moral; here it is doctrinal.
It was very difficult for the Hebrew to detach himself from the things in which he had been educated. He was "unskilful in the word of righteousness". The legal mind is apt to take up righteousness as Moses did, as a thing demanded from us. God takes it up as a thing that He will give us. And in the next chapter, finding this hindrance among them, he sounds an alarm, as in the opening of chapter 2 he sounded an exhortation. A carnal mind and a legal mind are two great villains. They are both little foxes that spoil the vintage of God.
Now, says the apostle, you must leave these things. I must put you down to another volume, and that volume is perfection. "For it is impossible for those who were once enlightened ..". That is, 'It is not within my reach to do it'. We must leave it to God whether they be brought back or not. It is just between themselves and God. It is a terrible thing, having known Christ, to go back to ordinances; but I have no warrant to say that it will not be forgiven in the
{16}
person of many who have thus been ensnared but have come back.
Chapter 7
To look carefully at the Melchisedec priesthood of Christ is important to our souls. Therefore, for the present, we will lay aside the parenthesis at the close of chapter 6, and read part of chapter 5 and the whole of chapter 7. We are looking at the priesthood of the Lord Jesus, as reflected in Aaron and Phinehas. Aaron, we saw, was simply called into his office; Phinehas earned his office. We will now look at the Melchisedec phase of the same priesthood.
Supposing I said to you that this world is a scene of forfeited life - you would understand me. Life is but suspended death. To return to life is to return to God. God is not the God of the dead, but of the living. Sin worked the forfeiture of life; consequently, if I can make a return to life, I make a return to God. In two characters God visits this world - as a Quickener, and as a Judge. @John 5 tells us that we are all interested in one or other of these visits. Now it is the office of this epistle to let every poor believer in Jesus know that he has returned to life, and that his business now is with the living God and with God the Quickener. "The living God", is an expression that occurs often in this epistle. "Departing from the living God", "To serve the living God", "The city of the living God". The living God thus occupies the field of my vision, both now and in glory. I am now not to depart from Him, which intimates that I have got back to Him. I have escaped from
{17}
the region of death and got back to the region of life; and by-and-by in glory I shall find "the city of the living God".
The question is, How have I got back to Him? The epistle beautifully unfolds that. It is a magnificent moral subject to trace the Lord Jesus in His ministry through the four gospels, and see Him, from the beginning to the close of His history, displaying Himself as the Son of the living God in this world. To mark Him at Gethsemane - to mark Him giving up His Spirit - then as the Son of the living God rising from the tomb, and bestowing the Holy Spirit. We see the Son of the living God in a scene pregnant with death. It is the office of this epistle to the Hebrews, very specially, to present Christ as the Son of the living God. The apostle is full of the death, and the cross of Christ. It would not be the epistle to the Hebrews, if it did not take up Christ in His vicarious character.
But though we see the Lamb on the altar, we see the vacant sepulchre too. We have remarked before that the Lord Himself always attaches to the story of His death, the story of His resurrection. "The Son of man shall be betrayed unto the chief priests and unto the scribes, and they shall condemn him to death ... and the third day he shall rise again" (@Matthew 20: 18, 19). We have the same thing here, only in a doctrinal and not an historical way. The cross is often named, but always in company with the ascension. Take the opening of the epistle "When he had by himself purged our sins". How did He purge them? By death. Death looks at you at the very opening of this epistle; but at once you read, "Sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high". Again we read, "That he by the grace of God should taste death for every man". Does the
{18}
story end there? No; He is "crowned with glory and honour". What is done historically in the gospels, is taken up doctrinally in the Hebrews.
The Holy Spirit is considering the living God in the Person of Jesus, as Jesus was exhibiting the living God in His own Person. So again chapter 2, "That through death" - death looks again at you, but what follows - "he might destroy him that had the power of death". Have I not again the empty sepulchre, as well as the altar and the Lamb? I go in this epistle to find an empty grave; but not as Mary Magdalene, and the other Mary. I expect to find it empty. Their mistake, dear women, was that they expected to find it full. I go expecting to find it empty, and I do find it so. When I see the Lamb on the altar, and the empty sepulchre, I have got hold of victorious, infallible life. That is the rock-life of which the Lord spoke to Peter.
In chapter 5 we find that in Gethsemane He transacted the question of His title, and was heard for His piety. He had a moral title to life. Then He surrendered that moral title, and took His vicarious place. From Gethsemane, He walked on to Calvary. Gethsemane was a wonderful moment. There the great question of life and death was settled between God and Christ; and instead of taking the journey He was entitled to up there, He went along the dreary road our sins put Him on down here. There is exceeding blessed interest about all that.
At Calvary, again, we find Him in death; but the moment He gave up His spirit everything felt the power of the Conqueror. He had gone down into the darkest regions of death, but the moment He touched them every one felt the power of the Conqueror. The earth quaked, the rocks
{19}
were rent, the graves were opened, and the bodies of the saints arose after His arising.
If we look in @John 20, we see not merely the vacant tomb, but the tomb containing the tokens of victory - the linen clothes lying, and the napkin, not lying with the linen clothes, but wrapped together in a place by itself. We shall never be able to read the mystery of the Christ of God, if we do not remember Him as the Son of the living God in the midst of death, getting victories worthy of Himself. We see in His death the rending of the veil. In the grave, we see the napkin wrapped together in a place by itself, to tell the story of conquest. We see Him then with His disciples, and He is exactly the Son of the living God of @Genesis 1. We find God there breathing life into the nostrils of man - the Head and Fountain of life. In @John 20, the Lord shines under our eye, as the Head and Fountain of infallible, unforfeitable life, breathing into the disciples and saying, "Receive ye the Holy Ghost".
In this epistle we find Him in that character, as entitled to life and as holding it for us. That is His Melchisedec priesthood. He is not merely the Son of the living God. He would have been that if He had gone to heaven from Gethsemane; but He went to heaven after Calvary, and is now there as the Son of the living God for us; and God is satisfied - to be sure He is satisfied. How could He be otherwise? Sin has been put away and the blessed God breathes the element of life. It is, so to speak (with worshipping hearts may it be spoken), His native element, and He is satisfied. And God has expressed His satisfaction. But how? When Christ rose, in the face of the world that said, "We will not have this man to reign over
{20}
us" (@Luke 19: 14), God said, "Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool" (@Psalm 110: 1). That was His satisfaction in a rejected Christ.
When Christ ascended to the heavens in another character, as having made atonement, He put Him in the highest heavens, with an oath, and built a sanctuary for Him - "the true tabernacle, which the Lord pitched, and not man". Is it possible for Him to show us in more interesting form that He is satisfied with what Christ has done for us? Are the services of such a High Priest enough for me? They must be so. I am in connection with life, and every question is settled between me and God. He is King of Righteousness and King of Peace, and He dispenses all you want, in the royal authoritative virtue of His own name.
The moment you get the living God expanded in this epistle, you find that everything He touches He communicates life for eternity to it. His throne is for ever and ever - chapter 1 tells you that. His house is for ever and ever - chapter 3 tells you that. His salvation is eternal - chapter 5 tells you that. His priesthood is unchangeable - chapter 7 tells you that. His covenant is everlasting - chapter 9 tells you that. His kingdom cannot be moved - chapter 12 tells you that. There is nothing He touches, that He does not impart what is eternal to it. To entitle the epistle to the Hebrews in a word, we might say it is 'the loaded altar and the empty sepulchre'. Christ has put Himself in possession of life, not to keep it to Himself. The living Jesus in the highest heavens says, 'Now that I have life, I shall share it with you'. Oh, the depth of the riches!
{21}
Chapter 8
We meditated as far as chapter 6: 7, and there we left it, taking up chapter 7. Now we will read the close of chapters 6 and 8. But before we pursue the doctrine of the epistle, we will look a little at what we called the hortatory parenthesis in chapter 6. At chapter 5: 10 we left the doctrine, and from that to the close of chapter 6 is a parenthesis. The apostle having turned aside to exhort them, we were observing that the thing he feared in the Hebrews was not moral, as in the Corinthians, but doctrinal depravity. And do we not see such moral varieties around us now? One has a Corinthian bias, another has a Galatian bias. The thing he feared in the Hebrews was a giving up of Christ as the Object of their confidence.
What is the blessing that God is giving our hearts now? (verse 7). It is not law but grace. Moses was on the principle of law - the Lord Jesus was on the principle of grace; and free, happy, grateful hearts are those who receive it. How is your soul before God? Do you apprehend Him in judgment or in grace? Is the communion of your soul with God in the liberty of grace, or in the fear of a coming day of judgment? If the last, it is not yielding fruits meet for Him by whom it is blessed. Thorns and briars are the product of nature. They are the natural product of a corrupt scene, whether it be the earth I tread, or the heart I carry within me. Supposing I am acting in a legal, self-righteous mind - dealing with God as a Judge - is not that natural? But these are all thorns and briars. But if I walk in the filial confidence of one who has trusted in
{22}
the salvation of God, that is the earth yielding fruits meet for Him by whom it is blessed.
Now what is the ground of the apostle's persuasion of "better things" touching them, in verse 9? Not confidence in the simplicity of their apprehension of grace, but that the fruits of righteousness were seen among them - beautiful things that accompany, but never constitute, salvation. Therefore the apostle, seeing this beautiful fruitfulness, says, 'Though I am sounding an alarm I do not attach it to you'. Having got on that ground, he pursues it to the close of the chapter, and does not return to what is doctrinal till he reaches chapter 7. He prays them to continue to minister to the saints. Does your knowledge of Christ lead you to two things - secret communion of soul with Him, and practical energy of christian walk and faithfulness? 'Now', says he, 'do you go on with the beautiful, practical work you have begun. Do not be slothful, but followers of them who by faith and patience inherit the promises'.
Then he brings out Abraham, as one who did not slacken his hand to the end. Abraham not only had the promise in @Genesis 15, but went on in patience, till it was confirmed by an oath in @Genesis 22. We are called not only to faith, but to the patience of faith. May you not have a consolation, and yet not a strong consolation? We see it in Abraham. He had a consolation in @Genesis 15, and a strong consolation in @Genesis 22. A saint once said to me, 'In that last sickness, the Lord brought me so near Himself, that I felt as if I had never believed before'.
The apostle would have us like Abraham in @Genesis 22, that "we might have a strong consolation, who have
{23}
fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us". This passage is commonly misquoted. It is not a sinner running to the blood for refuge, but a saint running to the hope of glory from the wreck of every prospect here. This is enough to try us. Do you and I sit on the wreck of everything here? Are we promising ourselves hopes for tomorrow? Abraham was a man who fled from every prospect here, to lay hold upon the hope of glory. The apostle says, "Lay hold upon the hope", not on the cross. The word of God has an intensity that commonly escapes us. Now he returns to the Levitical figures. Does your hope enter within the veil? Have you not a hope about tomorrow? What is the thing the expectation of your heart hangs about? Is it the hope of the return of Christ, or the promises tomorrow?
"Whither the forerunner is for us entered". The Lord Jesus is here brought out in a new character. We see Him in heaven, not only for us as our High Priest, but to secure a place for us with Himself. Oh! if we could unfold the glories of the present dispensation! It is full of glories. Jesus is now in heaven, in the glory of a Forerunner - a High Priest - the Purger of our sins. There He sits, arrayed in glories. He will put on other glories in the millennial heavens. He will also be King of kings and Lord of lords, on the millennial earth. He is not that now; but there are glories in which He is displayed to the eye of faith. Do you go and meditate, broken-heartedly, on the glories of "these last days", as they are called in this epistle?
But we pass on to chapter 8. "We have such an high priest, who is set on the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens; A minister of the sanctuary, and of
{24}
the true tabernacle, which the Lord pitched, and not man". What exquisite words! What glories filled the heavens in the days of creation? The sun, and moon, and stars were set there. His fingers garnished them. And pray, have not they garnished the present heavens? If there were glories set in the superficial heavens by the fingers of God, there are glories set in the interior heavens by the grace of God. One of these glories is a tabernacle which the Lord has pitched there. Christ came down from the glory, to glorify God on the earth. Was there anything too brilliant in the way of glory in which to array such an One?
What intercourse we get here between God and His Christ - between the Father and the Son! And among the glories that awaited Him, there was a temple pitched by the Lord Himself. The sun comes out of his chamber to run his course. The Creator built a habitation for the sun in the heavens (@Psalm 19). God, in redemption, has built a habitation for the High Priest; and He is seated there in the highest place of honour. Christ could not be a priest here. The place was divinely occupied. It has been foolishly said, He could not go into the holiest. Surely He could not, for He came of the tribe of Judah. Did He come to break God's ordinances, or to fulfil all righteousness? What business had He in the holiest? A priest of the tribe of Levi, if he found Him there, would have been entitled to cast Him out. He was entitled to everything, but He came as a subject, self-emptied Servant. Did He intrude on the two poor disciples at Emmaus? Much less would He intrude in God's house.
Here we pause a little. In this epistle we find one thing. From the beginning to the end, the Spirit is taking
{25}
up one thing after another, and laying it aside, to make room for Christ, and when He has made room for Christ and brought Christ in, He fixes Him before us for ever. And we must all submit to it. Has not God laid you aside, and brought in Christ in your stead? Faith bows to this. It is what He has done in every believing soul.
So in chapter 1 He lays aside angels. "To which of the angels said he at any time, Sit on my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool?" Oh! how faith consents to it! Oh! how angels consent to it! Next we see Moses laid aside. "Moses verily was faithful ... as a servant ... But Christ as a Son over his own house". We can part with Moses, because we have Christ - as the poor eunuch could part with Philip because he had Jesus. Then in chapter 4, comes out Joshua. But he is laid aside also. "If Jesus had given them rest, then would he not afterward have spoken of another day". Christ is set before me as the true Joshua, who really gives me rest. Then Aaron is set aside to let in the priesthood of Christ; but when I have it before me, I have it for ever. He is the Administrator of a better covenant. The old covenant is done away, because the Lord has nothing to say to it. And at the close we read the beautiful utterance, which might be the text of the epistle, "Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever". He, being brought in, is the same for ever. What a magnificent thought it is to think of God bringing in the blessed Jesus to the displacing of everything! That is perfection, because God rests in Him. This is exactly the Sabbath of old, when God rested in creation. Now God rests in Christ, and that is perfection; and if you and I
{26}
understand where we are, we are breathing the atmosphere of perfection - an accomplished work - a Sabbath.
There is nothing more fruitful in glorious luminaries than the epistle to the Hebrews. It is an epistle of untold glories, and of inestimable value to the conscience of the awakened sinner. It is the title of my soul to breathe the atmosphere of heaven itself; and if I do not do so, shall I put a cloud on my title because my experience is so poor?
Now at the close of chapter 8, we see another thing set aside - the first covenant. The covenant that Christ ministers never waxes old. Your sins I will forgive, your iniquities I will pardon. There is no wrinkle on its face, no grey hairs upon its brow. The Lord touches everything and fixes it before God for ever; and God rests in it. He perfects everything He touches. While everything gives place to Him, He gives place to nothing. And would not you have it so? Would not John the Baptist have it so? When they came to him and said, "Rabbi, he that was with thee beyond Jordan, to whom thou barest witness, behold, the same baptiseth, and all men come to him" (@John 3: 26), he answered, "He that hath the bride is the bridegroom: but the friend of the bridegroom, which standeth and heareth him, rejoiceth greatly because of the bridegroom's voice: this my joy therefore is fulfilled" (verse 29). This ought to be the instinctive utterance of your heart and mine. If the Spirit has dealt with you in your soul, you ought to say, 'Blessed be God for it! He has set me aside to bring Jesus in'. There is wonderful unity between the discovery we get here, and the experience of our own souls. We shall never get to an end of these glories till we are lost in an ocean of them by-and-by - a sea without a shore!
{27}
Chapters 9; 10: 1 - 18
We closed at chapter 8; and pursuing the structure of the epistle we will now read chapter 9 down to chapter 10: 18. This is the last section of the doctrinal part; and then to the close we get moral exhortations. From the opening of chapter 9, to chapter 10: 18, is one argument. Suppose we linger a little over the structure of the epistle. Did you ever present a little distinctly to your mind the glories that belong to the Lord Jesus? There are three forms of glory that attach to Him - moral glory, personal glory and official glory. From the manager to the cross was the exhibition of His moral glories. In "these last days", the Lord is exhibiting some of His official glories, and by-and-by He will exhibit more of them, as in millennial times. The prophets of old spoke of His sufferings and the glories which should follow - not glory. But His personal glory is the foundation of every one of these.
This is a grand subject for our constant meditation - the glories of the Lord Jesus from the womb of the virgin to the throne of His millennial power. All through life, He was exhibiting His moral glories. The scene for these is past now, and He has taken His seat in heaven; but that has only given Him an opportunity to display others. The four gospels give me a view of His moral glories here. In the epistle to the Hebrews, I see Him seated in heaven now in a constellation of official glories. In other writings we get His coming glories. Whenever you see Him, you cannot but see Him in the midst of a system of them.
In these chapters 9 and 10, you get what He was doing on the cross, the foundation of every one of His present
{28}
glories. In the first eight chapters we get a varied display of the conditions of the Lord Jesus now in heaven; and now, as the sustainment of all these, in chapters 9 and 10 we have an account of the perfection of the Lamb on the altar.
Do you ever make "these last days" a subject of thought? Why is the Spirit entitled to call the age through which we are passing the "last days"? We shall have other days after these. Why then does He call them the last days? Beautifully so - because God rests in what the Lord Jesus has accomplished, as thoroughly as He rested at the close of creation in the perfection His own work. It is not that in the unfolding of the economy of God we shall not have other ages; yet, in the face of that the Spirit does not hesitate to call these the "last days".
In all the Lord has done, He has satisfied God. He perfects everything He touches, and makes it eternal, and God does not look beyond it. Everything is set aside till Christ is brought in, but there is no looking beyond Him. "Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever". Now the moment I get God resting in anything, I get perfection; and the moment I get perfection I am in the last days. God has reached satisfaction, and so have I. Christ may be unfolded in millennial days; but it is the very same Christ that we have now. Shall I get Moses then, or Joshua? They are all (treated in the light of Christ) "beggarly elements". All give place, one after another; but Christ being introduced to the thoughts of God, God rests in Him; and when you come to see where you are, you are in God's second Sabbath - and see how one thing exceeds the other! The rest of the Redeemer is a much more
{29}
blessed thing than the rest of the Creator. In Christ you have perfection - the rest of God - and you are in the "last days".
Now when we come to chapters 9 and 10, we see Christ, not properly or characteristically in heaven, but on the altar. The glories that surround Him now have been given to us one after another - the glory of the priesthood - the glory of the Purger of our sins - the predestinated Heir of the world to come - the Apostle of salvation - the Dispenser of the covenant that never gathers age to itself - the Giver of the eternal inheritance. These are the glories of "these last days".
In chapter 9: 14 we see the cross that sustains them all. How blessed it is to trace from Matthew to John a path of moral beauty. Was the Lord Jesus in office here? No; He was here in subjection. When I have looked at Him thus I am invited to look upwards. Is it One travelling in moral beauty I see there? No, not that specially; but it is One who has been seated at the right hand of the Majesty with an oath in the very midst of glorious beauties - One whom the satisfied heart of God has seated there. It was the testing purpose of God that seated Adam in Eden. It is the faithful heart of God that has seated Christ in heaven.
And now we come to read the perfection of His work as Lamb of God, as the grand foundation of all these glories. He would not have perfected His moral glories here if He had not gone on to the cross and died there. He would not have had His official glories in heaven, if He had not gone on to the cross and died there. When the Lord Jesus was hanging as the Lamb of God on the accursed tree, and over His bleeding brows was written the
{30}
inscription, in every language, "This is the King of the Jews", they sought to blot it out - but God would not have it blotted out. He would have the whole creation know that the cross was the title to the kingdom. The inscription that Pilate wrote on the cross, and God kept there, is very fine.
Supposing the cross sustains the glory, according to the inscription, now tell me what sustains the cross itself? Is the cross without a foundation? The secret comes out in these chapters: as the cross sustains your hopes, it is the Person that sustains the cross. His personal glory is the sustainment of the cross. If He were less than God manifest in the flesh, all He did was no more worth than water spilt upon the ground. Of all the mighty mystery of official, millennial, eternal glories, the cross is the support, and the Person is the support of the cross. He must sustain His own work, and His work must sustain everything. This is just the argument of these chapters.
There was a veil hanging between the place where the priests ministered, and the mystic dwelling-place of God. That veil was the expression that that age gave a sinner no access to God. Were there not sacrifices? Yes, there were; and God's altar was accepting them. But they were "gifts and sacrifices, that could not make him that did the service perfect, as pertaining to the conscience". Beautifully then, at this point, He comes to your heart and demands a note of admiration. "For if the blood of bulls and of goats ... sanctifieth to the purifying of the flesh: How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead works to serve the living God?"
{31}
Supposing we inspect the old tabernacle, and see the beggarliness of all its elements. The blood of bulls could not bring you into the presence of God; and from the beggarliness of all that, look at the all-satisfying nature of the blood of Jesus, will you not exclaim, 'How much more shall it purge our consciences?' That is the way you are to come to the cross - laying doubtings and questionings aside, and losing yourself in admiration. The thing the Spirit does is to take you gently by the hand and lead you up to the altar at Calvary, and tell you who is the Victim that bled there. None but one who was personally free could say, "I come to do thy will". Have you any right to a will? Has Gabriel or Michael? To do God's pleasure is their business; but here was One who could offer Himself without spot to God. "How much more" then, shall such a sacrifice purge our consciences, and introduce us at once to the living God? That entitled me to say, that while we look at His glories - His official glories - we see that the cross is the sustainment of them all.
But if the soul does not know the personal glory of the Lord, it positively knows nothing. That is the secret you get here. He, for whom God prepared a body, through the eternal Spirit, satisfied the altar. Yes, satisfied the brazen altar before He went into the holy sanctuary to do the business of God's priest. And atonement flows from satisfaction. If I find out that Christ's sacrifice has answered the cravings of the brazen altar, I see that my reconciliation is sealed and settled for eternity.
The epistle to the Ephesians tells you to stand upon this, and look round about you at the glories of your condition. The epistle to the Hebrews shows you the
{32}
glories of Christ's condition in the compass of about three hundred verses. What a world of wonders is opened! You are sustained by what He has done; and what He has done is sustained by what He is.
Chapter 10: 19 - 39
We are coming now to another beautiful part of the epistle, and, as we hinted, to a new division of it. We will read from verse 19 to the close of chapter 10. You may have observed the general structure of the epistles. Take the Ephesians, for instance: in the first three chapters we get doctrinal truth, and in the last three the moral application of it. So in Colossians, Galatians, Romans, and so on. Now in Hebrews it is the same, and we are just entering now on the practical application of what has gone before.
'Now the full glories of the Lamb adorn the heavenly throne', as a beautiful hymn of Dr. Watts says. Constantly, through this epistle we have been looking up and seeing this. But let me ask, do you see glories anywhere in "these last days" that are not attaching to the Lord in heaven? You will tell me that all glory belongs to Him, and I grant it; but I tell you, you ought to see glories attaching to yourselves. Such is the wondrous working of God, that He has made the poor sinner a glorious creature. These same last days, that have set Christ on high in the midst of the glories, have set the poor believing sinner down here in the midst of glories.
I want that you and I be girt up to an apprehension of them. We do not wait for the kingdom, to see glories. Is it no glory for you to have a purged conscience? Is it no
{33}
glory to be fully entitled to be in the presence of God without a blush? no glory to call God, Father? to have Christ as your Forerunner in heavenly places? to enter into the holiest without a quiver of conscience? no glory to be introduced into the secrets of God? If we can lift up our heart and say, "Abba, Father"? If we can lift up our heart and say, 'Who shall condemn?' or "Who shall separate us from the love of Christ?" If we can believe that we are bone of His bone, flesh of His flesh; that we are part of Christ's fulness, will any one say there is no glory in all that? So that this epistle introduces us to most precious thoughts. It tells me to look up and see Christ adorning the throne, and to look down and see the believer having part with Him.
The world sees nothing of these glories. We only apprehend them in the glass of the word by faith; but I do say boldly, that I do not wait for the kingdom, to know what glory is. I look up and see the Lamb in acquired glories. I look down, and see the saint in gifted glories. Now the moral application begins. "Having therefore, brethren, boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus". There I look at myself; and will any one say there is not glory in such a condition? That is my title. Now the exhortation is that you are to enjoy your title. To enjoy, is to obey. The first duty you owe to God is to enjoy what He has made you, and what He has given you. "Let us draw near". Use your privilege, as we say. It is the first grand duty of faith, and I am bold to say it is the most acceptable duty of faith.
How slow we are to enjoy these glories. Do you ever look at yourself in the glass of the word? We are very
{34}
much accustomed to look at ourselves in the glass of circumstances - in the glass of relationships. If we say in the secret of our heart, with exultation of spirit, 'I am a child of God;' if, with exultation of spirit we can say, 'I am co-heir with Christ', that is the way to begin obedience. Here it is exactly that. "Let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith".
We should look on ourselves as the priesthood of God. The priests of old were washed when they were put into office. Then every day their feet were washed before they entered the tabernacle to serve the Lord. The pavement of God's own presence was not stained by the foot of the priest. He went in, in a character worthy of the place. Are you occupying the presence of God all the day long in the consciousness that you are worthy of the place? How will you be presented before Him by-and-by? Jude tells you - "to present you faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy". You ought to know that you are in His presence now, faultless, or without spot. We cannot put ourselves in the flesh too low; and we cannot put ourselves in Christ too high. If one may speak for another, we find it much easier to degrade ourselves in the flesh, than to magnify ourselves in Christ. That last is what the Spirit is doing here.
Now He tells me, having got into the holiest, what to do there. If I know my title to be in the presence of God, let me know also that I am there as the heir of a promised glory; I am there to be kept there till the glory shines out. We are the witnesses of a class of glories, just as the Lord Jesus is the witness of a class of glories. We are in a wealthy place; and having got in there we are to hold our
{35}
hope without a quiver. Let us hold fast the profession of our hope without wavering (as the word should be). If we go in without a quiver, we are to hold our hope without a quiver. That is what our God has called us to. We are there with boldness; and being there, we are to talk of our hope. And we are to talk of love also, "to provoke unto love and to good works". What exquisite service! Who can utter the beauties of these things?
"Not forsaking the assembling of ourselves together ... but exhorting one another". When you get into the house, what are you doing together? Are you to be down in the depths of conscious ruin? No; but exhorting one another to love and good works. These are the activities of the house. We dwell together in one happy house, encouraging one another, and so much the more as we point to the sky and say, 'Look! the dawning of morning is near; the sky is breaking'. We want a great deal more to encourage one another, to know our dignity in Christ than to know our degradation in ourselves. It is very right to know ourselves poor worthless creatures. Confession is very right; but to gird up the mind to the apprehension of our dignity is much more acceptable and priestly work than to be ever in the depths. "Out of the depths have I cried unto thee" (@Psalm 130: 1). Here we see ourselves accepted; holding our hope without wavering; encouraging one another; and saying, as we point to the eastern sky, 'The dawn is coming'.
Then, having thus conducted us to verse 25, he brings in a solemn passage about wilful sin. We read the counterpart of this in @Numbers 15, where presumptuous sin is looked at. Under the law there were two characters of offence. A man might find a thing that was his
{36}
neighbour's, and deal falsely about it, or he might lie to his neighbour, and there was a trespass offering provided. But when a man gathered sticks on the sabbath day, he was to be stoned at once. There remained nothing for him but "a certain fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation". It was presumptuous sin, flying in the face of the legislator. This is the presumptuous sin of the New Testament. It is running in the face of the God of this dispensation, as the gatherer of sticks ran in the face of the God of the law. We are not to be careless about sin. If we do the least sin we ought to be broken-hearted about it. But that is not the thing contemplated here. It is a defection from christianity.
Then, having come to verse 31, he exhorts them to "call to remembrance the former days". Let me ask your souls, Do you all remember the day when you were illuminated? One might say, 'The light shone brighter and brighter upon me'. I believe Timothy may have been such an one. Timothy, I have often thought, under the education of his godly mother, may have passed gently into the flock of God. But most people know the moment of their illumination; and if there is a moment of moral energy in the history of the soul, it is the day of its quickening. Why do not you and I carry the strength of that moment with us? Is He a different Jesus that we have now? When I know that the day was when all was over between God and me, and that now the day has come when all is over between the world and me, that is practical christianity. What was that day that he called on them to remember? The day when, being illuminated, they "took joyfully the spoiling of your goods". Why was this? How does he
{37}
account for it? Their eye was on a better inheritance. Let me grasp the richer thing, and the poorer thing may pass away for aught I care.
We can account for victory over the world just as easily as we can account for access to God. That, let me say, is just the knot that this epistle ties. It puts you inside the veil, outside the camp. In the wondrous, divine, moral character of christianity, the grace and the blood of Christ work exactly contrary to the lie of the serpent. The lie of the serpent made Adam a stranger to God, and at home in this polluted world - inside the camp and outside the veil. Christianity just alters that. It restores us to citizenship in the presence of God, and strangership in the world; and verse 35 of this chapter is the one verse in this epistle that knits these things together.
Hold fast your confidence, and it will be the secret of strength to you. Where do we see victory over the world? In those who are happiest in Christ. Why are you and I so miserably down in the traffic of the world? Because we are not as happy in Christ as we ought to be. Give me a soul that has boldness and joy in God's presence, and I will show you one that has victory over the world.
Now the apostle tells us that a life of patience intervenes between the day of illumination and the day of glorification. I am not to count on a path of pleasure - a path of ease - a path of prosperity - on being richer or more distinguished tomorrow than today; but I am to count on a path of patience. And is not there glory in that? Yes, there is companionship with Christ. No greater glory is or can be yours, than to be the companion of your rejected Master. That is your path. "If any man draw back, my soul
{38}
shall have no pleasure in him". He was not ashamed to be the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. They were strangers here; but if we become citizens here, instead of strangers - strike alliance with the world - He who could say, 'I am the God of my strangers', can say to the citizen of the world, 'I have no pleasure in him'.
May you and I provoke one another to love and to good works, and, pointing to the eastern sky, say, The day is dawning. Amen.
Chapter 11
We have reached chapter 11. I think we observed that chapter 10: 35 was a connecting link between the two great thoughts of the epistle - that christianity puts you inside the veil, and outside the camp. That is, it undoes the work of Satan, which estranged you from God and made you at home in a corrupted world. The religion of the Lord Jesus just comes to upset his (Satan's) work. Nothing can be more beautiful than the antithesis which thus shows itself between the serpent and the serpent's bruiser.
The "great recompense of reward" shows itself in the life of faith that we are now going to read about. We are called, as John Bunyan says, 'to play the man'. If happy within we are to be fighting without. This chapter 11 shows us the elect of all ages, 'playing the man' in the power of this principle of confidence. "Cast not away therefore your confidence", for it thus shows that it has "great recompense of reward". Faith is a principle that apprehends two different things of God. It views Him as a justifier of the ungodly, as in @Romans 4; but here it
{39}
apprehends God as "a rewarder of them that diligently seek him". The moment you apprehend God by a faith that does not work, you enter on a faith that does work. And while we rightly cherish a faith that saves our souls, let us not be indifferent to a faith that serves our Saviour. How boldly we sometimes assert our title, but do we value our inheritance? It is a poor wretched thing to boast in our title, and yet show that the heart is but little moved by the hope of the inheritance. Just so, if I boast of a justifying faith, it is a poor thing to be indifferent to the faith that we have here in chapter 11. "Now faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen".
Then you are told that it was the strength of all the worthies in old times, who through it "obtained a good report". It is another proof that, as we have said, everything in this epistle is to set aside law. If I take up the law as the secret power of my soul to do anything for God, I am not doing it for God but for myself. The law might chasten and scourge me and call on me to work out a title to life. But that would be serving myself. Faith sets law aside. Then, having established faith as a working principle, he begins to unfold the different phases of it from the beginning. I believe verse 3 may have a reference to Adam. If Adam was a worshipper in the garden, it was by faith. He may have looked behind all the wonders that surrounded him, and apprehended the great Artificer.
Now some say they can still worship God in nature; but when we left innocency we left creation as a temple and we cannot go back there. Nature was a temple to Adam; but if I go back to it, I go back to Cain. Here we come to Abel and to revelation. We are sinners; and
{40}
revelation, which unfolds redemption, must build us a temple. You must take your place as worshipper in the temple that God in Christ has built for you.
Then we come to Enoch. Enoch's was an ordinary kind of life; but he spent it with God. We are told in Genesis that he walked with God, and here we are told that he pleased God. As the apostle says in @1 Thessalonians 4: 1 "Ye have received of us how ye ought to walk and to please God". To walk with God is to please Him. Can anything be more welcome to us than the thought that we can give complacency to God? There was nothing in Enoch's life to make history; but whatever condition of life may be ours, our business is to walk with God in it. It is beautiful thus to see an undistinguished life going before a life of great events. You may hear some say, 'A poor, unnoticed thing am I, compared with some who have been distinguished in service for the Lord'. 'Well', let me reply, 'you are an Enoch'.
Now Noah's was a very distinguished life. Faith laid hold on the warning. Faith does not wait for the day of glory or the day of judgment to see glory or judgment. Faith in the prophet did not ask for his eyes to be opened. Faith here for one hundred and twenty years seemed to be a fool. Noah was building a ship for dry ground; and he may well have been the mockery of his neighbours; but he saw the thing that was invisible. How rebuking to us! Supposing you and I lived under the authority of coming glory: what fools we should be!
But I should not have passed over the word I took for my text. "He is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him". Again, I boldly say, you would not have had that
{41}
definition of faith in @Romans 4, "A rewarder of them that diligently seek him"! 'Why, what legal language!' some would say if they read it in a book. Ah! but it is beautiful in its place. The faith of a saint is an intensely working thing. Will God be a debtor to any man? No; He will pay to those who sow bountifully.
Abraham's life is next; and a picture of the varied exercises of faith. There was a magnificence in his faith - a victorious quality - a fine apprehension - all these qualities of faith come out in the life of Abraham. He went out blindfold; but the God of glory led him by the hand. So he came to the land; but to him not a foot of it was given. He must have the patience of faith; but whatever fell from the lips of God was welcome to Abraham. Abraham walked all his life in the power of the recollection of what he had seen under the hand of the God of glory.
Now supposing I tell you that the vision of Stephen has gone before every one of you. You need not be expecting the same vision that Stephen saw, but you have seen it in him. They may carry you to the stake; but you may say, 'I have seen heaven opened over me, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God'. If you and I are simple, true-hearted people, we shall just go forth as Abraham did when he had seen the God of glory.
Then Sarah's was another kind of faith. We must see God as a Quickener of the dead. Noah understood God so. The Israelites, under the blood-stained lintel, received Him in the same character. Death was there, and attached to every house in the land; but the Israelites knew God as the Quickener of the dead. That is what Noah, Abraham, Sarah, apprehended of God. If I make God less than a
{42}
Quickener of the dead, I make myself more than a dead sinner. It is as a Quickener of the dead I must meet with Him.
The thirteenth is a beautiful verse. The first thing to do to a promise is to apprehend it - then to exercise faith about it - and then to receive it by the heart. They "embraced" them. Their hearts hugged them. How far has my heart hugged the promises? One knows his own "leanness". But surely the closer we hug them the more blessedly we shall consent to be strangers and pilgrims in this world. This is a wonderful picture of a heart put into faith. Did they speak of strangership, because of leaving Mesopotamia? No; but because they had not reached heaven. They might have found their way back. Abraham could tell it to Eliezer; but that would not have cured their strangership. Supposing there were a change in your circumstances, would that cure your strangership? Not if you are among God's people. Mesopotamia was no cure. Nothing could cure, end, or close their strangership, but the inheritance. On they went to heaven; and God was not ashamed to be called their God.
In chapter 2 we read that Christ is not ashamed to call us brethren. Now, we read that God was not ashamed to call these strangers His people. Why is Christ "not ashamed to call them brethren"? Because they stand in one divine, eternal purpose with Him. One family embraces the elect and Christ. How could He be ashamed of such a people? And if you have fallen out with the world, God is not ashamed of you. For God Himself has fallen out with it, and He could not be ashamed of you, because you are one mind with Him. Therefore, when they said they were
{43}
strangers, God called Himself their God. Our hearts are terribly rebuked here. How much lingers in them of striking alliance and making friendship with the world!
Then we see Abraham in another light. Every hope of Abraham depended on Isaac. To give up Isaac seemed not only to become a bankrupt in the world, but to become a bankrupt in God. He might have said, 'Am I to become a bankrupt in God and in Mesopotamia?' There could not have been a higher stretch in the believing principle. Have you ever feared God making you a bankrupt in Himself? Has He turned away never to return? Well, he got him back in a figure, sealed as a fresh witness of resurrection. Do we ever lose anything by trusting God in the dark? If ever any one trusted Him in the dark it was Abraham.
After passing him we come to Isaac. Isaac showed his faith by blessing Esau and Jacob concerning things to come. This is the little, single bit of his life that the Spirit looks at. If we inspect his life, we shall find that that is the eminent work in it. That act shines out under the eye of God.
Jacob is more remarkable, as Noah had been more remarkable than Enoch. His was a very eventful life; but the only thing we get here is - "by faith Jacob ... blessed both the sons of Joseph". This is exquisitely beautiful. It shows how much in christian life may be rubbish. I do not believe Jacob's life was an exhibition of a servant of God. It was an exhibition of a saint who went astray, and whose whole life was occupied in getting back; and we do not get this act of faith till we come to the close, when he "blessed both the sons of Joseph". There he came in contact with things unseen, and things that came across the current of
{44}
nature. His life was the life of a man recovering himself; and just at the close he did this beautiful service of faith to God in the face of the resentments of his own heart and the appeal of his son Joseph.
But Joseph's is a lovely life - a life of faith from the beginning. Joseph was a holy man throughout; but there was magnificent outshining of faith just at the close. He had his hand on the treasures of Egypt, and his foot on the throne of Egypt; yet in the midst of all that he spoke of the departing of his brethren. That was seeing things invisible. That was the one thing the Spirit has signalised as an act of faith. Why did he talk in this way? He might have said, 'Ah! I do not walk by sight. I know what is coming, and I tell you, you will go out of this land, and when you go, take me with you'. The general course of his life was unblameable, yet we do find in his words as he was departing, the finest utterance of faith. And now that is what you and I want. Do you want to be righteous only? You must be so; but will that constitute a life of faith? You must seek to get under the power of things hoped for - things unseen - the expectation of the Lord's return; and till you do so in some energy, you may be blameless, but you are not walking that life of faith by which "the elders obtained a good report". Thus, so far we see faith as a working principle. Not the faith of the sinner, which is a no-working faith. The moment the no-working faith has made me a saint, I must take up the working faith and live in the power of it.
But we must go on. We will not forget what we hinted - that the whole of this chapter 11 depends on, and is the illustration of, chapter 10: 35. The stronger our faith is, the
{45}
more our soul is in the possession of mighty, moral energy. This chapter shows how this principle of faith gained the day. Do not read it as if it were the praises of Noah, Abraham, Moses, and others. It is the praises of faith, as illustrated in Noah, Abraham, Moses, and others. What a simple, blessed thing christianity is! I stand in admiration of it when I see how the devil has wrought a two-fold mischief in putting us outside the veil - inside the camp; and how Christ has wrought a corresponding two-fold remedy. Do I rejoice in the thought that I have gained God, though at the loss of the world? That is christianity.
"By faith Moses, when he was born, was hid three months of his parents, because they saw he was a proper child". What is the meaning of that? It means that when he was born there was an expression in his countenance that faith read. 'Beautiful to God' is the word. There was a certain beauty in him that awakened the faith of Amram and Jochebed; and they were obedient to it. Was there not a beauty in the face of the dying Stephen? Ought not his murderers to have been obedient to it? They stand in moral contrast to Moses¬ parents. Under the finger of God they saw the purpose of God and hid the child.
Now in Moses we see a beautiful power of faith. It got a three-fold victory - three splendid victories, and the very victories you are called to.
First, his faith got the victory over the world. He was a foundling, picked up from the Nile, and adopted as the son of Pharaoh's daughter. This was personal degradation translated into adopted magnificence. What did he do with it? He "refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter".
{46}
What victory over the world that was! We like those things that put worldly honour on us. Moses would not have it; and sure I am faith is set to the same battlefield, and challenged to get the like victory to this day.
Next we see Moses getting victory amid the trials and alarms of life. "By faith he forsook Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the king". What a terrible thing the life of faith is to nature! You have got a victory today - you must stand again tomorrow. "That ye may be able to withstand ... and having done all, to stand" (@Ephesians 6: 13). Here the pressure of life was coming on Moses, after the attractions of life had got their answer.
Then, in the third instance, Moses had an answer for the claims of God. It is magnificent to see a soul braced in the power of a faith like this. "Through faith he kept the passover". The destroying angel was going through the land, but the blood was on the lintel. From the very beginning, grace has provided the sinner with an answer to the claims of God; and it is the simple office of faith to plead the answer. God provided the blood and faith used it. Christ is God's provision. He is God's great ordinance for salvation; and faith travels along with Him from the cross to the realms of glory.
Then, "By faith they passed through the Red sea" - "By faith the walls of Jericho fell down" - "By faith the harlot Rahab perished not with them that believed not". And what more shall we say? It is the story that animates the whole of Scripture. The story of grace and faith - grace on God's part, and faith on ours - gives animation to the whole Book of God. *We are never called outside the camp till we are inside the veil*.
{47}
The early chapters of this epistle show the sinner his title to a home in God's presence; and then you are to come forth from that home, and let the world know that you are a stranger to it. That is the structure of this beautiful epistle. It tells us our title to be in God's presence, before it opens the calling that attaches to us. Before Abraham was called out to a land that he knew not, the "God of glory" appeared to him. Does he ever send a man a battle at his own charges? Does He ever send you to fight with the world, before you are at peace with Himself? Everything is for me from the moment I turn to God. I am called in God, to everything that is for me. I am "come unto mount Sion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem", and so on. This is chapter 12. Before ever David was hunted as a partridge, he had the anointing oil of God upon him.
We must linger a little on the two closing verses. They are very weighty, precious, pregnant verses. These elders obtained a good report, but with the report they did not obtain the promise. It reminds me of the prophet Malachi. "A book of remembrance was written before him for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his name. And they shall be mine, saith the Lord of hosts, in that day when I make up my jewels" (@Malachi 3: 16, 17). They are not His made-up jewels yet, but He has their names in His book, and He will make them up and display them as His jewels by-and-by. So with these elders. Why have they not yet obtained the promise? Because we must first come in, in the rich furniture of this evangelical dispensation, or all they had in their beggarly dispensation would never have done for them.
{48}
We find the word "better" constantly occurring in this epistle. "A better testament" - "A better covenant" - "some better thing for us" - "that speaketh better things than that of Abel". And we find the word "perfect" in constant use also, because now everything is perfected. Everything is perfected that gives God rest, as we have already said, and God is not looking for any satisfaction beyond what Christ gives Him. He has His demand answered - His glory vindicated - His character displayed - and all in Christ.
Now what is this "better thing" in the last verse? If we had not brought in our Christ, so to speak, nothing would have been done. God having introduced Christ in this dispensation, all the old saints that hung on it are perfected. For in one light of it, we look at this epistle (as we will now do, briefly and rapidly) as a treatise on perfection. Thus, in chapter 2, we read that it became the glory of God to give us a perfect Saviour; not merely my necessity, but God's glory required it. "It became him" - consulting for His own glory. It became Him to give the sinner an Author to begin salvation, and a Captain to close it. The difference between an author and a captain is just the difference between Moses and Joshua. *Moses was the author* of salvation when he picked up the poor captives in Egypt. *Joshua was the captain* of salvation when he carried them across the Jordan right into the promised land. Christ is the One who carries us both through the Red sea and the Jordan - the One who did the *initiative work of Moses, and the consummating work of Joshua*.
Then in chapter 5, we read, "being made perfect, he became the author of eternal salvation". Not moral
{49}
perfection - we all know He was morally stainless - but perfection as "author of eternal salvation". He would never have been perfect thus, if He had not gone on to death; but as it behoved God to give us a perfect Saviour, so it behoved Christ to make Himself a perfect Saviour. Then in chapter 6, "Let us go on unto perfection", the apostle says. That is, let us 'read our lesson on this subject'. Some read this as if they were to go on till they had no more sin in themselves. That has nothing to say to it. It is as if the apostle said, 'I am going to read you a treatise on perfection, and you must come and learn it with me'. Then he goes on with the subject in chapter 7. He says, You cannot find this perfection in the law. "the law made nothing perfect". You must look elsewhere. By the law here, is not meant the ten commandments, but the Levitical ordinances. In the midst of these beggarly elements you must look elsewhere for perfection. Chapter 9 thus shows you that it is in Christ, and tells you that the moment faith has touched the blood, the conscience is purged. Chapter 10 tells you that the moment Christ touches you, you are perfected for ever. Not in moral stainlessness in the flesh - there is no such thing here.
The moment Christ touches the apostleship, He perfects it. The moment He touches the priesthood, He perfects it. The moment He touches the altar, He perfects it. The moment He touches the throne, He perfects it. And if He perfects these things, He will, as to your conscience, perfect you, a poor sinner. So this epistle is, in one great light, a treatise on perfection. God gave you a perfect Saviour - Christ made Himself a perfect Saviour. Let me go on to perfection. If I seek it in the law I am in a world
{50}
of shadows. When I come to Christ I am in the midst of perfection. 'And there I stand, poor worm', as Gambold says.
Therefore these saints could not get the inheritance till we came in laden with all the glories of this dispensation. But now they can share the inheritance with us, when the full time comes. What glories shine in this epistle! What glories fill the heavens, because Christ is there! What glories attach to us because Christ has touched us! Is it no glory to have a purged conscience - to enter into the holiest with boldness - to say to Satan, 'Who are you, that you should finger God's treasure?' We creep and crawl, when we should be getting into the midst of these glories and encouraging our hearts.
Chapter 12
We will now read chapter 12. We have looked at the doctrine of the epistle. We are now eminently in the practical part of it; yet the blessedness of the doctrine shines out too. I would just say this first, we have been looking at the various characters in which the Lord has entered heaven. Now here in verse 2, we get Him in heaven in another character. Do not many crowns belong to Him? Will not you put a royal crown - a priestly crown - on His head? Can you put too many crowns there? What a cluster of glories fill the eye as we look at Christ in heaven, by the light of this magnificent epistle!
Now among other characters we see Him there as the One who perfected a life of faith on earth - "the author and finisher of our faith". The counsel of God is busy in
{51}
crowning Jesus. It is the delight of the counsel of God to crown Him - it is the delight of the Spirit of God to exhibit Him as crowned - and it is the delight of faith to see Him crowned. God, the Spirit, and the faith of the poor, believing sinner, all gather round Him, either to crown Him or to delight in seeing Him crowned.
Now we see Him owned in heaven as the One who perfected the life of faith. He passed through it to perfection from the manger to the cross, and is so accepted in the highest heavens. That of course put Him in collision with man. "Him that endured such contradiction of sinners against himself". Though ever ready to serve and save the sinner, in the moral glory of His manhood He was "separate from sinners", in His path here. You would not dare to take that language to yourself. It is too lofty a style for any but the Son of God to take. Was anything like that said of Abraham or Moses? No; the Spirit would not have talked so of one of them. So when you put the Lord Jesus in the wear and tear of life, in company with martyrs, you see Him, as in all other things, taking the pre-eminence.
It is so natural for the Spirit to glorify Christ! If He is looking at Him officially, as in the first part of this epistle, it is easy to look at Him with many, many crowns upon Him. Or, looking at Him here, it is easy for the Spirit to put this crown of peculiar beauty on His head. He "endured such contradiction of sinners against himself". It is a description which your heart would condemn you for taking to yourself, though you might be called to the stake.
The cross, in one aspect, was martyrdom. Jesus was as much a martyr at the hand of man as He was a victim at the hand of God. It is as a martyr we see Him here - and as
{52}
such we are put in company with Him. "Ye have not yet resisted unto blood, striving against sin". You have no deeper enemy than your own heart to strive against. It was sin in the Pharisees - sin in the multitude - sin in the chief priests - that carried the Lord Jesus to the cross. But He never had any sin in Himself to strive against. It was sin in others.
The apostle then goes on to put you, as a chastened sufferer, in company with the Father. Here we drop company with Christ. For He never was under the chastening of the Father. The moment I get under the scourging and education of the Father, I have dropped out of company with Christ. I am deeply in His company when travelling the path of the martyr. I am not a step in His company when I am under the chastening of the Father. So from verse 5 onward you are in company with your heavenly Father. Oh! these sacred, divine touches - that know when to introduce Christ and when to let Him disappear! How, or in what form of excellency, to display Him, and how to let Him out of sight! There is a glory, a completeness, in the very way in which the task of the Spirit is executed. He walks through life enduring the contradiction of sinners. I walk through it striving against sin. Then I am in company with the chastening of the Father - all resulting in a blessed participation in His holiness, but Christ is not there with me. If you put all the wit of aggregated intellects together, could it give you these divine touches that glitter in the Book of God?
In verse 12 we are exhorted to "lift up the hands which hang down". There is no reason why it should be so. Though you are under the scourge, there is not one single
{53}
reason why your hands should hang down, or your knees be feeble; for the Spirit has shown you yourself first in company with Christ, and then with your Father who loves you. Is there any reason why you should travel as if you did not know the road? This is a beautiful conclusion. We all know how the hands will hang down; but I set my seal to every word of this and say, 'Truth, Lord'. There is no reason that we should be fainthearted. Then having come to that he looks round. Do not let your own hands hang down; and in connection with others follow peace - in connection with God follow holiness. "What communion hath light with darkness? And what concord hath Christ with Belial?" (@2 Corinthians 6: 14, 15).
"Looking diligently lest any man fail of the grace of God; lest any root of bitterness springing up trouble you". If you consult at your leisure @Deuteronomy 29, you will find a root of bitterness there spoken of; but it is a different kind from this. There it arose from some man taking up false gods - here it is failing of the grace of God. The whole epistle has it as its bearing and purpose, to nail your ear, in scripture language, to the doorpost of Him that is speaking of grace. It is not a lawgiver that is heard, but One who is publishing salvation from the highest heavens. Angels and principalities and powers are made subject to the Purger of our sins; and the Purger of our sins has taken our conscience up to the highest heavens and every tongue that could lay a charge against us is silenced, as we read in @Romans 8: 1 (See also @1 Peter 3: 21, 22).
Now take care lest you fail of the grace thus published. It may end in the profaneness of Esau. It has been said by another, that this reference to Esau must have
{54}
been very striking to the mind of a Jew. 'If you fail of the grace of God, you will be left in the position of one whom your nation repudiates'. I do not care what you take up in His stead, if you slip away from Christ you may be tomorrow in the position of the reprobate Esau. How does Esau stand before you? As a type of that generation who by-and-by will say, "Lord, Lord, open to us". But their tears will be as ineffectual as Esau's by the bedside of his dying father. He came too late. So when once God has risen up and shut to the door, they will find no place of repentance. This verse 17 is very solemn. It tells me that that action of Esau is the presentation to our thoughts of that which is still to be realised in an Esau generation - and only in such - "Behold, ye despisers, and wonder, and perish" (@Acts 13: 41). Esau despised his birthright, and this generation have refused the grace of God, and despised the Christ that has passed through the world and died for sinners.
After this, in verse 18, we get a magnificent sight of the two dispensations. It is as if the apostle had said, 'I have been showing you a martyr path, but now I tell you that the moment you look to God, everything is for you'. The martyr path and the chastening of the Father are only further proofs of love.
Now, leaving Christ and the Father, we come to God; and you see that all the eternal counsels of God have clustered to make you a blest one, as they have clustered to make Christ a glorious One. Do not be afraid. You are not come to the mount that might be touched and that burned with fire. Turn your back on it. The more advisedly I have turned my back on it, the more I have met and answered
{55}
the grace and wisdom of God, and rendered the obedience of faith. Am I to be turning round my head - to be looking over my shoulder - to be giving it some glances? Is that the obedience of faith? Then as to my face. Where is that turned to? To a cluster of blessedness. I was introduced by my own self-confidence to law, and found not a thing for me. Now I have turned my face right round and I see everything for me. "Ye are come unto mount Sion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem; and to an innumerable company of angels, To the general assembly and church of the firstborn, which are written in heaven, and to God the Judge of all". The Lord, even in judgment, is for us, for it is one office of a judge to vindicate the oppressed. Then, "the spirits of just men made perfect, And to Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling". Everything is for you. And that is where your face is undivertedly to direct itself. Let your face be right fully turned to the one hill, and your back be right fully turned to the other hill.
But here at this place, in chapter 12, you are at the very beginning of the epistle again. In chapter 2 we read, "How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation; which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord?" Now we read, "See that ye refuse not him that speaketh". From the beginning to the end, the Spirit is nailing your ear to the door of the house of the Master of grace.
Then it very solemnly closes: "Our God is a consuming fire", that is, the God of this dispensation. From the fires of Sinai there was a relief by turning and taking refuge in Christ; but there is no relief if God's relief is despised. If you turn away from the relief this
{56}
dispensation brings in, there is no more relief. "Our God is a consuming fire". What, I ask you, puts you in company with God, like simplicity of faith? As we said before, the purpose of the eternal counsels, and the joy of the Spirit is this, to put crowns on the head of Christ; and when I am simple in faith I am delighting to fill the field of my vision with these glories. Thus I am put in the most dignified company I could be in - God and the Holy Spirit. The Lord grant that you and I may be there! If we know these things, happy, thrice happy are we, if we rest in them!
Chapter 13
We are closing the epistle, and we get what is common in all the epistles - some little details. It is eminently the structure of Paul's epistles to begin with doctrine and close with exhortation. So it is here. "Let brotherly love continue". Then a brother may be a stranger. "Be not forgetful to entertain strangers". And to encourage them to that duty, they are reminded that some in their own history entertained angels unawares. Then another duty - "Remember them that are in bonds", and the encouragement follows - "as bound with them". Take your place in the body of Christ as His prisoners, not prisoners corporeally but mystically. When he speaks of suffering for Christ's sake, he appeals to you in your mystic place; but when he speaks of suffering adversity (verse 3) in a common, ordinary way, he appeals to natural life "as being yourselves also in the body".
Then we get the divine duties of purity and unworldliness. Unworldliness is expressed in the words,
{57}
"Content with such things as ye have", not seeking to be richer tomorrow than today. Then the Lord speaks in verse 5, and you answer Him in verse 6. It is the response of faith to grace - the reply of the heart of the believer to the heart of the Lord God. Then comes the duty of subjection - "Remember them which have [or rather have had] the rule over you". Not a blind following of them, as when they were heathens (@1 Corinthians 12: 2) following dumb idols. Are you to be led blindfolded? No; you are to be led intelligently. "No one can say, Lord Jesus, unless in the power of the Holy Spirit" (verse 3). We are living people of a living temple. So it is, "considering the end of their conversation". They died in faith, as they preached faith.
Now he leaves all that and starts in verse 8 from another point; and this verse 8 may be called the motto of the epistle. Only in one light I grant. What I mean is that, as we have seen before, the Spirit of God in this epistle is looking at one thing after another - taking a passing glance at angels, at Moses, at Joshua, at Aaron, at the old covenant, at the altars with their victims, and setting every one of them aside to let in Christ. And you would not have it otherwise. With your whole heart and your whole soul you set your seal to that. Let all go to make room for Christ; and when Christ is brought in, do not let Him go for anything. This is what you get in verse 8. He is gazing for a moment at the object of the epistle. 'I have displaced everything to let Him in, and now keep Him before you'. It is a most blessed peroration of the whole teaching of the epistle.
Then there comes a corollary - a conclusion to that: "Be not carried about with divers and strange doctrines;"
{58}
doctrines foreign to Christ. You have got everything in Christ; take care to hold fast by Him. Then if I get Christ as my religion I get grace. "It is a good thing that the heart be established with grace". The Lord is set before you and me as the sum of our religion, and that religion is a religion that breathes grace to the poor sinner.
Now do not read verse 9 as if you could to some extent establish your heart with meats. Observe the punctuation; a semicolon after "grace", cuts it off from the close of the verse. Meats do nothing for you; as he tells you in another place - "Touch not; taste not; handle not" (@Colossians 2: 21). They bring neither profit nor honour to you. Suppose you accumulate carnal religious observances. If @Colossians 2 tells me there is no honour in them, this tells me there is no profit in them. When probed and searched out, they are all to the satisfaction of the flesh. The moment I get the Lord brought in, I get the heart established in grace. Did you ever hear it remarked that not a single religion on earth takes grace as its secret, but the divine religion? It is keeping God quiet, if you can, with them all. God's religion is the only religion ever thought of that takes grace for its basis. This is exactly contemplated here. Do not be carried away with doctrines foreign to Christ.
"We have an altar". What is the altar of this dispensation? It is an altar exclusively for burnt-offerings - the praises of God. The Jews had an altar for expiatory sacrifice. We have no such altar. Christ has been on the altar of expiation, and now we, as priests, minister at an altar of God's praise. We remember that the Son of God's blood has been shed, and we serve at an altar where we
{59}
know sin as cancelled, blotted out, thrown behind the back; and there at your altar you are rendering a constant service of thanksgiving. But they that go back to the services of the tabernacle have no right, no competency, to stand as priests at the altar of this dispensation. Many a loved and loving soul is struggling with a legal mind, but that is a very different thing from displacing Christ for anything, as the Galatians were doing, putting a crutch under Him. The Spirit, in this epistle, does not quarrel with the poor struggling soul, but if you are seeking to offer expiatory sacrifices and not holding your altar diligently for praise Godward, you are blaspheming the sacrifice of the Son of God.
Now, having put you at your altar, and also within the holiest, he shows you your place outside the camp. Jesus was accepted in the holiest by God, and He was put outside the camp by men. You are to be with Christ in both these places. That is where this dispensation puts you; and if ever moral glory attached to a creature of God, it is that which attaches to you at this moment. Called outside the camp with Him to bear His reproach! Are angels in such conditions? Did He ever say to them, "Ye are they which have continued with me in my temptations" (@Luke 22: 28)? Angels are never invited to be the companions of His sorrow. He has never put such honour on angels as on you. Therefore by-and-by the church will be nearer the throne than angels. "Here have we no continuing city". Christ had none.
But further, we see in verse 16 another beautiful thing, another character of service for your altar: "But to do good and to communicate forget not". In various scriptures we
{60}
find that the more joy we have in God, the more large-hearted we shall be to one another. It is the very character of joy to enlarge the heart. As in @Nehemiah 8: 10 - 12, where the prophet tells the people, "Go your way, eat the fat, and drink the sweet, and send portions unto them for whom nothing is prepared: for this day is holy unto our Lord: neither be ye sorry; for the joy of the Lord is your strength ... And all the people went their way ... to send portions, and to make great mirth". A man that is happy himself can afford to look round and make others happy with him.
After this the apostle comes to those who have present rule. Those in verse 7 are those who had died. Is this a blind subjection, I ask again? No; you are to take knowledge of them. "They watch for your souls". Office without power, without the unction of the Holy Spirit, is a thing this dispensation does not know, and if we know of it, we have got into the corrupt element of it and out of God's element. It is a part of your fidelity to God to keep the dispensation in purity; and mere official authority is an idol.
This vessel of the Holy Spirit, this mightiest servant that ever served in God's name, comes down to the feeblest saint, "Pray for us", and he asks it on the authority of a good conscience. Could you ask another to pray for you if you were purposing to err? I will answer for it, you could not. And here it is on the ground of a good conscience that the apostle asks prayer. Then he gives them a subject of prayer. Oh! the familiarity of scripture! You are not taken out of your own world of affections and sympathies. Then he breaks out into his doxology. Now, if
{61}
we remember what we were saying to one another, we shall find here something new and strange. We get the Lord in this verse 20 in resurrection not ascension. The great theme of the epistle is, as we have seen from the beginning hitherto, Christ displayed in heaven, but here the apostle does not go beyond resurrection. Why in closing does he bring down Christ from heaven? He has been keeping our eyes straining after Him into heaven, and just at the close He brings Him down to earth. Yes, for it is very sweet to know that we need not travel beyond death and resurrection, to come in contact with the God of peace. You have reached the God of peace when you have reached the God of resurrection. Resurrection shows that death is abolished. Death is the wages of sin; and if death is abolished sin is abolished, because death hangs on sin, as the shadow on the substance.
The covenant is called "everlasting", because it is never to be displaced. The old covenant was put away. The new covenant is ever new, never abrogated. The blood is as fresh this moment to speak peace to the conscience as when the veil was rent. So when we come to daily life, we are brought down to be in all simplicity in company with the God of peace, that has raised the great Shepherd from the dead, by the blood that has sealed remission of sins for ever. So you may forget sin. In one great sense we shall remember it for ever, but as far as that which constitutes your condition before God you may forget it for ever.
Then he prays that God may adjust and mould us to do His will. What poor adjustment there is in you and me, compared with that verse. We are awkward in our business, as if we were not at home in it. And then, at the
{62}
last, he just closes by a few common words to the brethren. "Grace be with you all. Amen".
Conclusion
We may remember that I have observed several distinct lines of thought running through this epistle. In taking leave of it we may consider it and see how these various lines all meet in harmony, and give us in result a conclusion infinitely divine. The lines of thought are these:
(1) The Spirit is displacing one thing after another to let in Christ.
(2) Having brought in Christ, the Spirit holds Him up in the varied glories in which He is now filling the heavens.
(3) The Spirit shows how Christ, being brought in, acts on everything to perfect it; that whatever a glorified Christ touches He perfects: and, among other things, He perfects our consciences.
(4) This being so, on the ground of my reconciliation as a sinner I am introduced to a temple of praise.
These four things may be looked at independently, yet it is very blessed to see that they acquire fresh glory when seen in connection one with another. Now I do say there is a magnificence in such a divine writing that needs nothing but itself to tell its glory. I am in contact with something that is infinitely the mind of God, with some of the most wondrous discoveries that God can make of Himself to me. But ere we quit our sweet and happy task, we will look a little particularly at these four things. In chapters 1 and 2, the Spirit displaces angels to let in Christ. In
{63}
chapters 3 and 4, He displaces Moses and Joshua. In chapters 5, 6 and 7, He displaces Aaron. In chapter 8, He displaces the whole covenant with which Christ has nothing to do. In chapter 9, He displaces the ordinances of the old sanctuary, with its altars and services, to let in the altar where Jesus as the Lamb of God lay. One thing after another He takes up and sets aside, to make room for Jesus. This is a delightful task to the Spirit. God knows His own delights. If the Spirit can be grieved, He can be delighted too.
Then having brought Christ in, what does He do with Him? He keeps Him in for ever. Christ has no successor. When the Spirit has brought Him in He gazes at Him. And what is it to be spiritual? It is to have the mind of the Holy Spirit. Have you ever delighted to get out of the house, to make room for Jesus? Indignantly the Spirit talks of the things we have been looking at as "beggarly elements". Have you ever treated them so? The Spirit sees no successor to Christ. In the counsels of God there is none after Him. Is it so in the counsels and thoughts of our souls?
So, having kept Him in, He gazes at Him. And what does He see in Him? He sees glory upon glory. In chapter 1, He sees Him seated at the right hand of the Majesty on high, as the Purger of our sins, and hears a voice saying, "Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever". He looks in chapter 2, and sees Him as our Apostle talking to us of salvation. Then He finds Him as the Owner of an abiding house, as the Giver of eternal rest, and sees Him in the sanctuary above, seated there with an oath, and hears Him uttering the salutation, "Thou art a priest for ever after the
{64}
order of Melchisedec". In these various ways the Spirit delights in Christ. Then in chapter 9, we see Him looked at in the heavens as the Bestower of the eternal inheritance, having first obtained eternal redemption. In chapter 10: 13, we see Him seated there in another character, with this voice saluting Him, "Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool" (@Psalm 110: 1). Have you ever in spirit followed Christ up to heaven, and heard these voices addressing Him? We want to give personality to the truth. We are terribly apt to deal with it as mere dogma. I dread having it before me as a thing I could intellectually learn. In this epistle it is the Person that is kept before you; it is a living One you have to do with. These are heavenly realities. Moses pitched a temple in the wilderness. Solomon pitched a temple in the land. God has pitched a temple in heaven. And oh! how it shows what an interest God has in the sinner, when for our Priest He has built a sanctuary, and that because He is our Priest and about to transact our interests. Then in chapter 12, when He had ascended, He was received and seated in heaven as the Author and Finisher of faith. That is the second line, and we see how it hangs on the first. The Spirit, having fixed Christ before us, displays Him to us.
The third thing we get in this epistle is perfection. If I get Christ perfect as Saviour, I get myself perfect as saved. If I am not saved, Christ is not a Saviour. I am not speaking now of a feeble mind struggling with legality, but of my title - and I have no more doubt that I have a right to look on myself as a saved sinner than that Christ has a right to look on Himself as a perfect Saviour. Salvation is a relative thing. If I take myself as a sinner to Christ, and
{65}
doubt that I am saved, I must have some doubt of the perfection of His Saviour-character. But we have already looked at the epistle as a treatise on perfection. It became God to give me none less than a perfect Saviour. Wondrous! He has linked His glory with the perfection of my conscience before Him. He has condescended to let me know that it became Him. Does it become you to come and serve me in some capacity? You might do it through kindness, but I should not think of saying so. Yet that is the language God uses.
So then, in the third place, we find the epistle a treatise on perfection. Not, however, the perfection of millennial days. Christ will be the Repairer of every breach. But the greatest breach of all was in the conscience of the sinner. There are mischief and confusion abroad in creation still. There is mischief abroad in the house of Israel. Christ has not yet set to His hand to repair that. There is a breach in the throne of David - Christ has not yet applied Himself to heal that. But the mightiest breach of all was between you and God. By-and-by He will turn the groans of creation into the praises of creation; but He began His character as a Repairer, by applying Himself to repair the breach that separated you from God; and now we have boldness to enter into the holiest.
And then, in the fourth place, we find in this epistle the Spirit doing nothing less now than building a temple for praise. Is He about to mend the veil again, which God has rent? Is He going to revive the things that He has indignantly talked of as "beggarly elements"? Unspeakably glorious is this fourth and last thing. The
{66}
Spirit of God has built a temple for you to praise Him - the fruit of your lips giving thanks to His name.
What have we not in this epistle? Though we may look on each line of thought independently, yet they do lend to each other exquisite and increased glory. The Spirit is, as it were, making a whip of small cords, and telling all to be gone to make room for Jesus. Of course I know they were willing to go. John the baptist uttered the voices of them all when he said, "He that hath the bride is the bridegroom: but the friend of the bridegroom, which standeth and heareth him, rejoiceth greatly because of the bridegroom's voice: this my joy therefore is fulfilled" (@John 3: 29). Moses, Aaron, angels - all were delighted to be put out of the house for Christ.
These things are combinedly serving your soul by introducing you to deeper apprehensions of the Christ of God. What a Servant to our souls the Holy Spirit is in this dispensation - as the Lord Jesus was a Servant from the manger to Calvary. I believe we each need individually to be fortified with truth. We do not know how far Romanising and infidel errors may be getting ahead. If we have not the truth, we may be the sport of Satan tomorrow. I will give you an instance of it. The Galatians were an earnest, excited people (and I do not quarrel with revival excitement); they would have plucked out their eyes for the apostle, but the day came when he had to begin afresh with them from the very beginning. "My little children, of whom I travail in birth again until Christ be formed in you" (@Galatians 4: 19). There was excitement without a foundation of truth; and when mischief came in, the poor Galatians were next door to shipwreck - and this epistle is
{67}
a witness to the same thing. The Hebrew saints were unskilful in the word. But we must be fortified by truth. A state of quickening wants the strengthening of the truth of God.
And now what shall we say? O the depth of the riches! O the height of the glory - the profoundness of the grace - the wonder of the wonders - God unfolding Himself in such a way that we may well cover our faces, while we trust Him in silence and love Him with the deepest emotions of our souls! But some of us can surely say, "My leanness, my leanness" (@Isaiah 24: 16).
*Editor's note - In the book entitled 'Recollections of the late J G Bellett', written by his daughter, she states that - 'The pamphlet entitled "Musings on Hebrews" is the substance of notes taken at a weekly Bible reading at a friend's house (in Dublin). It was not written for the press. I think this ought to be mentioned; because the familiar conversational style was not what my father used in writing*'.
{68}
{69}
THE HOLY CITY JERUSALEM AND ITS POLITICAL INFLUENCE IN THE COMING DAY
H D'A CHAMPNEY
@Revelation 21: 9, 10
The great political influence in the future day will be the holy city, Jerusalem, the bride of the Lamb. With this thought in view, I would like, with God's help, to bring before you the striking correspondence between the church, as here set forth in the symbol of the holy city, and Christ Himself, the Lamb, whose bride she is.
Christ was both inclusive and exclusive. He was inclusive, for He embraced everything that is blessed and beautiful. Nothing whatever was wanting in Christ that God could delight in, and which He would have man to be. The world could never produce a man like Christ. Christ was everything and had everything. Every moral grace and good was there, nothing was lacking. He fully expressed God and what was of God. The more the disciples listened to Him the more they were amazed to find how blessed He was. Each day He seemed to be more wonderful than the day before. In Him, God Himself was "manifested in flesh". Christ was the embodiment of all the good and of all the grace that is in the heart of God for man, and all that good was perfectly expressed in *Man*. He was entirely of God, the heavenly Man, the Man out of heaven.
On the other hand, Christ was the most exclusive Man the world has ever seen. He excluded everything that was of the world. He would have none of its thoughts and ideas
{70}
and none of its ways. The world can never boast that they *made* that Man. And indeed the world has never made a man for God, nor can it do. Whatever we have learnt from the world we have to unlearn when we come to Christ, and learn of Him. His thoughts were in direct opposition to the thoughts of the world. The world never educated Christ. He brought all that marked Him from heaven, from God, who was the true spring of all His precious thoughts and His blessed ways. He was absolutely exclusive of all that is in the world - whether it was the lust of the flesh, or the lust of the eyes, or the pride of life. He was exclusive of its pride and self-importance, its ambition and its vanity. He would have nothing of its evil, nothing of its lying and deceiving character, nothing of its hatred, nothing of its lust. He had nothing to say to its violence nor to its corruption. He was the very opposite of all that the world is. Who was ever so gentle as Christ? Who was so full of love and grace? Who was so meek and lowly? Who was so dependent and confident in God? Who was so faithful? Who was so righteous and true? In every way He was the delight and pleasure of God, inclusive of all that is of God, but exclusive of all else. He was essentially the Holy One and the True, righteous in the midst of unrighteousness, godly in the midst of godlessness.
Naturally we do not like the idea of exclusiveness. But Christ was also *inclusive*, inclusive of all that is truly beautiful, of everything that has real value and worth, and He distributed liberally on every hand. He came into a world of need with grace to meet every bit of it. He had all the sweet light of God to give to man. He never lived to Himself or for Himself. He lived to God, and for God.
{71}
Though greater than all, He came lower than any in order to serve, and to give Himself a ransom for all. He loved to communicate; and with the utmost patience He taught His disciples, and so He does still. All who are truly taught of Him become like Him, and soon will come with Him from heaven, in the character of the holy city, in order to exercise their holy political influence for the blessing of the whole world.
Now let us consider the inclusive character of the city - what she is and what she has. As the bride of the Lamb the city corresponds with Christ and is like Him. And first, Jerusalem is a holy city. This is in striking contrast to the unholy cities of this world, and the politics of today. Christ is "the Holy One", and therefore it must be a holy city. All who form it are taught to abhor evil, and to follow after holiness. The Holy Spirit is given us that we may be holy, and thus like Christ.
Next, the city is seen "Coming down out of the heaven from God". The city is heavenly, and its origin is God. This is another feature of Christ. He was the heavenly Man, and He came from God, and "such as the heavenly one, such also the heavenly ones" (@1 Corinthians 15: 48). What wonderful influence we should have even now, if every morning we came down, as it were, from heaven, from God, to illuminate men with the light of Christ! The church did so at the beginning, when all were in the power of the Holy Spirit, and individually we may do so now.
This brings out another thought - the city has the glory of God and a shining most precious. Her shining was "as a crystal-like jasper stone". Now in chapter 4 the jasper stone is descriptive of Christ, so that the church has the
{72}
glory of God and the shining of Christ. Christ Himself is the glory of God, and was so when on earth. He revealed God fully, and God was glorified in Him. Christ was also the light of the world, the great light to lighten every man. Never before had there been such precious light. So the church will come out of heaven having the glory of God and a shining most precious. We find too in @Ephesians 3: 21, there will be glory to God "in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all generations of the age of ages". The heavenly city then will bring the glory of God to the nations, and the shining of Christ. How sweetly will that light influence the whole world in the coming day, diffused, as it will be, through myriads of saints! May we have grace to do so in some measure even now!
Next, we read the city has "a great and high wall". The wall is for defence, and to keep out evil. It was of jasper and therefore like unto Christ, and presents that holy nature which repels instantly, and with abhorrence, everything that is not in accord with Christ. "Every one begotten of God does not sin, but he that has been begotten of God keeps himself, and the wicked one does not touch him" (@1 John 5: 18). It is the saving character of the divine nature which allows no evil to penetrate. "Thou shalt call thy walls Salvation, and thy gates Praise" (@Isaiah 60: 18). God has called us to the fellowship of His Son Jesus Christ our Lord, and this fellowship is to keep out evil and to protect the interests of Christ down here, and to share in the wonderful privileges and blessings connected with Him. But it necessitates the fellowship of His death, so that we do not live in that to which Christ died. We are thus drawn together away from the world and sin, and by
{73}
the Holy Spirit are bound together in holy fellowship. Christians need such help in a world opposed to Christ. They are not meant to walk absolutely alone, as if there were no others who love the Lord. We need the help of one another. Now the walls present to my mind that inner work of a defensive and protective character which is wrought in our souls by the Holy Spirit, without which fellowship would only be an empty name. Christ knew nothing whatever of sin, His holy nature was absolutely opposed to it. If then Christ is in us, we have a new nature which is abhorrent of evil and will have nothing to say to it. The wall is twelve times twelve cubits high. No sin or evil of any kind can get in, and this wall is now being built in the souls of God's people by the Holy Spirit, and can never be thrown down. It is insuperable and impregnable.
The number twelve in Scripture expresses perfection in service or administration. It occurs twelve times in the description of the holy city, if we count the length, breadth and height as separate twelves. Thus the great thought of the city is administration and service in the day to come, when she will distribute all the goodness of God for the benefit of man. The city has twelve gates, that is perfection in accessibility. No matter from what point you approach the city, you find a gate. It is accessible to all men. No one was ever so easy to approach as was Christ. And He is still. And it should be just as easy to approach us. The Lord teaches His people to put themselves at the service of the poorest and the most needy. None were too lowly or outcast for Christ to serve, and He encourages us to do the same. Often have heavily burdened souls found that they could approach christians, when they could approach no
{74}
one else. How blessed to think we may be accessible to any poor sinner who has a need, and that it is for us to serve them and to tell them of the love of God. We are left here for that very purpose, that we may give to any and every one the sweet light of Christ, and bring the gospel within reach of all men. There were three gates on each of the four sides that the gospel might go out to all, and that no one might have to go away because he could not find a gate. In the future day the city will be within reach of the whole world, and all nations will find easy access into the good of the city and into the blessing of God.
Another thing brought before us is that at the gates were twelve angels. Angels, though now unseen, have a blessed service in guarding the Lord's people. So that we have here perfection in providential care. Angels were constantly seen in the Jewish dispensation protecting and guarding the saints, or opening prison doors, rendering some outward assistance to the Lord's earthly people. And they still serve us though unseen. @Hebrews 1: 14 says: "Are they not all ministering spirits, sent out for service on account of those who shall inherit salvation?" The Lord, too, says of infants, "their angels in the heavens continually behold the face of my Father who is in the heavens" (@Matthew 18: 10). We little know how the objects of God's love are cared for in this way. Angels will have their recognition in the coming day. They have, for nearly two thousand years, cared for and protected God's people providentially, and they are at the gates in the day of glory. They will escort the city when it descends from heaven. Though in a somewhat different way, they will serve Christ and those who are Christ's. They will ever be at the
{75}
bidding of Christ. They are "mighty in strength, that execute his word, hearkening unto the voice of his word" (@Psalm 103: 20).
Further, I would notice that on the gates were inscribed the names of the twelve tribes of the sons of Israel. God can never forget Israel. It is from them that we got our light at the beginning of the gospel, for the first preachers were all Israelites, and so too the first converts. Also the history of the children of Israel was written for our instruction. Further, there will not only be a wonderful heavenly rule in the day of glory, but there will be perfection in earthly administration by means of the twelve tribes of Israel, who will occupy the first place on earth, and form twelve great nations. Israel will get its greatness and glory from Christ through the heavenly Jerusalem. They will be the first to get the good and blessing of the holy city, and they in turn will become a blessing to the nations, and all who bless them will be blessed. They will love God with all their heart, and their neighbour as themselves, and be the centre of blessing on the earth.
Again, the wall of the city has twelve foundations. Everything at the present moment is unstable. Men's hearts are failing them for fear. Things that seemed perfectly safe are giving way. But the walls of the holy city are marked by perfection in stability. Very soon there will be a general shaking of everything. "For thus saith Jehovah of hosts: Yet once, it is a little while, and I will shake the heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and the dry land; and I will shake all nations, and the desire of all nations shall come" (@Haggai 2: 6, 7). And this means "the removing of what is shaken, as being made, that what is
{76}
not shaken may remain" (@Hebrews 12: 27). Christians receive a kingdom which cannot be shaken. The city cannot be shaken. Christ can never be overthrown, and never has been, great though the failure of our testimony has been. Christ still remains as precious and as faithful as ever to His people, and He is absolutely reliable.
Next we read that on the foundations are the names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb. The Lord entrusted the apostles with the testimony to give to us. He gave them the words which the Father gave Him, and they received them, and they have ministered them to the saints. Then it was given to Paul to complete the word of God. We get, therefore, here, the thought of perfection in testimony. Centuries have gone by, but nothing has been added to apostolic testimony. The church has been built upon it, upon their presentation of God as revealed in Christ. Nothing can be added to Paul's gospel. The whole light of a Saviour God was preached at the beginning, and nothing has been added to it since apostolic days.
Next, we come to the measurement of the city. It is a golden measure that is used, for God only can truly measure things. The measure must be divinely right. And it is the measure of *a man*. The city can never rise to Deity, it must keep its true place, and Christ as Man is the only standard of measurement according to God. There can be no exaggeration, no making great what is small, nor making small what is great. We get here perfection in symmetry. There is nothing which protrudes nor which offends the eye, for there was nothing uneven in Christ. The city is a perfect cube and absolutely and entirely the work of God. The length, breadth, and height are each
{77}
twelve thousand stadia. It is far beyond any other city in measurement. It surpasses everything. It is God's greatest work, for it is the full setting forth of Christ. It is fifteen hundred miles high, whereas the wall is only about two hundred and fifty feet high. This shows that the greatest thought is not salvation, nor power to protect itself from evil, for Christ goes far beyond that. So, too, the city expresses a much greater thought than that of the wall. In every direction it measures twelve thousand stadia, and it sets forth the perfection of Christ. There Christ is set forth in all His greatness.
Again, the city is pure gold, like pure glass. Even the street of it is pure gold, as transparent glass. That is, the public highway is marked by divine righteousness and transparency. It is through and through what Christ was and is. There is no part dark. The saints are made righteous as He is righteous, and "created in truthful righteousness and holiness" (@Ephesians 4: 24). Nothing less will satisfy the thought of God. Christ, who "knew not sin he has made sin for us, that *we* might become God's righteousness in Him" (@2 Corinthians 5: 21). Both publicly and privately, as the street and the inner part of the city indicate, the church becomes the full expression of the righteousness of God. If the question be asked - How could God put sinners in heaven? the heavenly saints will give the answer, for there will not be a trace of sin about us, or in us, then, nothing whatever to show that we had ever been sinners. We shall be, in Christ, the perfect expression of God's righteousness in putting sin away in the sacrifice of Christ, who was made sin for us. The heavenly company will not be sinners. They will be absolutely abhorrent of sin and perfectly
{78}
righteous. We shall be entirely like Christ, and a grand proof to the universe of how completely God has put away sin in the death of Christ, and has satisfied all the claims of His righteousness.
I would say again, that great though the wall is, and high, the city is greater and higher still. It is blessed to be saved and to be impregnable against evil, but it is a greater thought that we should be in every respect like Christ and for the delight of God. What a wonderful day it will be when myriads of saints, in the image and likeness of Christ, reflect His glory for the blessing of the earth. At the present moment Christ is but feebly seen in us christians, but He is seen in no others, for none but true christians can bring the rays of a living Christ into this dark world. All others speak and act like the world, for they are of the world. Soon the whole world will be filled with His glory.
Next, we find that the foundations are adorned with twelve kinds of precious stones. "The first foundation, jasper; the second, sapphire; the third, chalcedony; the fourth, emerald; the fifth, sardonyx; the sixth, sardius; the seventh, chrysolite; the eighth, beryl; the ninth, topaz; the tenth, chrysoprasus; the eleventh, jacinth; the twelfth, amethyst". Here we have then perfection in what is precious and valuable. Everything that has moral value and worth is found there, as was the case with Christ Himself, and is still. Nothing whatever was wanting in Him. All grace was there, everything that God could value. There was more value in Him when down here than there was in the whole world put together. He presented everything that is precious in the eye of God, and that in striking contrast to the world. Babylon, the false church, is built upon every
{79}
vile and worthless principle, on selfishness, pride and lust of all kinds, and will fall in one moment when its day of judgment comes. But Jerusalem, the true church, is founded in everything that is precious, as set forth in Christ, and now in those who are Christ's, at least in the measure in which they are like to Him. It will be the most valuable building in the universe, because it will resemble Christ more closely than any other.
Next we read that the twelve gates were twelve pearls. "Each one of the gates, respectively, was of one pearl". This sets forth perfection of beauty. At whichever gate you approach the city, you are struck by its amazing beauty. It is unparalleled. There was never such beauty seen in this world before as was seen in Christ. But it needed anointed eyes to see it. In the eyes of the blinded Jews there was "no beauty" that they should desire Him. There was no halo round His head, as is falsely represented in pictures. But there was a moral halo, an indescribable moral beauty which at once marked Him off from every other man. See, for instance, how, in contrast to the bitterest hatred round Calvary's cross, the beauty of His spirit shone out in the words: "Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do" (@Luke 23: 34). Similar beauty too, marked the early christians. The words of Stephen when they were stoning him to death, illustrate this: "Lord, lay not this sin to their charge" (@Acts 7: 60). There is a beautiful spirit about christians who live and walk under the influence of Christ, which at once attracts those who are seeking light. The only approach to the city to get the good and blessing of it is by means of the gates of pearl, the beautiful testimony of Christ. Christ sold all that He had to buy the church, the
{80}
"pearl of great value". Its beauty corresponds with that of Christ Himself.
Here I would notice that the throne of God and of the Lamb shall be in it. For this city of light and glory will be the seat of the rule and government when God and the Lamb are universally owned. God could never connect His rule with Babylon, where man must have a name, and which is only a system of confusion and evil. The holy Jerusalem is the seat of His rule, and the saints will reign with Him for ever and ever. Yea, even now, if we are right, He rules in our hearts; His throne is there. If we submit to His rule now, we shall be trusted with rule and political influence when Christ reigns.
Then, proceeding from the throne is the river, a pure river of water of life. It presents the living influence of the Spirit flowing far and wide and bringing life wherever it goes. Its source is God and the Lamb, but no one can say how far it flows. "He that will, let him take the water of life freely". It is found in the city, for all true christians have the Holy Spirit. It is both now and in that day the Spring and Power of all blessing, and goes out far and wide.
In the midst of the street of the city, and on either side of the river, is the tree of life, producing twelve fruits, yielding fresh fruit every month. The tree is Christ Himself, and the twelve fruits express perfection in delight, for Christ knows how, both now and also then, to minister unceasing fresh delight to those who feed on Him. What was lost through the fall of man, is given us in a far higher and more blessed way in Christ. Then the leaves of the tree are for the healing of the nations. It may be we
{81}
shall be employed in healing the nations, by bringing to them as it were a leaf from the tree of life. Oh, that now, instead of hurting one another, we knew more how to heal the wounded with the grace of Christ.
Now let us look at the exclusive side. There are seven things which the city excludes. First, no temple is there, no distance, nothing whatever between us and God. It excludes the religion of this world, which puts us at a comparative distance and would rail off God's people lest they should come too near. But we shall be in His immediate presence, in holy enjoyment of His love, and we may be now. The Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are the temple of it. Secondly, the city has no need of the sun, nor of the moon, to shine in it. It is exclusive of all created lights. There is no place there for great men, nor for glorying in man. The Lamb is the great luminary there, diffusing the light of the glory of God. And instead of the kings of the earth hating the city, as they will do the false church, the great whore, Babylon the great, and destroying it, they bring their glory and honour unto it. The nations, too, greet the welcome influence of the holy city, and walk in the light of it. Thirdly, "night shall not be there". No authority of darkness has sway there. It is all light, there is no dark spot. All there love the light and are light. Therefore the exclusive city is always open. "Its gates shall not be shut at all by day". The gates of a city are shut at *night*, but there is no night there, and so the gates are always open. The more exclusive of evil we are, the more open we shall be for the blessing of man. We must be exclusive, if we would keep the gates always open. Fourthly, nothing common, nor that maketh an
{82}
abomination shall enter there. It is impossible to connect Christ with defilement. The city must be holy and so free from defilement. Fifthly, no idolatry has place there, "nor that maketh an abomination". God has had His witnesses against idolatry ever since the days of Abraham, and of Babel when, by means of idols, demons got man's heart instead of God. "Children, keep yourselves from idols" (@1 John 5: 21). Everything that takes the place of God in our hearts is an idol. But nothing that works idolatry shall enter there. Sixthly, no lie is there, nor anything that maketh a lie. Satan brought in the lie. Christ was the truth. Nothing false will the Spirit support in those who are Christ's. All must be true. Lastly, no curse is there, for "no curse shall be any more". Sin brought in the curse, but Christ removes it. Christ never taught us to curse, but rather to bless. No people have ever been such a blessing as christians, and then we shall be the blessing of the nations. What a day that will be for His servants! They have been despised for thousands of years, but then they "shall serve him, and they shall see his face; and his name is on their foreheads" - not the name of the beast, but the name of God and of the Lamb!
Then when the millennium is over, and the new heaven and new earth are seen, the holy city, new Jerusalem, will be the tabernacle of God, and God will dwell with men for ever and ever. May we all be fitted now to have our part in it, for His name's sake!
*Place and date unknown*.
{83}
RESPONSE
G V STANLEY
@Hosea 2: 19 - 23; @Hosea 14: 1 - 3, 8, 9; @1 Corinthians 14: 15, 16, 29 - 32; @Revelation 3: 20 - 22; @Revelation 22: 20, 21
The thought of response is on my mind. We see that feature - as every other feature - perfectly in the Lord Jesus Christ. When He was here upon earth, for the first time God had One here who yielded Him full and perfect response in every word, in every movement, in every motive of His heart. It is touching to think of what the Lord turned into account in praise to God; the books of Psalms show that He would turn even His abandonment by God into praise. Think of His turning the very hiding of God's face from Him into a theme for praise. If cities refused His ministry, if He felt their turning from Him, it says, that, "At that time, Jesus answering said, I praise thee, Father, Lord of the heaven and of the earth, that thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them to babes" (@Matthew 11: 25). He "*answering* said ..". He was giving a response to God. What a word for us if we are found in a complaining spirit! Jesus turned the very hostility, the very refusal of precious ministry, into account in praising God, and taking up thankfully the babes.
How important for each of us to give attention to ministry! If we despise it, dust may be shaken off the feet of some ministers against us; but God will see that some get it - "babes", some in simplicity, some lowly, some
{84}
shall get the blessing. The Lord saw in those babes those who would respond to His teaching, those outwardly small but potentially great - great enough at the end of that gospel to be told that they were to sit on thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. So we see this feature of response to God perfectly in the Lord Jesus, constant communion and turning of things into account in praise to God. Is this feature with us? Do we allow God's ways with us to produce psalms, and hymns, and spiritual songs? God is looking for response; if we fail Him, others shall be giving it to Him. What a wondrous opportunity we have of affording response to God!
I read from the prophet Hosea, feeling how interesting is the way in which God begets response in a day of failure and breakdown. Things could not have been much worse, things were so bad publicly, that the prophet has to be told to take as wife a harlot, a worthless woman. God's servants are to be sympathetic with God in His feelings: Hosea was to have the feelings of God over faithless Israel, and by the commandment of God he takes this woman, and by the commandment of God he names the first child Jizreel. God had fixed the name of that boy - his name means, '*God* soweth'. Then the second child is born - a girl - and she is named by the commandment of God, Lo-ruhamah, - not having obtained mercy. Then the third child is born - a boy - and he is called Lo-ammi - not my people. Could things be worse? They correspond, I believe, with the outward position today religiously, and, lest we should be caught in the spirit of it we are to *feel* the position, we are to have our part, as Hosea had, in feeling how heartless is the public profession.
{85}
Then God comes in, for His prerogative is to have mercy. He comes in on His own side. He had had that first boy named 'God soweth'. Why should we be together here, freed from much that is religious? We must trace it to God's sovereign activities. Why should I have been freed from what has laid hold of so many? Because God sovereignly, from His own side, comes in. 'God soweth', and here is this little remnant, Jizreel, and the prophet is able to continue to speak of universal blessing. In some ways Hosea is as wide as any of the prophets, for he speaks of universal blessing coming in. How will the millennium be ushered in? Not automatically; it will come in in answer to those who cry to God. The heavens "shall hear the earth; and the earth shall hear the corn, and the new wine, and the oil; and they shall hear Jizreel", and God comes in in blessing. "I will sow her unto me in the land; and I will have mercy upon Lo-ruhamah; and I will say to Lo-ammi, Thou art my people; and they shall say, My God". Well, one loves to think of that moment when here on earth, actually here, there shall be demonstrated what it is for creation to respond to God, as in connection with those on earth who know Him: "they shall hear Jizreel".
So, at the end of this prophet, you get a most touching suggestion of this intimate conversation between Ephraim and God. "Ephraim shall say, What have I to do any more with idols?" God says, "I answer him, and I will observe him". Ephraim says to God, "I am like a green fir-tree", and God replies, "From me is thy fruit found". The better translation makes the speakers clear: Ephraim speaks, God replies; Ephraim responds, God acknowledges that
{86}
response. Oh, how blessed this intimacy is! Have we part in it? What have I to do with idols? "Assyria shall not save us; we will not ride upon horses: neither will we say any more to the work of our hands, Thou art our God". Is there not a tendency for us to be caught in the spirit of this age? It is a day when men are saying to the work of their hands, 'Thou art our God'. The tendency is to be interested in what is happening around us, wondering, for instance, whether England would be first in a race across the world. As a believer in Jesus how can I be concerned as to some national exploit, when the cross severs me from every national feeling; when the Lord Jesus died that I might be separated from the pride and vanity of man; foolish man who would venture into spheres that are not his! We ought to pray for those men. "Neither will we say any more to the work of our hands, Thou art our God; because in thee the fatherless findeth mercy".
Oh, how blessed to have an entrance into a world of *moral* values, to meet the achievements of man by retiring into the blessed knowledge of a God who shows mercy; to find an outlet for our feelings at a gospel preaching; in a God who can bring sinners to repentance; a greater work than any achievement of man's mind or hand! We need to be judging ourselves as to the spirit of what is here; the tendency is to turn back to Egypt, to rely on horses, on the power of the flesh; its weakness has been demonstrated - "The horse and his rider hath he thrown into the sea" (@Exodus 15: 21). I need to keep myself in self-judgment to watch that I do not go back to trust in what the death of Christ has severed me from. Then, as I say, at the very end of this book we have this touching conversation.
{87}
What does it mean to be "like a green fir-tree?" I suppose this figure is taken up by the Spirit of God to demonstrate the possibility of being in a hostile atmosphere; in circumstances and surroundings that are against life, and yet be the expression of freshness, having life in oneself. The fir-tree has life in itself - the cold, the snow, the frost do not damage the fir-tree. Ephraim says, "I am like a green fir-tree;" God says, "From me is thy fruit found". It seems in Scripture as if the very best is reserved for the end. It seems, beloved brethren, as if we who have come in as eleventh-hour men come in for the very best. We have one of the brightest rays in the Old Testament right at the end, a handful of people thinking of Jehovah's name, speaking often one to another; thinking on His name, remembering Him. And we see God's appreciation of it, for He says, "I will spare them as a man spareth his own son that serveth him" (@Malachi 3: 17). God was about to have the supreme delight of seeing that blessed One in manhood, who should come in and fully express God, One who should serve Him as a Son; and He accredits that little remnant at the end with that very character of service. Is the day difficult? Let us be like this remnant, let us feel the conditions. The Lord Jesus wants us to feel more intimately the state of the public profession of His name, the heartlessness as to His interests, but to encourage us to lay hold of Him in the sense of the sovereignty of what God will sow.
Could anything be more delightful than heaven and earth in this touching conversation - a speaker and one who answers? Why, this is what eternity will hold; our praises will be evoked spontaneously. We know that
{88}
angels secure response from one another; they are crying to one another in @Isaiah 6: 3 and saying, "Holy, holy, holy is Jehovah of hosts; the whole earth is full of his glory!" The two choirs in Nehemiah's day surely have some significance - *two* of them would suggest there is to be responsive praise. Many of the Psalms are written in that way - a theme, a thesis, put forward - the response secured, then the swelling chorus of praise. The book of the Revelation would show how much of the praise in heaven is secured by way of response; one burst of praise begets in another company a fresh outburst of praise to God. Is it so with us, dear brethren? "I am like a green fir-tree", and God, responding, "From me is thy fruit found".
The scripture in @1 Corinthians 14 shows how precious this feature of response is, in that provision is made for the simple christian to say, "Amen". "If thou blessest with the spirit, how shall he who fills the place of the simple Christian say Amen, at thy giving of thanks, since he does not know what thou sayest?" It seems as if this feature of response, this "Amen", is so precious, that provision is made that the simple one may have his part in saying it, and I would raise an exercise as to how far we - each one of us - have our part in the prayer meetings? If we came to the prayer meeting to pray, we should have better prayer meetings. We tend to leave it to certain brothers to pray, we tend not to be there vitally. What a prayer meeting it would be if every brother and sister were praying! How much we need adjustment as to the way we come together! We come together to pray, the sisters come to pray; the brothers give oral expression to the desires represented in the company, but those expressions would be more fervent
{89}
and deeper, if all the company were praying. Provision is made for the simple one that he may say, "Amen". This response is so precious, so necessary, that the simple one is taken account of - How shall he say, "Amen?" - as if that is to be the normal order, the expected thing, that every one shall be able to say, "Amen!"
The feature of prophesying, too, is one as to which some of us have had to be adjusted; this coming together, speaking by two or three, and letting the others judge. We are all to be there in true exercise, one is speaking, others should be judging. There should be with us this faculty of discernment. It seems at the end, as if the feature of discernment is specially given to those who are true; right at the end of Malachi it says, "And ye shall return and discern between the righteous and the wicked, between him that serveth God and him that serveth him not" (chapter 3: 18). The feature of discernment is to be with us; we are to weigh over every word, we are to judge critically, not harshly, to weigh over what is said and to appraise it rightly. "Let the others judge. But if there be a revelation to another sitting there, let the first be silent". What a sensitivity is suggested in this, such a sensitivity that the speaker is aware that another is being given something even more precious. It seems to me as if the word evokes what is still more blessed, as if while one is speaking, the Spirit is pleased to give to another sitting there something even more precious, and room is made for it. "For ye can all prophesy one by one, that all may learn and all be encouraged". How blessed these inclusive scriptures are!
{90}
Are we all kept thankful for what the Lord has brought about? There are believers who are groaning under the bondage that they feel; there are believers who seem afraid to pray for themselves. Do we appreciate the value of what the Lord has brought about? Do the boys and girls here take account of the blessedness of what the Lord has brought so near to them? You sit with those whom the Lord has sovereignly touched. You sit amongst those who have liberty to speak to God; you are in homes where there is liberty to speak to Him; your pathway is committed to Him daily; you are the subject of prayers. I think if some of us knew of the bondage that there is religiously, we might come more thankfully together, and in the spirit of contributing. There is room for each one to bring in his distinctive impression of Christ, "And spirits of prophets are subject to prophets".
Then a word as to Laodicea. "Behold, I stand at the door and am knocking; if any one hear my voice and open the door, I will come in unto him and sup with him, and he with me ... . He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies". What will this knocking be? Is it ministry? There is the Lord's voice; there is this knocking too. Does it suggest that the Lord insists on having our ear? Some of us were privileged to hear a word recently as to the "last hour". It was said, 'It is as if John says to the children, You must listen, I must have your ears!' The fathers have what has been written - "*I have written* to you, fathers". "*I have written* to you, young men". "*I write* to you, little children". You must listen, you must pay attention to ministry. It seems as if the Lord is knocking. There is His voice, and what a voice it is! You can discern
{91}
the voice of the Lord. The brethren of Christ have discernment to recognise the voice of the Beloved in the present ministry, it is the voice of Christ. "Behold, I stand at the door and am knocking; if any one hear my voice and open the door, I will come in unto him and sup with him, and he with me". And then it is as if the Lord holds again in reserve one of the finest thoughts: "He that overcomes, to him will I give to sit with me in my throne; as *I* also have overcome, and have sat down with my Father in his throne". What is it to sit with Him in His throne? It is exaltation, but exaltation in affection. Could there be anything more dignified, anything more precious, than what He says, "as *I* also have overcome, and have sat down with my Father in his throne?" It is not dignity and glory put upon Christ in an official way, but given to Him in love - "with my Father in his throne". And He holds and reserves that for overcomers in this final phase of the church publicly, the phase that is right at hand, the phase to which our heart answers, unless we are kept in self-judgment; the phase marked by this feature of assuming to have everything that the Lord has given, yet having nothing and being naked and blind. Oh, what an appeal the Lord would make so that we might answer to this knocking of His, to this voice of His! It has never ceased - and, thank God, He never will cease to speak to His assembly, as long as He leaves her here.
Then, to refer to @Revelation 22: it is touching that the closing words of Scripture should give this feature of response. The Lord says, "Yea, I come quickly", and the immediate response is, "Amen; come, Lord Jesus". When God came into the garden of Eden, His creature was hiding
{92}
from Him. God did get an answer, however. He went on speaking until He won from them the story of what had come in. They made excuses, they tried to hide the matter, but God went on patiently speaking. What must have been His feelings as He came down! "They heard the voice of Jehovah Elohim, walking in the garden in the cool of the day" (@Genesis 3: 8), and Adam was hiding from Him! But here at the end we have, "Yea, I come quickly. Amen; come, Lord Jesus". It is as if the mention of it wins from John an immediate response. The Lord is coming quickly.
You may say, For nearly two thousand years it has been 'quickly'! Yes, it has been 'quickly', all the time, and the years have seemed like single days for the love He has for her. We shall marvel to see what the Spirit of God has secured in so short a time. Think of the patience of that holy, divine Person, patiently staying here, content to indwell a lowly vessel that He might provide a perfect answer to Christ. Oh, the patience of the Spirit! And the Lord says, "Behold, I come quickly" (verse 12). He has never had greater thoughts of His assembly than He has for her today; He is waiting for her like Isaac as he went in the cool of the day, in the eventide, to meditate in the field. He is waiting for her coming through the wilderness - "Yea, I come quickly. Amen; come, Lord Jesus". Then John thinks of all on earth that is precious to Christ, and he says, "The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with all the saints". Do you know, dear brethren, I believe, that if we are able to respond and say, "Amen; come, Lord Jesus", we shall think immediately of everything on earth that is precious to Him. The one who longs most for Him will think most compassionately, and affectionately, and prayerfully of all
{93}
who compose the assembly. John was on Patmos, he was there for the sake of the testimony, he was there for the sake of the other bondmen - "Yea, I come quickly. Amen; come, Lord Jesus. The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with all the saints".
Well, what a feature this matter of response is, and it is open to every one of us. "The simple" - well, the brethren think of you; God thinks of you; the Lord Jesus thinks of you. You will have special consideration if you take the place of being simple. There is one man in the Old Testament who says, "Truly *I* am more stupid than any one" (@Proverbs 30: 2), and that man got wonderful light! It is good to be amongst the simple with such a Teacher as Christ! It is good to be amongst the simple, when heaven is set upon our blessing. Think again of that one who read the scripture in his chariot and did not understand what he was reading: "How should I then be able unless some one guide me?" he says (@Acts 8: 31). Heaven provides a teacher for that one man, and beginning at the same scripture Philip "announced the glad tidings of Jesus to him". To speak simply, if we brought our difficulties with us in an inquiring spirit, they would often be answered in the meetings. If I bring my difficulties complainingly, I shall get no answer. If I bring those doubts and desires with me when I come, how often the Lord has proved that He will answer! How often the brothers have found the Lord has given them fresh thoughts, and they owe them to the desires of someone there; for the Lord is not working automatically, He is working sympathetically, He is using those who give themselves over simply to Him - responsive vessels. We need to make the most of these
{94}
blessed opportunities the Lord is giving us - the meeting for prayer; the reading of the Scriptures; the meeting for prophecy; that blessed occasion - the Supper - when most of all we may respond to the heart of Him who loved us, even to dying for us.
May God grant that we may each have part in this feature of present response; and, as the Lord says, "Yea, I come quickly", may we, as self-judged people, be able to say, "Amen; come, Lord Jesus. The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with all the saints".
*From Response and Other Addresses, pp. 1 - 17, Place and date unknown*.
{95}
THE LORD OUR TEACHER
G V STANLEY
@Isaiah 42: 1 - 4; @Luke 7: 44 - 50; @Luke 10: 38 - 42; @Philippians 3: 17 - 21
We read in @Proverbs 30 of one who said that he had not a man's intelligence, who said that he had not learned wisdom, an attitude of mind that should be ours; necessitating our taking the ground of needing to be instructed in grace, taking the lowly ground, with the sense that mercy would give us, that divine things may be opened up to us. In regard to our learning, I wish to speak simply of the Lord as teaching, and teaching by way of model. Every teacher knows that one of the best ways of imparting things is to teach by models, even in human teaching. If a teacher can find a model he has gone a long way to securing the interest of those who are learning; if he can find an exemplification of the thing which he is seeking to teach, how good it is! If he himself is the exemplification of the lesson he would teach, how good it is!
The Lord takes the place of Teacher. He knows the best way of teaching, and He loves to teach by way of a model. He Himself as the Teacher, was the exemplification of everything that He taught. If He said, "Blessed the meek" (@Matthew 5: 5 - 9), it was because He was meek. "Blessed they who hunger and thirst after righteousness" - He was righteous; "Blessed the peace-makers" - He was a peace-maker. That great Teacher is
{96}
Himself the exemplification of every lesson He would teach.
In Isaiah attention is being called to Him personally. "Behold my servant whom I uphold, mine elect in whom my soul delighteth". God is looking on to the time when He will have One here who will represent Him in this scene. "Behold my servant!" The One who has no will of His own; whose delight was to do the will of Another. Think of God calling attention to the Lord Jesus in that way. "Elect", that is, He will answer to every thought of God as to Him - He is providing present joy to the heart of God. "In whom my soul delighteth". "He shall bring forth judgment to the nations". I think the reading of the prophet Isaiah moves many of us. To think that we were in God's thoughts before Israel was publicly set aside! God is looking on for the nations to be brought in, as He says here, "the isles shall wait for his law". God was looking forward to the extension of the sway of Jesus. He was looking on to the time when some out of every tribe and nation should come out to honour His beloved Son. He says, "He shall not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard in the street. A bruised reed shall he not break, and smoking flax shall he not quench: he shall bring forth judgment according to truth".
Teachers get discouraged with their pupils, but this Teacher never does! He takes you up as you are. "A bruised reed shall he not break, and smoking flax shall he not quench". What poor material the Lord takes up! How do I look at my brethren? Do I expect them to be fitted to some standard of my making? I know that they will shine in the likeness of their Lord. Am I expecting that there will be
{97}
some great change? I believe that we shall have to go on with bruised reeds and smoking flax to the end. A word in the New Testament says that the unruly are to be rebuked, the weak are to be supported, the feeble minds are to be comforted, but we are to have patience towards all. Every brother and sister may test my patience. This blessed One comes in as God's Elect. He takes up the most unlikely material. Think of His patience with Peter, and of His patience with me.
Then it says, "He shall not faint nor be in haste". He is going on. He will bring in a universe for God's pleasure. "The Spirit and the bride say, Come". The holy city is yet to come down from God having His glory. The Lord "shall not faint nor be in haste". He is going on. God's glory, and the securing of it in the brethren - that is the thought. How it would help us to be patient with one another! Not that divine principles are to be given up. We are to stand by divine principles in the spirit of the dispensation. We are to be restful as to the ability of divine Persons to carry the work through.
Paul in writing to the Corinthians says of the report that reached him, "I partly give credit to it" (@1 Corinthians 11: 18). Some of us would have said he had abundant proof, but he says, "I partly give credit to it", and yet he holds to divine principles. He would be unsparing with those who are not keeping the commandment. "If any one thinks himself to be ... spiritual, let him recognise the things that I write to you, that it is the Lord's commandment" (@1 Corinthians 14: 37).
Then in Luke's gospel Jesus is teaching in chapter 7 by way of this model, the woman who has come into the house; she has come behind Him weeping. What a model
{98}
for every one of us here! Some of us may cease to shed tears over our state when once we find the liabilities have been borne by Jesus. We may tend to lose the sense of mercy. These tears are to go on. The kisses and the tears are blended - tears for what *she* is; kisses for what *He* is. Tears of repentance for her state, kisses, the greeting of love that He has come within her reach. He says, 'She has never ceased to kiss my feet from the time I came in'. Why cease? Why stop kissing those feet? We are to go on. Paul went on to the end. Long after his conversion he was shedding tears - "less than the least of all saints" (@Ephesians 3: 8); he was shedding tears - "who has loved me and given himself for me" (@Galatians 2: 20); he is blending the tears with the kisses. Oh, for a sense of mercy to imbue every one of us; that our souls might be steeped with the sense of mercy; that we may never move out of that sphere where the sense of mercy prevails! What a model this woman is! He uses her as an appeal to the proud heart of Simon. In spirit she has become the true hostess. It may be Simon's house, but she is doing the entertaining.
We are all living in towns, or cities, or villages, where what is big outwardly takes the place of honouring Christ, but at heart it is hostile. There is criticism of Him; in the teaching publicly in this country they are even questioning His Deity. What a need for us to come in with the sense of mercy! Kisses for those lovely feet, so beautiful upon the mountains. Why cease? I believe that these kisses and tears are to be maintained to the very end. As Mr Darby said, when nearing his end, 'I go to obtain mercy'. A sense of the mercy that has brought Christ near to us, and a sense of the unworthiness that marks us - this would give us a
{99}
fine opportunity of bestowing kisses with affection on that blessed One.
It says, "They that were with them at table began to say within themselves, Who is this who forgives also sins? And he said to the woman, Thy faith has saved thee; go in peace". They came in with their feelings of hostility. The Lord gives her a touch. Think of the Lord feeling the hostility publicly - feeling what people are saying within themselves, but turning to those He loves and giving them an added touch. I believe the Lord would love to do that as He feels what is being done and said in God's name. I believe He loves to commit another impression to those who are before Him in lowliness. He loves to touch us. What a model this woman still is for us! How much I need to learn of the spirit and manner in which I am to come before God!
And then as to Mary, she is sitting at the feet of Jesus and hearing His word. Martha was distracted with much serving; she came to Him and said, "Lord, dost thou not care that my sister has left me to serve alone? Speak to her therefore that she may help me. But Jesus answering said to her, Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many things; but there is need of one, and Mary has chosen the good part, the which shall not be taken from her". Mary has chosen the good part! What shall we lose when we go? What shall we leave behind? Social status will be left behind; wealth will be left behind; ability to excel over others. What shall we take? My fancied usefulness - that must be left behind. Martha feels so important in this house. To her credit she had asked the Lord in, and to her blessing, too, for if you ask the Lord in
{100}
He will be faithful. It is to Martha He speaks, "Martha, Martha". We have often dwelt on the love of the Lord in saying our names twice. He will say our name twice if we need adjustment; He has blessing behind saying the name twice. It is no ordinary matter. The Lord says, 'Mary is at My feet; she has chosen the good part'.
Do we not make excuses and say, Other people are more spiritual than I am? Do we not often try to excuse ourselves for our lacking of diligence in regard of spiritual things? Mary has *chosen* the good part. Mary has deliberately wanted this; she has gone in for it. The brethren who have served us long and faithfully - where did they get their substance? They got it in conflict - in carrying burdens. I have noticed that the brethren who serve most effectively amongst us are carrying a burden wherever they are. If they are out of the local meeting they are carrying the local exercises; they acquire this wealth of substance by deliberately choosing. "Mary has chosen the good part, the which shall not be taken from her". She has been at the feet of Jesus. We shall all be there. We shall know God eternally in Jesus. Throughout the eternal day we shall know God in Him and *only* thus shall we know God. Mary is acquiring substance. She says:
<blockquote>'Low at Thy feet Lord Jesus, <br>This is the place for me. <br>Here have I learnt deep lessons, <br>Truth that has set me free'. </blockquote>
What a model Mary is for us! - and the Lord would encourage it. He would give us to see that that place is
{101}
open to every one of us. If we feel that our minds are so wandering or unable to retain divine things, He would help us to be found at His feet, that that kind of mind might be judged and the capacity to hold and retain might be strengthened.
What opportunities there are in the prayer meeting, in the reading, in the edification meeting; what opportunities for time to be with God! How abundant the opportunities are! We may receive one impression. Some of us are not small enough, not lowly enough, to receive one impression. If we come in like Ruth into the field with a sense of mercy, we would faithfully take up every ear of corn, and we would know that there was One who would say to the brethren, You had better drop handfuls of purpose. The eyes of Boaz were upon Ruth; he saw that she was faithful, that she could be trusted. Ruth had much to commend her. Let us qualify by coming into the local meetings with a sense of mercy. Boaz says, "Hearest thou not, my daughter? Go not to glean in another field ... keep here with my maidens" (@Ruth 2: 8). And she stayed with his maidens to the end of the barley harvest and of the wheat harvest. What a portion there is as we are found at the feet of our true Boaz.
Then Paul speaks of himself. He says, "Be imitators all together of me, brethren, and fix your eyes on those walking thus as you have us for a model; (for many walk of whom I have told you often, and now tell you even weeping, that they are the enemies of the cross of Christ: whose end is destruction, whose god is the belly, and their glory in their shame, who mind earthly things:) for *our* commonwealth has its existence in the heavens, from
{102}
which also we await the Lord Jesus Christ as Saviour, who shall transform our body of humiliation into conformity to his body of glory, according to the working of the power which he has even to subdue all things to himself".
"Be imitators all together of me, brethren", Paul says; one of like passions with ourselves. One who was an insolent, overbearing man. One who in his hatred of the name of the Lord Jesus had sought letters from the high priest to go wider in his ravaging expeditions, that he might stamp out the name of Jesus. Now he is saying, Brethren, take me and others with me as a model. This is what divine love can do. Do you think there was anything in Paul naturally to commend him? I believe when he speaks of these bodies of humiliation that he was conscious that the earthen vessel was not adequate, it was not in keeping with the treasure that God gave him. Are we looking for outward things? What do we look for amongst the brethren? Paul looks on to the time when these bodies of humiliation shall be changed. He knows the power that is with the Lord. He knows the finishing touch when these earthen vessels shall be made glorious, when they shall be in keeping with the treasure that they hold. But even with the body of humiliation, with all the attendant circumstances, that were disagreeable in what was outward, he could say, knowing the preciousness of the treasure that he holds, "Be imitators all together of me".
How the Lord delights to give us a model! Is there one in your locality? The Lord is looking for models. He is teaching by way of models. He Himself ever the perfect One; but He is looking for those whom He may take up as
{103}
models. There are those who to their shame wear special garments to show that they are connected with the service of God. If only we felt the shame of it - of those who profess the name and do not show it - our part is to see that we make up for it. If I feel there is any discredit to the name of the Lord, it is incumbent on me that I make up for what is lacking. If I see deficiencies in my brethren, it is incumbent upon me to make up for the deficiency.
Paul says, "yet shew I unto you a way of more surpassing excellence" (@1 Corinthians 12: 31). He is a model to the Corinthians. He could give an address on it; he could write a chapter so that it would move us to read it; language that is superb, language that is amazing, as Paul speaks of the features that mark love. Today the gospel is being slighted and the Lord would have particular use for models. If the word is refused, let us see that we are the exemplification of the lesson the Lord would teach. He will stand by us.
May the Lord bless the word!
*From Response and Other Addresses, pp. 52 - 64, Place and Date unknown*.
{104}
{105}
ENTERTAINING DIVINE PERSONS
G V STANLEY
@Genesis 18: 1 - 8, 16 - 19; @2 Samuel 7: 1 - 10, 18 - 21; @John 12: 1 - 3, 7; @Revelation 21: 1 - 3
We were dwelling together this afternoon on the thought of hospitality. And seeking to encourage one another in providing those features in keeping with Peter's ministry in sobriety. And in keeping with the widowhood of the assembly here, as Paul held it in his heart - a widow who yet brings up children, who shows hospitality, who washes the saints¬ feet; and in keeping with John. Hospitality according to John would give us to be found with spiritual discernment as to those who are moving in keeping with the Name.
One desires now to dwell on this thought of entertaining divine Persons, of providing what gives pleasure to Them. It says of Benjamin in the blessings in @Deuteronomy 33: 12, "The beloved of Jehovah, - he shall dwell in safety by him; He will cover him all the day long, And dwell between his shoulders". That is, God will dwell between the shoulders of Benjamin. It is no doubt a prophetic reference to the mountains that came in Benjamin's portion of the land, in the centre of which was Jerusalem. Think of God committing Himself to Benjamin, covering him all the day long, and then dwelling complacently between the shoulders of Benjamin. That is why God reveals Himself. He comes out in the expression of His own love, and so secures what is great enough to
{106}
hold him. He covers Benjamin, and wins from Benjamin such a response.
How blessed were God's thoughts in relation to this man Abraham, who sits in the entrance of his tent in the heat of the day! Some of us tend to put off christianity as we go to our work, and to put it on again as we are free, but our work and our life of responsibility here are to be part of the testimony. I am to be ready in the heat of the day. Abraham is restful as he waits for this divine visitation. Three men come to him. When he saw them he ran to meet them from the tent door. The tent door is blessed, but we are to prove God in our circumstances and to come out as conquerors, as facing responsibility and meeting it, and yet restful for what divine love may disclose, and then vigilant, alert, mobile, as occasion requires. Abraham bowed himself to the earth, and he said, "Lord". What stature there is with this man! There are three men, but he says, "Lord". He recognises One is distinctive. He speaks to One.
I do not think we could exhaust the greatness of what is here. It is a matter for contemplation, indeed for worship, for God is visiting this man and is visiting him in a man's form, drawing near to Abraham in a way that he understands. Abraham says, "Lord, if now I have found favour in thine eyes, pass not away, I pray thee, from thy servant. Let now a little water be fetched, that ye may wash your feet, and rest yourselves under the tree". A greater than Abraham was to think of refreshment for the feet: a greater than Abraham was to lay aside His garments and gird Himself with a linen towel and serve those He loved as He washed their feet.
{107}
What must it have meant to God to find these sensibilities with Abraham! He says, "I will fetch a morsel of bread; and refresh yourselves; after that ye shall pass on; for therefore have ye passed on towards your servant". It is as if to say, I know that the divine pleasure is concerned with others, and with other things. I know that you are only calling on me; but let me hold you, let me do something for your comfort. You stood within my range to see if I would hold you, but wait while I provide something. Let me keep you. How the Lord must love desires like these! Do we want the Lord for His own sake? We needed Him for what He would do for us, for what He brought to us, as we were on the roadside half-dead, stripped. I needed Him on the night I confessed Him in the gospel, but do I need Him for His own sake? Do we value His presence, so that we ask Him if He will stay while we provide something to minister to His own heart?
The next thing is that "Abraham hastened into the tent to Sarah". He is going to bring her into it. Love is never selfish. She is there in the tent: she does not have to be sent for, she is a keeper at home. Hers is to knead the bread, to get it ready. She can do it. She is not buying it ready made. She will make it, and these heavenly visitors will wait while it is made. It is to Abraham's credit that he brings Sarah in. He says, "Knead quickly three seahs of wheaten flour". I believe there is an answer in this to the fact that there were three visitors. Every fresh ray of light that reaches us is to have its effect, and future movements and actions are to be coloured by it. A fresh touch today from the Lord is intended to colour the rest of our spiritual experience and movements here. As we get the light, the
{108}
Lord wishes us to review everything in regard of it, and Abraham says, "three seahs of wheaten flour". Abraham is a man who is with God, and intuitively he is doing what is pleasing to heaven. Is it not pleasurable when you find you have been so under the control of the Spirit that intuitively you have done what was pleasing? "Three seahs of wheaten flour". Knead it, and make cakes. One would plead, dear brethren, for cakes. A cake is a whole thing. No matter how diminutive they may be, let us have cakes in the reading meetings. Let us have whole thoughts. They do not possess them in professing christendom: they have only partial thoughts; they take one truth and press it at the expense of every other. Let us have whole truths. The Lord Jesus gave to Saul of Tarsus a whole truth as He said, "Why dost thou persecute me?" Behind that one sentence, pregnant with meaning, is the thought of the assembly complete, the unity of Christ and the assembly. We were singing:
<blockquote>'And then with Thee blest Saviour, <br>We evermore shall be, <br>In deepest, fullest blessing, <br>For ever one with Thee'. (`140:4)</blockquote>
That was behind what the Lord said in His first utterance to Saul of Tarsus. "Why dost thou persecute me?" The apostle is to come out with a ministry that shall give the saints the blessed light of the oneness of Christ and the assembly. It was a cake, so to speak, a whole thought. Do not let us be discouraged with poverty locally, with smallness or breakdown, but let us cleave to the Lord and
{109}
have cakes, whole thoughts. Let us not be partial as to the truth: let us see that all we have is connected with completion. The Lord says to one assembly, "I have not found thy works complete" (@Revelation 3: 2).
"Abraham ran to the herd, and took a calf tender and good, and gave it to the attendant; and he hasted to dress it". He is going to bring in the young brothers. How blessed to bring them in! Are we looking for the next generation? Do the children know they are loved? Do the young people feel that there is help for them, and affection and expectancy as to them? We want to see them in the divine service; out at the meetings, but also making things their own. He "took a calf tender and good". A greater than Abraham speaks of a fatted calf. We must wait for the Lord Jesus to be here in manhood that we may know the full thought, but Abraham has typically his own appreciation of Christ. He is going to present this to these heavenly visitors. He will detain them over the excellencies that he sees in this calf, tender and good. He gave it to an attendant; and he hasted to dress it. We are to trust one another in regard of the work of God. Abraham is not restless or interfering. The young man will do it. Abraham's is the choice, a mature choice, you might say. It is like the contribution of a proved brother, but he brings in the young man, to have his part as he makes the meal available.
Then it says, "he took thick and sweet milk, and the calf that he had dressed". I am not to speak to the Lord in the crudity of nature, nor in the refinement of nature. The scholar's voice and the uncouth voice are both ruled out, for I am to speak in the grace that belongs to those who
{110}
know God. Much matters as to my manners in the house of God. I am to be there in a becoming way. All this would go with the thought of the sweet milk.
Abraham's provision was set before them, and he stood before them under the tree as they ate. He can entertain these heavenly Visitors: he has all this to present to them. It finds us out, dear brethren. Do we know enough of the excellencies of Jesus to be able to hold the attention of God Himself? It says, "the men rose up thence, and looked toward Sodom; and Abraham went with them to conduct them". How blessed this is! Abraham does not just let them go, and it means that he will be given further disclosures. God says, "Shall I hide from Abraham what I am doing?" Without being fanciful one can see an order in this as to our own Lord's days. After the privilege of knowing the drawing near of divine Persons, we are well equipped to be instructed together in the word, and then to be before God interceding for men. Abraham keeps up his pleading. Wilt thou destroy the city for fifty? If there are five missing, Wilt thou destroy it for forty-five? Down the scale he comes, lowering his number. We have to wait for another day - a greater day - for God to come down to one Man, a poor wise Man, who by His wisdom delivered the city. We must wait for the greater day for the full expression of God's mercy secured in Christ. All these Old Testament scriptures are pointing on to Christ. Abraham has known intimacy in his entertaining the heavenly Visitors, and now as feeling for perishing men, who deserve the judgment of God, he detains God for them. It is a conversation that one marvels at. God will continue to answer, and Abraham continues to plead. Finally it says,
{111}
"Jehovah went away when he had ended speaking to Abraham; and Abraham returned to his place". Oh, for more communing in the gospel! A clear gospel, a good preaching, a stirring time, may have their part, but there should be more communing with God over the gospel. It says that He went away after He had ended speaking with Abraham, and Abraham returned to his place. There would be more secured in the gospel preaching if we were on this line of communing with God as to it.
Then as to David, it says that the king dwelt in his own house: "See now, I dwell in a house of cedars, and the ark of God dwells under curtains. And Nathan said to the king, Go, do all that is in thy heart; for Jehovah is with thee". On the same night God speaks to Nathan, and says, "I have not dwelt in a house since the day that I brought up the children of Israel out of Egypt, even to this day, but I went about in a tent and in a tabernacle". Think of God speaking thus, "I went about". Then He sends the prophet to David to assure him of the prosperity of his line, and to speak to him of the one who is to come after him and to establish his house. What pleasure God has in the promotion of those who love Christ! David sits in his own house, and there comes to him this thought, the ark still dwells under curtains. Shall I not build a house of cedar? He does well to speak to the prophet. You notice that God speaks to the prophet. He does not speak directly to David: He speaks to Nathan, and Nathan comes and tells him all the words and all the wisdom God had revealed. Now see what David does. He went in and sat before Jehovah and he goes over in the presence of God his own feelings as to mercy, and all God's feelings as to him, and all His
{112}
goodness. He sits before God, rehearsing the way He has taken. In these days we are concerned that we may have a prophetic word, but it is not to end with the word in prophecy. We are to take the prophetic word home to our hearts, and to go in and sit before the Lord. Think of having such an experience with God that you can hold His attention as you rehearse His ways with you, as you come into the light of Solomon, the true Solomon, and see that every thought of God has been established irrevocably in Christ. You are able to sit before God with substance in your soul, restful and complacent, rejoicing in the fact that He has One, the true Solomon, who shall carry through every thought of His heart to its full completion. We have been concerned as to the prophetic word, as to the meeting for edification. Let us, dear brethren, go further than this, and see that the prophetic word is to awaken within us a longing to go into the presence of God Himself; and in the knowledge and light of what He has given in the prophetic word to be found in the good of it as we sit in His presence.
In @John 12, "they made him a supper; and Martha served, but Lazarus was one of those at table with him. Mary therefore, having taken a pound of ointment of pure nard of great price, anointed the feet of Jesus, and wiped his feet with her hair, and the house was filled with the odour of the ointment". You notice, beloved brethren, that in all these three passages we have read the suggestions come from those who are seeking to minister pleasure to divine Persons. What can we say of Mary? Her contribution is of great price. It was the wealth that had accrued as a result of sitting at the feet of Jesus. She had
{113}
gone in for the best. We know from Luke's gospel how she had acquired this. She does not appear again in Scripture; she merges in the company now. She is assembly material. Having learnt at the feet of Jesus in choosing the good part which shall not be taken away, she had become intelligent in love. She goes the whole way as she thinks of her Lord. He says, She has kept it "for the day of my preparation for burial". Some of the disciples were amazed when their Lord was taken and crucified; but love in this woman, love wrought out subjectively in her, had given her to go all the way. How intelligent is Mary and the house is filled with the odour of the ointment. It brings out what is hostile. Do not let us be too concerned, dear brethren, when elements that are hostile come to light. If there were spiritual conditions amongst us, what was hostile would have to come out. When the Lord Jesus went into the synagogue at the beginning of Mark's gospel a man cried out. What was evil came to light, and was exposed as the Lord Jesus came in. Do not let us be too troubled at what is distressing coming out, if we have the house filled with the odour of the ointment. The Lord Jesus says what He thinks of it. She has that which ministers to Him, and it fills the house. Thank God, we have known a little of it. As someone's precious appreciation of the Lord Jesus was being spent entirely on Him we have known Him as supreme. Love has been in movement as there was presented what was gratifying to His own heart.
In the Revelation, "I saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down out of the heaven from God, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband". One feels one's incapacity
{114}
to say a word about it, but here it is, God tabernacling with men. I think I could understand if it said that men would tabernacle with God, the God who has made Himself known in so blessed and so gracious a way, that He secures men to ever find their joy in dwelling with Him. Here God is tabernacling with men. It is God finding in men such capacity, such state, such delightful features that He commits Himself to them, tabernacling with them. It would give us to marvel more and more at the incarnation - that One who is God became Man. We learn that all God's thoughts cluster round Christ, and we see that God's purpose from eternity is connected with men in the likeness of that blessed Man. In this consummation of things, the holy city, the assembly -
'Complete and in His beauty dressed',
the new Jerusalem, comes down from God out of heaven, adorned as a bride for her husband. The heart of Christ is forever satisfied as He gazes upon the one He died to secure; and then God tabernacles with men. God dwells with them, finding those who know Him and love Him and understand Him, those who have been touched in grace and drawn one by one. "And he shall tabernacle with them, and they shall he his people, and God himself shall be with them, their God".
One desires, dear brethren, that we may each know something of providing features that will hold divine Persons. As They draw near to us (and in grace They do) may there be with us capacity to present what is so acceptable, so pleasing, that we may detain Them. What
{115}
an opportunity there is ere we are taken out of this present scene, that we have the blessed privilege of providing features in love that will hold divine Persons, that will detain Them, and will minister to Their hearts. So that God Himself can delight in the features of Christ presented to Him by those who know Him. May the Lord bless the word!
*From Response and Other Addresses, pp. 95 - 109, Place and Date unknown*.
{116}
{117}
RETURNING
G V STANLEY
@Ruth 1: 6 - 10, 14 - 22; @Malachi 3: 7, 16 - 18; @Luke 17: 11 - 19; @Luke 24: 32 - 36
In these well-known scriptures we have the thought of returning. It would form part of the great subject of recovery, representing the subjective side with us, the answer to the Lord's appeal in grace, as in response to that appeal we return. This woman Naomi is one who is returning. She had known days of blessedness, but she had come, through self-will, to a time of soul famine and here she is seen returning. She has heard that God has visited His people in giving them bread and, leaving the fields of Moab, she sets her face in the direction of that land which was blessed with bread. She is a returning one. How good it is that such are to be found today! There by our side, for our encouragement, are those who are self-judged, who use this language, "I went out full, and Jehovah has brought me home again empty". They are accepting God's ways, accepting in self-judgment their own part in what has proved so disastrous, but thankful in their spirits to be brought back. Now Naomi is returning, she has her face in the right direction. One loves to think of her companion - Ruth.
What an encouragement for the youngest here, someone who, like Orpah or Ruth, may be just at the point of decision. How many there are coming to the meetings, recognising what is good, but who, like Orpah, come part
{118}
of the way and receive Naomi's kiss and then go back; but Ruth is credited with returning. The last verse of chapter 1 makes it clear that Ruth is regarded as returning. You say, she had never had part in this, she had never lived before in Bethlehem; but the Spirit of God credits her with returning. You, dear young friend, will find that the Lord will early put to your credit all that He can. The Lord has sovereignly designed and planned this portion for you, but as you answer to His appeal in grace, and take your place along with self-judged persons, you will find that He loves to credit you with all He can. Orpah goes back, but Ruth says "Do not intreat me to leave thee, to return from following after thee; for whither thou goest I will go, and where thou lodgest I will lodge: thy people shall be my people, and thy God my God; where thou diest will I die, and there will I be buried". She has, so to speak, measured all the distance. It is as if this self-judged woman, Naomi, had had her part in effecting this spirit in Ruth. Naomi says: "Call me not Naomi [pleasantness] - call me Mara [bitterness] ... I went out full, and Jehovah has brought me home again empty". There was once a king who said that the bitterness of death was passed: he walked gaily, but he was hewn in pieces, @1 Samuel 15: 32, 33. Here is one who acknowledges the bitterness of death, it is not over for her. She will retain the sense of it as long as she is here. Here is one who judges her path and past, but steps thankfully into the blessedness of that which God delights to reserve for those who judge themselves and return. It is as if Ruth's very spirit is permeated with the same feeling, for she says, "Where thou diest will I die, and there will I be buried". It is someone coming into fellowship, so to speak,
{119}
with nothing before them but to have part in all that the Lord's people are feeling and bearing in their exercises here.
"And they came to Bethlehem in the beginning of the barley-harvest". It is always the beginning of barley-harvest amongst the Lord's people. It is barley-harvest today. Is there someone here hesitating, someone who has not thrown in his lot with the people of God? We can tell you in truth that it is barley-harvest. As we lift up our eyes, we see the fields white unto harvest - the features of Christ out of death appearing in His beloved people. We find later that Ruth had her own desires; she suggests that she should go out to glean, (chapter 2: 2). What a comfort that would be to Naomi! Ruth goes out into the field, and you will remember the inquiry of Boaz as to this returning one who has come up from Moab. The eye of Boaz is upon her. The Lord's eye is upon you. He asks the brethren about you, for He wants to know if you are in their prayers, He wants to know if they take account of you. Boaz says to the servants "Whose maiden is this?" He gets the information through the servant. It is as if the Lord would give us concern, dear brethren, as to every inquirer who may come along. The Lord would put upon us the burden and responsibility of knowing from whence each inquirer comes. "Hearest thou not, my daughter? Go not to glean in another field, neither go from here, but keep here with my maidens". It is the language of affection. You know that there *are* other fields - the field of education, the field of culture, the field of sport, the field of ambition. There they are, each one is a temptation to you, but the Lord says: "Go not to glean in another field". Do not
{120}
complain that the meetings are difficult. Meetings can be difficult. You can understand that it must be so, if even Peter, the first of the disciples, sovereignly first, could speak of things "hard to be understood", that the beloved brother Paul had written. If Peter finds ministry difficult, may I not find it difficult? The best ministry is the most difficult. Gleaning is such a simple thing! The very attitude suggests lowliness, thankfulness to get even one thing in any reading, thankfulness at the prayer meeting to get one impression of the Lord, who has stooped so low that He looked upon me when I came up from Moab. It is the gleaners that are needed at the prayer meetings, and readings, those who will bend, those who in lowliness of spirit will seek to gather some fresh impression of Christ. He will not disappoint you. He will see that there are handfuls of purpose for you - not one, but many! How blessed to be in this field! There is full provision. There are young men, thank God, who are working. You can drink of what the young men have drawn. The Levites are at their work. The young men are not failing, there is what they have drawn; there is refreshment in this harvest field, there is the protection of the maidens of Boaz - keep with them. Do not choose worldly companions, but "my maidens", suggesting those who have purity of affection for Christ.
She gleans, if you remember, until the end of the barley-harvest and of the wheat-harvest. How blessed to have part in it all, from the first sign, so to speak, of the features of Christ amongst His beloved people, right on through the wheat-harvest, for it is going to end in the wheat-harvest. Those feeble, failing Naomis, those self-
{121}
judged ones, will yet shine in the likeness of Christ. The harvest is going to be full and complete. He will be satisfied only with perfection, and He will have it in the beloved brethren as He takes them to be with Himself. What an opportunity for someone to return today! How much the Lord has in His heart for one who comes back - who returns.
Then God makes an appeal through the prophet Malachi. He says: "Return unto me, and I will return unto you, saith Jehovah of hosts. But ye say, Wherein shall we return?" The figure that Malachi takes up right through his prophecy is of a disobedient child or children, throwing back in the mouth of the One who is speaking to them, His very words. God says, "I have loved you". The people say: "Wherein hast thou loved us?" (chapter 1: 2). God says: "Return unto me, and I will return unto you". The people say, "Wherein shall we return?" The figure is that of disobedient, gainsaying children, throwing back as a retort the very appeal of love. What an appeal the prophet has made! - showing that right at the end of the dispensation there is this touching appeal of God to return.
"Then they that feared Jehovah spoke often one to another". Just at that very juncture, when there was a hostile attitude on the part of God's professing people, these few made the most of their opportunities. Thank God for the opportunities we have of being together, recognising the weakness of the outward position, but with fidelity and affection that would make the most of every occasion. "Then they that feared Jehovah spoke often one to another". How often? As often as I can be with my
{122}
brethren; as often as I can get an ear, as often as I can share another's impression of Christ.
"And Jehovah observed it, and heard, and a book of remembrance was written before him for them that feared Jehovah, and that thought upon his name". It is as if the Lord takes account of the very feeblest desire after Him. You say, These people do not do very much, there is no great public activity. Ah! but there is fidelity to Christ, there is fidelity to the Lord here! "And a book of remembrance was written before him for them that feared Jehovah, and that thought upon his name. And they shall be unto me a peculiar treasure, saith Jehovah of hosts, in the day that I prepare; and I will spare them as a man spareth his own son that serveth him". It is as if the Lord retains one of the brightest thoughts for the very end of the dispensation. He clothes the outward weakness of the position with one of the most dignified thoughts: "I will spare them as a man spareth his own son that serveth him". It is what God longed for in the beginning. It is what He was about to have in perfection as Christ stepped into this scene, but He clothes this weak, you might say outwardly hopeless, position with this bright thought, as though He had reserved it right through the dispensation.
How blessed the expression, "Jehovah of hosts!" It is the post-captivity prophets who delight in this title of God - "Jehovah of hosts". It is right at the very end that this blessed thought is brought in in a peculiar way. We are in touch with the Lord who is thinking of all His people, of His assembly. As we break bread together, we long to do it with assembly affections and feelings, to take account of the love of Christ for His assembly, to think of Him as the
{123}
Lord of hosts. It may be but a handful; it may be two or three, but He is looking upon them in the light of His love for all His own, and they are comforted that He is still Jehovah of hosts. "I will spare them as a man spareth his own son that serveth him".
To turn to @Luke 17: 19, the Lord says, "thy faith has made thee well". One feels that the exercise is necessary with all of us as to whether we are accepting the blessing without giving to the Lord, the Blesser, and to God, the Blesser, what is due. How much we have been brought into! Taken from the dunghill, set among princes! How much light there is! What a flood of precious ministry! How much there is that we expect and take almost for granted!
Think of the Lord here as moving on to die; His face is set; He is moving on to Jerusalem in grace, and He passes through these villages and towns. The witness of the grace of God is exemplified in those ten lepers who get blessing. It is as if every question of responsibility can be met. Ten are cleansed, but one returns. "And Jesus answering said, Were not the ten cleansed? but the nine, where are they?" How blessed to be entrusted thus with the feelings of Christ! One of the greatest favours He can confer upon us is to share with us His feelings as to what is outwardly indifferent to Him. He answers this faithful one, this worshipping one, this returning one, by sharing with him His feelings over the nine. He said: "Were not the ten cleansed? but the nine, where are they? There have not been found to return and give glory to God save this stranger. And he said to him, Rise up and go thy way: thy faith has made thee well". A question for each one of us in
{124}
our localities is, How much He can entrust us with in regard to His feelings over what is here? We can easily be caught in the spirit of what is in the world. I remember one Christmas morning years ago, waking up and listening to the bells; they have their appeal. I suddenly thought of the cross. What do they mean - the bells? Outwardly, that Christ is accepted; outwardly that God is honoured; but go into the street and speak of Christ; go to those who make the greatest show in any town religiously, and what heartlessness you find! But the Lord must feel this! What are the feelings of His heart over it all? He would have us sympathetic with Him. He would share with each overcomer the feelings of His heart, for only such can truly feel with Him. He is looking for returning ones to share His innermost feelings. What follows here is the question of His rejection. The Pharisees come up and they speak of the kingdom of God. "He answered them and said, The kingdom of God does not come with observation;" there it was, in the midst of them. How the Lord must feel about that which publicly takes His name, but which at heart is indifferent and even hostile to Him!
Then at the end of the gospel, chapter 24, the Lord out of death walks with those two to Emmaus, and they constrain Him, saying, "Stay with us, for it is toward evening and the day is declining". He went in to stay with them; and you will remember that, "having taken the bread, he blessed, and having broken it, gave it to them. And their eyes were opened, and they recognised him". It says that when their eyes were opened, "he disappeared from them". I have been thinking a little of this expression, "he disappeared from them". That was not a normal
{125}
movement, but the Lord loves the two so much that He withdraws from them suddenly. It evidently had its effect upon them, for they speak to one another immediately; they recall the touches they had as they walked, and then "rising up the same hour, they returned to Jerusalem". I believe that the Lord loves us so much that He does not give Himself to us apart from our being with the brethren in a full and intimate way. I think it is possible to go on for years expecting some revelation from the Lord, expecting some answer to the longings that only He knows, and to find disappointment, because the Lord is longing to have us with His brethren. He would have us together in *assembly* features and *assembly* setting. How can I know the satisfaction of every desire apart from being in touch with that which is so precious to Christ here? That to which He gives His whole and undivided attention, until He has her finally in His presence? "He disappeared from them". Is there someone here who has been disappointed in these very longings after Christ? He will give you more than you can ask for, but there will come a time when, on individual lines, He will disappear. He will suddenly, so to speak, withhold support. He will give you an uncomfortable sense that all is not right with you: He is longing for you to return; He is longing to have you with His people. The company is greater than the individual, greater than Paul, greater than Peter, greater than the greatest servant! So they go to Jerusalem, and they find that Peter had already had the light of the Lord being risen, and they bring in their contribution. How blessed that is!
The Lord has brought about most blessed conditions amongst His people. You will find that the brethren
{126}
welcome the least expression of Christ and they will gladly make room for it. How blessed to think of these two returning ones as they bring in their contribution. There is no rebuke: the Lord had brought it about in love. It was evening. It was not the time to set out on a journey, but these two had had such a touch that they felt they must return that same hour. They were like the Philippian jailor who washed them from their stripes, "the same hour". He did not put it off. He had his part in causing those stripes, but now he is washing them. It says, "he took them the same hour of the night and washed them from their stripes" (@Acts 16: 33). It does not do to put things off. These two rise up immediately, and they return to Jerusalem. It is a question of having a present touch from Christ that will set our hearts in movement towards Him, for this question of returning is to be before us all the time; in our circumstances, in our deportment, in our attitude. It is what we are to be doing all the time, *returning*. Each touch of the Lord in love is to secure from my heart an answer, not on individual lines, but as set with those who love Him, to whom He will appear. "And they related what had happened on the way, and how he was made known to them in the breaking of the bread. And as they were saying these things, he himself stood in their midst, and says to them, Peace be unto you".
This, in a way, is well-worn ground, but how blessed if any one of us should get a touch to set our hearts in movement towards the Lord, that we might all be found in the spirit of returning! We all have our responsible histories, and then we have all had our part in church breakdown. "I went out full, and Jehovah has brought me
{127}
home again empty", says Naomi as returning. "Call me not Naomi - call me Mara;" but she is coming back where the Lord is visiting His people with bread.
How blessed it is to have older brothers, and older sisters, moving in self-judgment and winning those of us who are young into this pathway of decision; returning with them, coming back into the portion and part the true Boaz reserves; keeping fast by His maidens and not gleaning in another field. Then, when the position outwardly is in weakness as in Malachi's day, we have those who "spoke often one to another". The Lord is making the way for us to return, and giving the feature of discernment - a precious feature right at the end - the feature of discerning those who are serving God, and those who are not serving God, a feature that the Laodiceans needed. The Lord puts His own valuation on it. "I will spare them as a man spareth his own son that serveth him". There is room, one feels, for us all to be on the line of returning.
May the Lord grant that we may be found with those who return. "Return unto me, and I will return unto you, saith Jehovah of hosts".
*From Response and Other Addresses, pp. 141 - 156, Place and Date unknown*.
{128}
{129}
FEET-WASHING
R DUNN
@John 13: 21 - 26; @John 14: 18, 27; @John 15: 7 - 18
R.D. What was before the heart of the Lord when here was that we should, when the Holy Spirit came, know divine Persons intimately. Now, John's ministry is a ministry for our affections, so that we might be enabled to take up what is for the pleasure of divine Persons on the one hand, and that which would further the interests of the Lord Jesus on the other. It is a ministry that would promote growth in our affections. Paul gives us intelligence in spiritual thoughts and ideas, but John gives the affections to take up those thoughts.
In @John 13 we get the blessedness of being in relation to the Lord Jesus, so that no cloud exists between Himself and our spirits. That is the practical effect of feet-washing. John gives this. He is so near the Lord, and his spirit so unclouded that he can look up to the Lord Jesus and ask Him any question. It is a very blessed thing to contemplate, but immediately we come to the application, we find nothing is so testing. Why could not Peter do this? Are we satisfied to be on the terms that Peter was on, or do we see that our blessed privilege and portion is to be on John's terms?
R.W. Why was Peter not affected in the same way as John?
R.D. That is the whole point. What the Lord did was for a pattern; He would engage us with this blessed
{130}
service. We serve Him and serve the saints in washing one another's feet, but the question is, Am I prepared to put my feet in the hands of the brother who would do this? Why should I object? Peter had a pious kind of objection.
F.R. He thought it was too menial a service for the Lord to perform.
R.D. That is the way he put it, but as a matter of fact there were secret thoughts in his heart which accounted for his reserve with the Lord. So when a question is to be asked later, Peter beckons to John to ask it. We want to see what the Lord intends as the result of feet-washing. He intends that we should all be so in the enjoyment of His unclouded presence that we have direct reference to Himself in the intimacy of love, and we do not need, like Peter, to refer to another. Many are content to refer to some one else. What is the reason? There is a deep moral reason.
Ques. Is it that one is too satisfied with oneself?
R.D. That may be so with one; it might be something else with another. Peter could not lay his head against the bosom of Christ, for there were things in his heart *entirely* out of correspondence with such a place. It raises the question as to whether there may be anything in *our* hearts unsuited to Himself. If so, we cannot enjoy "part with me".
A.F. It becomes a serious thing if we prefer to go on with those things rather than have part with Christ.
R.D. Everything must go which is out of keeping with this ministry of Christ. We want to be so set at liberty that we can come and ask Him about everything. We cannot have our own thoughts and schemes and enjoy intimacy with the Lord Jesus. At the finish Peter got to the
{131}
same spot as John. He throws his heart open and says, as it were, Lord, I could not ask Thee questions once, but now I can invite Thee to look into my heart. Peter came into the blessedness of what John had enjoyed all the time. It would be a great matter if this were laid as an exercise on each of us, that we should allow the Lord to search our hearts, and see if there be anything that prevents our having direct access to Him, and then that we might let it go.
He invites us to the sweetest and most perfect intimacy possible, and this would lead to spiritual intimacy with one another. Peter had to say to John, You ask the Lord. He enjoyed an intimacy with John which he had not with the Lord, but the Lord will not be satisfied till intimacy with Himself is deeper than with any other. Our relations with one another should flow from our link with Him. If I have reserves it hinders me from enjoying this intimacy. The Lord cannot be untrue; His love is a true love, and there cannot be intimacy until reserves are gone. Look at John living in the sunshine of the Lord's own love and moving there all the time. He speaks of himself as the disciple whom Jesus loved, but this is for our exercise and encouragement. The springs of all our affections are to be there, and the Lord would have us realise an intimacy that should never be beclouded. He died to secure the happy confidence of our hearts, so that we might never be so much in holy liberty as when with Himself, never so much at home as when beside Him.
It is a great exercise if I am to ask the question, "Lord, who is it?" and for the heart to say, I do not mind if He should expose anything to me out of keeping with this blessed atmosphere. The psalmist says, "Search me, O
{132}
God, and know my heart" (@Psalm 139: 23), that is, he never wanted to have thoughts and schemes in his heart in which he could not have the Lord's approval. If Peter had only embraced the opportunity that was his, and gone to the Lord to ask his question, the Lord would have said in effect, Before that question is settled, what about those reserves that will lead down to the bars of death? and he would have been saved that long, toilsome road of sifting. The Lord does not want to sift; it is ever so much better to let Him lay His hand directly on what is hindering.
Ques. What is the distinction between the two questions, "Is it I?" and "Who is it?"
R.D. They are very much akin, but "Is it I?" is self-examination, so that I am made conscious of what I am capable of. "Who is it?" raises the question as to what exists in the company. I can only face the evil in others as I have judged my own capability to do the thing. Thus I can always turn to Him, and if a cloud exist, I shall get an indication where it is. It is very testing, and causes one to examine one's associations.
D.G. Could these not be right, and yet there be reserve?
R.D. The hindrance might lie in one's associations, or it might be self-confidence, as in Peter's case. The *root* was there, and we must take account of this rather than of the overt thing which only calls attention to the root. If we valued the intimacy that we have been considering, we should be preserved from going as far as Peter did; the Spirit would immediately produce a sense of distance, or cloud. If I have to ask a brother rather than go to the Lord, what does it mean? Distance is there, and if we valued
{133}
intimacy, we should be sensitive as to this. Are we to be satisfied with less? The Lord is not, and it is beautiful to take account of the working out of His love in His pursuit of Peter, till He brings him to the point that He can entrust His sheep to him; He can constitute Peter a shepherd. Now many may try to be shepherds, but unless their spirits are formed through living in this cloudless communion with the Lord, they will leave marks on the sheep instead of shepherding them.
It is good to be reminded that the Lord never allows us to be happy or at rest, till we are in nearness to Him. His present service is to go on until saints are all brought to enjoy the very bosom of His love. One is struck with the grace and manner of the Lord in connection with feet-washing. He lays aside His garments and girds Himself. If we attempt the service, it is so often official, but we want to catch the Lord's thought, that He is set to introduce us into the sphere of divine affection. "The Son of God, who has loved me and given himself for me" (@Galatians 2: 20), is the language of a man who knew this near place. How readily a cloud overcasts our spirits! You are in a difficulty and you say, There is brother So-and-so, I shall write and ask him. Very good, but what about this blessed favour of referring directly to the Lord Jesus? (@John 13). That place is open to every one of us. The exercise of all should be to take advantage of it, and if we do, it will raise the question of our private pursuits, the company we keep, the books we read, the benefits we enjoy - for any *one* of these things could shut us out. It might even be the innate sense of being the most devoted brother in the meeting, but this
{134}
must not be cherished. I must be emptied of everything, so that I simply fall back on the heart of Christ.
Rem. Where such things are known and allowed they will hinder.
R.D. The question of intimacy, the consideration of the blessedness of it, will bring you at once into the presence of Christ, and the first thing He will do is to lay open to you everything that hinders. He does not throw a load of exercises on our hearts, so to speak. He puts His finger on this thing and then on that, and says, This is a wicked way. You may have been doing a thing for twenty years, but when the question is raised you can no longer go on with it. He may take something else up with you tomorrow, but you do not fear; on the contrary, you are very glad if you are to get as much gain out of tomorrow's exercise as out of today's.
I look at John on the Lord's bosom, and take account of the blessedness of it. The Lord would tell me I can always be there, nor will He be satisfied till I am. The psalmist had come this way that we have been speaking of, and he says, "How precious are thy thoughts unto me, O God!" (@Psalm 139: 17). He had looked into that book to which he alludes in the previous verse and it gives him such an insight into God's thoughts that his desire is to be in line with them.
If we go on to chapter 14, we find the Lord manifesting Himself to us. The chapter begins by describing how He is to go up to heaven to prepare a place for us. Nothing, I think, endears Him so much to one's heart, or would engage one in devotedness to His interests as the sense of this. It conveys so much to one's heart; that
{135}
we are to be brought in there with supreme delight by the Lord Himself, in all the blessed consciousness that He Himself has prepared the place! In the forethought of His love He has gone to do this. I never read J.N.D.¬s lines,
<blockquote>'There in th¬ unsullied way, <br>Which His own hand hath dressed', (`79:6)</blockquote>
without recalling this scripture. His own hands have indeed prepared the place, and when we get there we shall find every indication of the thoughtfulness of His love. But now, in the present moment, those who know this blessed intimacy of which we have been speaking, have the opportunity of expressing love for Christ, and it is expressed in the way we are here for His interests.
We have presented here what is laid open to us in the way of privilege. "If ye love me, keep my commandments" (verse 15). Here is a wonderful door for us! The Lord expresses things from His heart for the saints, and I say, That is for me. Christ has gone to prepare a place for His people, and I am left waiting, but here are His interests. In devoting ourselves to them, we are preserved from self-seeking, and officialism, preserved from the pursuit of that which is not Christ, and we get compensation in this path, for He manifests Himself to us. "He that has my commandments and keeps them", the Lord says, "he it is that loves me; but he that loves me shall be loved by my Father, and I will love him and will manifest myself to him" (verse 21). That is the regard in which Christ holds the one who is found cherishing His commandments. That is a *conscious* love, you do not tell any one of it. Feet-washing
{136}
is a commandment; love will discover *all* the commandments. I follow the Lord, and I hear Him express one commandment after another, and I love Him, and would delight to do them.
Paul speaks of the commandments of the Lord, but John gives you the manner in which they are taken up, that is in the power of affection. They are taken up in the devotedness of love by those who cherish every thought that is dear to the heart of Christ. His commandments protect what is eternal. Apart from keeping His commandments, all would be in disorder and we could not enjoy together the blessedness of family affections. Everything, so to speak, is bounded for us so that there is no disorder inside, and we are free to share together in the blessed enjoyment of heavenly things. But if you have to stand alone, Christ will manifest Himself to you, and the manifestations are very interesting. If the commandments are set aside, saints cannot get the good of a manifestation, and one may have to stand alone. Be it so, He will not forsake that one. What He says is very full and very blessed, "I will love him and will manifest myself to him". Have you a troubled heart? Here there were hearts troubled by the apprehension of parting from Christ; then there are all the conditions that would trouble saints in a world where there would be anything but peace, but the Lord would quiet our spirits. Do not be afraid of disaster, He would say. Do not be afraid of evil tidings.
The manifestation of Christ Himself can be enjoyed, the Father's love can also be enjoyed; it is a special thing. It is a conscious love, it would distinguish the one who knew it. God Himself appreciates the interest you have in
{137}
the interests of Christ, and He loves you for it. Paul said, "The Lord stood with me" (@2 Timothy 4: 17). That was a manifestation, and he had another when things were not too bright with the devoted servant. The Lord drew near to him and said, I know and understand all about it, but do not be discouraged, I have not given you up; and at that moment the cloud passes, and the servant can go on. John, too, had a manifestation in the isle of Patmos, and what disclosures accompanied it! You cannot limit a manifestation.
Furthermore, He would have us in the enjoyment of the full thing. He says, "if any one love me, he will keep my word" (verse 23). "My word" involves the whole thought of God in christianity. All is expressed in Christ, but presented to us as God's mind for us. Take that word in @John 1: 14, "We have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father, full of grace and truth". That gives God's thought for us. He has in view a home and affections there, and in order to have us in the blessed relationship of sons in our eternal home, He gave His Son. How blessed is this word, and we can enjoy it now! We see two who are introduced into it in chapter 1. I cherish it in my heart as God's thought, and realise that the enjoyment of it is possible now. "If any one love me, he will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and we will come to him and make our abode with him". It is an immense thing if God has secured, by the Spirit's power, an answer to this in the heart of a man. He so delights to get an answer now, "We will come to him and make our abode with him". He speaks as if to say, You need not wait for what is eternal, you can have it all now. Today we have "my Father" and the Lord Jesus Christ making their abode
{138}
with us, and by and by we shall be in our abode with Them. If we realise this now, supposing death comes in it will but lead to the continuation. It is the Spirit's day now so all this is possible, and in heaven it will be just a continuation.
One injunction in the Old Testament in regard to the Sabbath was that it was to be observed in "ploughing time and in harvest" (@Exodus 34: 21). One might have reasoned that the Sabbath might have been set aside at those arduous seasons, but the Lord would say, Whatever toil you are subjected to I am not to have you deprived of the Sabbath. Applying this, we see that in a higher way this blessed dwelling of divine Persons is not to be affected by the place I have in the testimony here. This is all private.
We might look for a moment at another thought. In chapter 15 we go out; chapter 14 is inside. The present moment affords the opportunity for fruit-bearing and that is outside. There is a break at the end of chapter 14; the Lord says, "Rise up, let us go hence", therefore what follows here is more in relation to what is outside. So He says, "I have chosen you ... that ye should bear fruit". Fruit is little understood. It is spoken of occasionally as something hardly definable, something that escapes in the air. But fruit is very practical. It is something tangible it is *fruit*, it is not fragrance. One would be exercised on the lines of being fruitful. The psalmist says, "Let the beauty of Jehovah our God be upon us; and establish thou the work of our hands upon us" (@Psalm 90: 17). One wants to be practically of service to God and pleasurable to Him, and we get a very encouraging word here as to this: "If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what
{139}
ye will and it shall come to pass to you". I am hereby encouraged to pray, and it is in relation to myself that I should be fruitful. Suppose I am exercised about this. "Ask what ye will", the Lord says - more grace, more patience with my brethren, all the wisdom necessary - "and it shall come to pass *to you*". I may have the simple desire to shepherd my brethren, and I may feel I am anything but a shepherd. But I am exercised in consequence that something of the tenderness and grace of the heart of Christ may be manifest in me, so that there may be fruit in this way. Just ask, the Lord would say, "and it shall come to pass to you".
"I have chosen you, and have set you", He can say to the disciples here, "that ye should go and that ye should bear fruit, and that your fruit should abide". Think of the wonderful results of the apostles going out in this way! Fruit is a very practical thing. It is very blessed that saints should be set to be fruitful; it is pleasurable to God. A brother needs to be recovered, and one is in the hands of the Lord to refresh him, and he is restored - it is that which abides. A divine idea, if given to one by another, is for eternity; it remains. Fruit-bearing is intended to produce wonderful results. Gracious consideration is exercised towards one another, so that saints are kept in bloom and freshness; souls are restored and the unconverted brought to God. All this is rich fruit. In the end of Hosea you get it, when Israel at last lifts up her head and becomes fruitful. But they have to own that it is all the result of what God has wrought - "From me is thy fruit found" (chapter 14: 8).
{140}
So then we become disciples. "In this is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit, and ye shall become disciples of mine" (verse 8). I start on a line that puts me on the road as a disciple, but I go further and come out as a friend. A friend prays, but what he prays for now is for things to be done in the saints. First, something is done in me, and I am enlarged, then I pray for something to be done in the saints. The Lord has a particular regard for friends, and to such He makes disclosures. Suppose I see that the saints in a certain place are lacking in affection. If I am a "friend", I ask this for them. I pray that they may develop in affection, and the Lord hears, and the saints begin to move. Or one might see they were deficient on the lines of Colossian truth. One tells the Lord and suited ministry comes along to help them. A friend never becomes official. As a disciple I am ever learning, but learning to become a friend, and the Lord does not have us long as disciples before He makes us friends.
In closing, I would say that all our education is about to cease, and He is to take us up to our own place - to the Father's house - but it is in the power of the affection we have been considering that we are preserved till we are all there. The apostle in writing to Timothy says, "that thy progress may be manifest to all" (@1 Timothy 4: 15). Now this is the way of progress. Moving on these lines in affection, saints will develop in wisdom and in moral stature, for the Lord will withhold nothing from friends.
*From Memorials of the Ministry of R Dunn, Volume 2, pp. 10 - 25, Dundee, December, 1918*
{141}
PHILADELPHIA AND THE FEAST OF TABERNACLES
NOTES OF A READING WITH R DUNN
@Revelation 3: 7 - 13; @Deuteronomy 31: 7 - 13
What is your thought in suggesting Deuteronomy in connection with Philadelphia?
I thought in looking at Philadelphia we should see that the very name suggests what we were speaking about as the beginning of things in Acts. Family relations are there and the Lord can take account of them. Philadelphia means brotherly love. I think, perhaps, with many there is misunderstanding in regard of what first love is. I understand that Philadelphia is the response of first love in character, secured by the grace of the Lord Jesus before the assembly is translated. The Lord in His gracious ministry and love to the saints, before the assembly is translated, secures an answer to His heart in first love.
So what was lost at Ephesus is regained in Philadelphia.
Yes, regained morally. We must not forget what we speak of as the public ruin, which is what is outward. Now we take account of the outward thing, and we recognise the ruin; but what was to be seen in Philadelphia were the moral features of the beginning. The question arises what first love is. I thought the type would help us. You have a people dwelling in the land. Moses spoke all these words to them in the plains of Moab. He had in view their possessing the land and loving Jehovah. Then also they
{142}
were put together in such conditions that they loved one another, and he speaks of a day in which this law was to be read. It was to be in the year of release, and during the feast of tabernacles. (@Deuteronomy 31: 10). This second law was made in the plains of Moab, and refers to what is enjoined in the book of Deuteronomy - a set of conditions which were to govern them in view of their possessing, and dwelling in, the land for God's pleasure. In that way we see the obligations that devolve upon us as pertaining to the fellowship. My point is that it was at a peculiar moment this law was to be read - during the feast of tabernacles.
Why was it during that particular time?
That was the time when no brother had any difference with another, but every one was at liberty. Every brother was set free from all his bonds; there was nothing to square up with masters or servants. Every brother moved out, and was at liberty. So you have brethren in relation to each other without any wrong influence during the feast of tabernacles. How good it is to dwell together in unity! Brethren have come up out of their local exercises and settings, and have come to live together on family lines, surrounding the place where God's name was, and where God dwelt. I am quite sure the Lord is speaking to us today that we might desire to see brethren at liberty. There are many things, it may be, in this and other districts, putting brethren at a distance from one another. The Lord is jealous that we should take account of one another, that we as brethren might be in full liberty in the circle. In the beginning of Acts we have the year of release. No one had influence over another brother in a way that hindered him
{143}
in his liberty. One feels that is the force of the name Philadelphia - brotherly love. The death and resurrection of the Lord had brought in the year of release. They were released to love one another.
And no man called anything his own.
I love that expression, "the commonwealth of Israel" (@Ephesians 2: 12). "Commonwealth" seems to me to be a better word than citizenship. But what is our commonwealth? It is the wealth that belongs to us all, and which we would love to see every brother and every sister set at liberty to enjoy.
Why does it say "solemnity of the year of release" in @Deuteronomy 31: 10 (AV)?
It means a set time; that is the time when it is celebrated. I fear many brethren have a wrong idea of first love. Most would say it is our supreme love to Christ. That is an element in it, but first love is a very full thing indeed. It means that the blessed God has a full place in my affections, as He has been pleased to make Himself known. I know the blessedness of revelation, and what I have been brought into in christianity. One is under the influence of the love of Christ; also in the good of spiritual possession of divine territory; in possession of the land in first love; and one loves one's brethren. You come into the gain of all that is open to you by the Spirit. I think we have been inclined to connect first love with Christ. I think first love speaks of the Ephesian position being enjoyed with all the saints. I thought the passage in Deuteronomy suggests the land occupied in spiritual conditions, and the character maintained on our part of all that devolves upon
{144}
us - all being on covenant lines to secure family affections.
You connect family relationships with the plains of Moab?
Yes. I suppose when they did take possession of the land, covenant relationships did not lapse; they were still maintained.
You remember in @Joshua 1: 8 the Lord said in view of their entering into the land, "This book of the law shall not depart from thy mouth ... that thou mayest take heed to do according to all that is written therein". Recognising being put in possession and enjoyment of the land according to God's pleasure, they were never to forget the instructions given in this law, and binding on them all, binding because of the covenant. We cannot enjoy what is beyond the covenant - what lies in family relations - apart from the recognition, in a spiritual sense, of the covenant bond.
Would you say we have been brought into covenant relation by the death of Christ, and family relationship flows out of that?
Of course the covenant in its actuality is made with Israel. We have the blessings of it spiritually. I think family relationships flow out of being children of God, but covenant relationships have to do with the responsible side of things. The difference between the bond proposed at mount Horeb, and what was proposed in the plains of Moab, was that at mount Horeb the people should serve God, but in the plains of Moab the bond entered upon was that they should be on family lines for the pleasure of God. Apart from recognising the principles and claims that
{145}
come upon us as having put our hands to the fellowship, we cannot be together as brethren.
John brings in the light that is to govern the position as brethren, so that we should walk in the light, being prepared to be bound by all that the light discloses. Fellowship is wider than what is vital; fellowship has to do with bonds and covenants, but being on family lines does not involve bonds, although it is protected by them.
What does "This cup is the new covenant" mean?
It is simply the setting forth of the love of God in the death of Christ. It is that which speaks to our hearts of the love of God, but on the principle of a covenant. It is the expression of the love of God and the love of Christ to our hearts. Paul brings in the bond of obligation in the presence of the world: John brings in the line of obligation in regard of loving the brethren. Paul gives what we refuse in order to be true to the brethren when we are away from them; being loyal to the fellowship of the death of Christ in an unrighteous world (@1 Corinthians 10). But John takes up the other side of things, where we are brought together in love to have part in the family of God. So we have two lines, the line of the wilderness and the line of the land.
You referred to the feast of tabernacles would you say a word as to that?
The present bearing of the feast of tabernacles is that we live together on entirely spiritual lines.
I have noticed that this feast is peculiarly available and prominent in remnant days.
Yes, because it is a feast that secures spiritual relations with one another. It would test us to live next to each other for a whole week; and the proposal was that
{146}
they should come up for eight days out of all their own dwellings, and come to the place where the Lord's name was. If you have family affections it would be a most blessed time; it would bring about acquaintance with one another spiritually. The more we see what a wonderful thing it is, and learn to keep company with one another, and speak together of the blessed God, and the things of God, the more we live with one another now, the better we shall be fitted to live with one another eternally.
The feast of tabernacles brings in what is spiritual and eternal, God tabernacling with men eternally - the year of liberty; it is beyond any kingdom thought.
It is a necessity on family lines.
Hitherto one has thought of the feast of tabernacles as having a fulfilment in the millennium.
So it will have as the end of God's ways, which is rather the presentation of it in Leviticus. But in Deuteronomy you have three feasts by which all the people in the land will be able to touch one another, and live with one another on family lines, dwelling together as surrounding God Himself, instead of living according to their tribes. Here you have a Danite, a Simeonite and a Reubenite, living next to one another on family lines, dwelling together entirely as brethren, and God the centre of it all.
When the apostle Paul wrote his epistle to the Colossians, what was on his heart to minister to them was that there should be an answer to the truth of the body now. If people are to be here in the sensibilities and affections of Christ, he says, "I would have you know what combat I have for you, and those in Laodicea, and as
{147}
many as have not seen my face in flesh; to the end that their hearts may be encouraged, being united together in love ..". (@Colossians 2: 1, 2). That is, in other words, that we should be bound together on tabernacle lines.
I think that the feast of tabernacles might apply in three ways. First, in what is really to be secured here for God. Then secondly, when God has reached the end of His ways and at last reached His thought, that He should dwell with men and they with Him. Then thirdly, the end for us that we should be actually together with Christ in heaven in the presence of God. But the moral import of it, according to Deuteronomy, is that we should possess the land in spiritual power now, and that it should be held by us in spiritual conditions for God's pleasure. So we have to introduce two thoughts, children and sonship. I think that these thoughts are involved in the name Philadelphia - the assembly in the last days that answers to the heart of Christ. It is no small encouragement to think that the heart of Christ is to be answered to in these last days when everything outwardly has gone to ruins. The more we feel the ruin the better, but what was proposed at the beginning was moral features, and that is what is secured now.
Nothing the Lord died for has broken down.
Nothing. So I suggest "first love" as one of these moral features. It is what is for God's pleasure, as well as for Christ's pleasure. It has to do with entering into the whole extent of the truth; not the outgoings of affection at the beginning merely, but saints under the influence of Christ; love in known relationship enjoyed in the land.
Could you make the recovery in Ezra run on the same lines as Philadelphia? Here you get an open door.
{148}
The subject in Ezra is the house, not the walls; the altar, too, as well as the house, and the house occupied. Nehemiah is setting up the defences that protect the house.
Ezra is more John, and Nehemiah Paul.
So in the epistle of Jude there are two things Jude speaks of as praying in the Holy Spirit - building yourselves up, and keeping yourselves in the love of God. John gives family relations; building yourselves up, that is Paul.
What about the Thessalonians?
The Thessalonians did not know first love. There are three different ways in which the affections of the saints are taken account of. First, *early* love. It is very sweet to the heart of Christ, the first upspringing of the heart of His beloved ones when they begin to know Him. "Draw me, we will run after thee" (@Song of Songs 1: 4). Then there is *virgin* love, when no one has any place in the heart but Himself. Then there is *first* love, what you have in Ephesus. The love of the people of God when they went out after Him in the wilderness, is not the same as love secured in the land, when they reach possession of everything and when the feast of tabernacles is held in the year of release.
I thought it was a development of the same love.
Oh, that will do; but the development is not from babes of sixteen weeks old.
You say Thessalonians is early love; where is virgin love?
It is proposed in Corinthians "I have espoused you unto one man, to present you a chaste virgin to Christ" (@2 Corinthians 11: 2). No one else has a place in our affections.
{149}
One can conceive there being entrance into virgin love, and yet the inheritance not occupied, and family relations not known in their fulness.
"First love" supposes that you have gone right on to possession in the land.
You know what Ephesus was. All the Lord says about Ephesus is very good indeed: "But I have against thee, that thou hast left thy first love" (@Revelation 2: 4).
"First love" is really in the enjoyment of the land when you are there.
Yes, quite so. We think first love is something we have to go back to.
It means prime love, first in quality and character; not first in history.
You would not get it in Acts?
I think you do. I think these saints in the beginning of Acts had more than the first upspringings of affection. They had not the doctrine of these things, but they had the blessed reality of them.
Those in Acts had gone a very great way. The truth had very real weight with them.
The hundred and twenty had not come into the land by way of Jericho, they had gone up like the spies by the south land. They had learnt what was in the land in the presence of Christ.
They had continued with the Lord since the days of John the baptist.
Do you not think the south land is an allusion to Christ? The hundred and twenty learnt all in the presence of the Lord. There is a distinction between the people who had to cross Jordan and those who went by way of the
{150}
south land. The latter came into it by divine favour. We have little conception when we speak of the disciples of the Lord, how very much they had. We are inclined to think they had nothing till they had the Spirit, but the scripture we were considering would refute that.
They were the most wonderful company that ever existed in one sense. They lost Christ, and had not the Spirit, but they survived.
I think you said there were conditions to which the Spirit could come. That was brought about by the Lord.
There was formation in their souls for the material of the house.
The Lord had educated them and given them many precious thoughts.
I think we see that from the way they come out in the end of @Acts 2; they come out in character like Christ as having all things common.
Well, it is very cheering to the heart that would be prepared to be for the divine pleasure, to discover in the Lord's address to Philadelphia that there is to be such an answer to His heart.
Why is the Lord presented as having the key of David?
That just suits the exercised heart; the key of David opens the way to all the treasure house. Nothing that is proper to the assembly is locked up to us. You cannot tell me a privilege, or blessing, or divine thought for the assembly that is not available today.
The thought of the open door is that there is encouragement to spiritual energy to take advantage of it.
{151}
It seems to me any exercised heart would greatly appreciate this word which the Lord speaks to us; He says, as it were, It is available for any one to come in and be formed in the moral features pleasing to My eye in Philadelphia. If the heart loves Christ nothing else will satisfy it.
Will you say a word as to "the holy, the true"?
There is no change in Him whatever. If He says "the holy, the true" it raises the question of holy conditions that are to be answered to. "The true" implies that nothing has lapsed in unfaithfulness on His part, He is unchanging. Philadelphia would not wish anything else but what is holy and true; that just meets the heart of Philadelphia.
What do you understand by keeping my word, and not denying my name?
I think His word is a very full thing indeed. I think His word embraces christianity, all that came out in Christ when He was here, all that is disclosed to the assembly; the revelation of God is the greatest thing of all. If you have the revelation of God there must be the truth; but His word refers to what He has to say particularly to the assembly. We have in the epistles and gospels everything that has come out in Christ for us, what the one who loves Him would treasure up in his heart. If we think of it for a moment, what an immense privilege is ours in the presence of all the ruin! There is the failure in our own day, and the failure that came in before we were born. The true Philadelphian would recognise all that - the failure that has come in - but then, too, he would take account of this fact that the Lord in His faithful love has opened a door, and no one can shut it. The heart that chooses it has
{152}
this door open to him; and I can have every spiritual blessing as I wait for Him, in company, of course, with others, for Philadelphia is not an individual making his lonely way; do not let us give up the idea of assembly relations. How could we have brotherly affections if we have not our brethren? So the idea of saints walking together will continue until the Lord comes. Things will never be so reduced that we shall not have others to walk with us.
No one would claim to be Philadelphia, but the moral features pleasing to Christ are set forth there, and if I love Christ these moral features will be pursued. Philadelphia is not public, but we can take account of moral features and let these be our ideal. There is no room for pretension at all, because the question is not who the Philadelphians are, but what the moral features are. I have often thought the best example you get in scripture of a Philadelphian is Paul, in the last chapter of Acts. It is all very simple. I like that case because you have a very simple man there living in his own hired house in Rome. He had passed through experiences that really are a lovely picture for us. Thrown ashore on an island after the break-up of the ship, it might have been said Paul would be a case of, 'Light of the lonely pilgrim's heart'. There is the break-up of the ship, but what you find is that at that moment the hand of God is over Paul and those who are with him. It is very interesting to recognise God's providence, and His special care. Paul was on that island just as long as his service to God called for it. Then there is a ship lying there - had lain there all the winter - but that ship sails on a certain day for Paul. He goes so far and comes to a certain spot, and he meets
{153}
brethren - not a lonely path - and they have the feast of tabernacles together seven days. He goes on and meets more brethren, and then the saints of Rome come out to meet him; thus the Lord's interests go on, and there is an open door for everything proper to the assembly. For the same reason Paul is allowed liberty in Rome; the Lord ordered things and put His hand over them, so that Paul having liberty hired a house for two years. It gives us a beautiful example of a Philadelphian in the full support of the truth, and in the practice of it, and going out with a full heart in the gospel.
The picture gives every comfort to the heart in regard of circumstances down here. God has particular care for those who love the testimony. I do not think we can conceive even in this year - 1921 - and all its strange legislation, the immense clouds that may be gathering with regard to our livelihood down here. I do not think we can conceive anything more difficult than Paul had; yet he is able to hire this house and live in it for two years, and go on with the saints and with the gospel. One is thus afforded a view of our apostle, so that we should see the ministry he unfolded to us practically carried out in these last two years. I think it is very blessed to think, if we are friends of Christ, that our heavenly Father knows what we have need of. Do not let us take that instruction up as if it belonged to all who profess to be christians; we want to recognise that these things are ministered to us on conditions. "All things work together for good *to those who love God*" (@Romans 8: 28). There are none so sure of being seen through peacefully as those friendly to the truth.
{154}
So if your tent is pitched by the tent of the tabernacle you will come through.
And the cloud will be between you and trouble. The enemy attacked the hindmost of the people, those who lagged behind the cloud. If I move where I like, and act according to my own plannings and schemings, I am not going to have the protection of the cloud, nor guidance by the movement of the cloud.
"My word" is all that comes out in christianity.
One may only know very little of it. I think His word is really enlarged amongst one's brethren. Mary sat at His feet and heard His word. It begins with the desire to be under the influence of the love of Christ, to be here answering to His full mind. Then the Lord would make known everything to one. I think keeping "the word of my patience", is what a devoted heart would be doing at the present moment; what we are as Galileans in sympathy with the heart of Christ, in reproach here cherishing His interests. While He is waiting, what a great thing it is to Christ's heart to have a few down here who love His interests, and who are in line, and suffering with His suffering interests.
Do we gather from verse 8 that the door was opened because of these moral features you were speaking of?
Yes, because it is in answering to these conditions that all this is secured to us.
I was thinking of these conditions when you were speaking about Paul; there were these conditions, so the door was opened.
This door is presented as something available to us as set on these lines. We have talked about these things and
{155}
yet ignored the conditions. We want to read Scripture wisely and carefully, and if conditions be spoken about let us face them. I think His commandments are taken up on covenant lines; the commandments protect what is internal. His words are more the presentation of what God's thoughts are, but Christ's thought for us today in christianity, and every precious thought that is ministered to us, is cherished as His word. We have the truth about Israel; about the nations; and about what is evil. These have all come to light consequent on revelation, but His word has to do with *us*; so we receive His communications, and all that is set forth in the Lord Jesus, as that which is God's mind for us. Keeping it, is that we treasure it up in our hearts in such a way that it becomes our very life; we respond to it. Mary sat at His feet, and heard His word, but the next thing is to keep it.
We cannot keep His word if we do not hear it. If I go on easily and say, It is all very nice what is engaging these brethren, but I do not interest myself in it, that is a very easy way of getting out of it. The heart that loves Christ wants to answer to Christ today. It is very easy to shelve things and say, I am not going in for these things. Mary had more than a general interest in things - she sat at His feet and heard His word. The Lord put His wing over her; the thing she has gone in for nobody shall be allowed to take from her. Her heart is set as a friend of Christ. I suppose I begin by being a disciple, but I continue by keeping His word. A person who is indifferent to the ministry the Lord is giving may break bread, but will never be a Philadelphian.
These things are addressed to those who have ears.
{156}
Yes.
Would you say a word on the overcomer? In what sense is there an overcomer in such a company?
Because it is the last mile that tells. None of us are overcomers yet; one is an overcomer when one goes in. I can say a man like Mr Darby was a Philadelphian; he has gone home. But the point is the door is opened to us to go in for that. Still, as long as we are down here, it is as Paul said, "not that I have already obtained the prize, or am already perfected" (@Philippians 3: 12).
Jacob was an overcomer at the end; he gathered up his feet into the bed. He had finished his last footstep here; but he was so enlarged as a prince with God that he worshipped God and blessed his children. Speaking of himself he says, "Few and evil have been the days of the years of my life, and they do not attain to the days of the years of the life of my fathers, in the days of their sojourning" (@Genesis 47: 9).
And to Joseph he says, "The blessings of thy father surpass the blessings of my ancestors, Unto the bounds of the everlasting hills" (@Genesis 49: 26). I really have something greater to indicate than Abraham or Isaac. He was telling the truth; and then he speaks specially in regard of Joseph's sons, about the God who shepherded him all his life long, and who redeemed him from all evil. You have morally there a true overcomer, passing in in the height of things.
Passing in in full sail. There is something very princely in Jacob, when about to depart. All that engages him is the purpose of God, and the discipline of God.
{157}
One has often remarked, in this address to Philadelphia, on Christ's personal attitude to those on earth who show this purpose of heart, and this brotherly love, and who pursue these moral features. The Lord opens out His heart to such in these last days. The ministry in these last days is the unreserved opening of His heart to the saints. There is not a word of blame here. There are two assemblies the Lord addresses without blame, one is suffering Smyrna, and the other is Philadelphia in the upspringings of first love. I believe no greater favour could have been bestowed on us than that we should have been born at the present moment, and to have had some little opportunity of availing ourselves of this opened door.
In the world's great events everybody wants to be in at the finish.
If any of us would seek to extend our fields today and to settle down here, these things said to Philadelphia might well pull us up, so that we may rather seek to minister consolation to Christ, and to the brethren.
We can even accept all the present unrest from the Lord's hand.
Oh, yes, and the suffering connected with it. We might even have to go further in that way.
Paul had to get a fire together when conditions were difficult. You find Paul doing things at the bottom and living at the top.
The very fire that discovered the viper consumed it. The warmth of brotherly love will discover evil, and consume the viper that settles on the hand; it is ready to serve at the lowest point.
{158}
You get in the last part of Ezra a very rainy day - rain and cold.
We have been in the habit of looking at rain as ministry.
But sometimes in Scripture it has to do with adversity. Sometimes it is not refreshing.
There are two things ministry will do: it will comfort and refresh; and it will also add something.
The next brick needed in building, ministry, if it be from God, will provide, even though that brick may raise a question in the conscience. I do not think ministry works unless the conscience is reached in some way. I think one of the most dangerous things in connection with ministry is to become a pipe, rather than a reservoir. Unless a thing first of all affects my own conscience, and my own heart, the handling of it in ministry will be damaging to myself. Judas went out preaching, he handled divine things, but it went for his destruction.
"He shall go no more at all out". The Philadelphian often has to go out today. One may constantly have to be in trying circumstances and conflict. In @John 10: 9, it is "shall go in and shall go out", the idea there is liberty; but here it is that having to stand for the truth I may have to go out; I may find plenty of opposition, and that is trying if you love the truth. Each fresh bit of light may bring you into conflict, even with your brethren, but the things for which you may have suffered, and which you have cherished, will have their answer in that day: "He that overcomes, him will I make a pillar in the temple of my God".
{159}
Then the writing is upon the pillar; you become expressive in that scene of what you have stood for here. "I will write upon him the name of my God".
*From Memorials of the Ministry of R Dunn, Volume 2, pages 26 - 49, Oxford, February 1921*
{160}
{161}
READING ON COLOSSIANS 2
R DUNN
What is the gain to us of the truth of this epistle?
I think it is that by a response to its ministry you would be established in the christian circle. If we were all in the gain of holding the Head, there would be a ministry to God of all that is for His pleasure now in the body. The body, as presented in Colossians, is for the present pleasure of God, "to walk worthily of the Lord unto all well-pleasing" (chapter 1: 10). One feels it would be well if all were interested in this, that it is for the present pleasure of God; it is His mind that there should be a ministry for His pleasure from the body. He had from His beloved Son an unceasing ministry for His pleasure, and this is to be continued in the body. The truth of this is presented that we might come into the circle of experience as members who have their hearts exercised that God should have His pleasure now.
This epistle is written that the Colossians might be confirmed in the truth of being risen with Christ, and that they might increase with the increase of God. They were moving in that direction, and this is to confirm them. We could not enter into the purpose of God unless we are first in Colossian condition. The type is instructive. In Colossians we get them pressing through Jordan to the other side. There is no break between the crossing over Jordan, and relations formed on the other side by the Spirit. We get into that circle where these relations are regulated by Christ as Head. Then the going up to the land
{162}
is Ephesians. Unless we are in the Colossian condition as well as position, we do not enter into the gain of the land. We reach Ephesians through Colossians.
Colossians brings us to Gilgal. We are not actually in the land till past Gilgal. We should go on to the heavenly position and enjoy it, and enjoy the heavenly atmosphere proper to it. Colossians then is a presentation of Christ to the heart, in order that He should have the supreme place in our affections. In the type Joshua is presented in all his excellence, and magnified as leader before them. So Paul presents the Lord in all His greatness and perfection, in order that we should accord Him the first place in our hearts, and so follow the ark across Jordan.
None of us will move unless attached in heart to Christ. It is important that we should have Christ altogether as the Object of our hearts; so Paul presents the Lord here as the ark of the covenant. He is the One who was for the pleasure of God. The apostle has certain things in his mind as to the prosperity of the saints at Colosse, and so he had great conflict for them. It is important to listen, for we are confronted with this, that if we are to come into the good of the Colossian position there must be deep exercise on our part; it was so deep on the apostle's part that he calls it conflict. Neither are we going to enter in lightly. And we are not to be satisfied with light; light is not stature. There is wonderful light in this chapter, but the apostle becomes the instrument in building them up in the truths he unfolded, in such a way as to draw out hearts to a risen Christ.
In the beginning of Joshua, when the people were to cross Jordan, they had to make provision: "Prepare
{163}
yourselves victuals" (@Joshua 1: 11). It involves very deep exercise if we are moving in the gain of association with Christ; it requires deep exercise. We may speak lightly of the great truth of being risen with Christ, but it is a Herculean exercise. They had to prepare victuals and come down to the bed of Jordan three days. The three days bring in a very important time; it involves Jordan with all its force. Jordan was overflowing all its banks. It is there we get a revelation of Christ to the heart. We leave the plains of Moab, with all its allurements, and accord to Christ the supreme place in our hearts.
Moab stands for the place where my own interests occupy me legitimately. I am set up in the power of the Spirit, come out of Moab, esteeming the things of Christ and His circle as my supreme interest here. They had to go down into Jordan but they had food. They needed strong meat for Jordan. I understand the truths in Colossians to be very good victuals. If we feed upon them, Christ and His love and what is dear to His heart become very dear to our hearts. "Jesus, having said these things, went out ... beyond the torrent Cedron" (@John 18: 1). The ark of the covenant moves.
It is a wonderful thing for our hearts to contemplate the movements of that One, who was the true Ark, as He faced Jordan knowing what was before Him. He said to the disciples, "None of you demands of me, Where goest thou" (@John 16: 5)? Why was that? Well, I think it is this way, we do not like to speak of a subject that is very unpleasant. The Lord had said He was going away; He counted upon their affection. They did not care to speak of it, for sorrow had filled their hearts. Jordan was
{164}
overflowing all its banks. In @John 18 and 19 we get Jordan overflowing all its banks.
As regards Paul, part of his conflict was that he knew the particular danger that confronted them at Colosse. He had intimate intercourse with Epaphras, and had heard him praying for Colosse. The apostle writes with a very intimate knowledge of the saints. He knew the dangers they were in. There were those who were bringing wild gourds to shred into the pot. The apostle is bringing meal to nullify that. That is chapter 2.
The ark presents the Lord in Joshua in four ways: (1) as the ark of the covenant, (2) the ark of testimony, (3) the ark of the Lord of the whole earth, (4) and the ark of God. It brings before us the way the Lord is presented in the gospels. Matthew presents Him as the ark of the covenant; Mark as the ark of the testimony; Luke as the ark of God; John as the ark of the Lord of the whole earth. Think of an appreciation of Christ like that given in our hearts. What a place He should have as Leader of our affections! Joshua comes in as a type of Christ; he is magnified before all. He looks for hearts to be throwing out tendrils for new territory. Because of those feelings they are led on. So I want to raise the question as to whether we are satisfied with light? Is the light as to Christ risen enticing us on to new territory? Would we all like to come into the gain of a risen life with Christ in the christian circle? The purpose of Colossians is to bring us into the gain of that.
"That their hearts may be encouraged, being united together in love" (verse 2). It is first that their hearts might be encouraged. We shall never have moral power unless the
{165}
singers are in the first rank. "Giving thanks to the Father, who has made us fit for sharing the portion of the saints in light" (@Colossians 1: 12) - we cannot come into the good of the Colossian position without it. Does it not engage our hearts to know that God, in His grace and goodness, has given us light as to these things? If we come under the influence of Christ as Head, we know what the effect would be; *abiding* in Christ would give us a very deep impression of encouragement. Paul engages them with moral thoughts. "That their hearts may be encouraged, being united together in love". If we are going to take in these moral thoughts, we need the ministry of the apostle John. Paul desires that the hearts of the saints might be encouraged. Although we might move on and study these things with a measure of light, it will not have much effect on us unless we are under the influence of John. If the saints are together in love, living under His influence, so that their hearts are warmed up with love, will they not be happy together? That would be a perfect meeting. The apostle aims at having the saints encouraged, being united together in love. We should not desire anything less, though we are often content with much less.
If we are "giving thanks to the Father, who has made us fit for sharing the portion of the saints in light", if we really accept this as wonderful light to the soul, what less can be before our hearts than to come into all the good of our inheritance? We hide it in our hearts that the Father has made us fit for the inheritance - fit to live on the other side of Jordan. May the Lord exercise our hearts that we may all come into the good of it. The apostle would have us united together in love by spiritual links,
{166}
acknowledging Christ as Head for the pleasure of God. The verse (verse 2) goes on, "and unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding, to the full knowledge of the mystery of God". We come into the gain of the mystery, come into the risen life of Christ and remain there. Our hearts are encouraged; and not only that, but united together in love. It is very necessary that we should see the importance of our hearts being united together in love. I think in this uniting together we learn to live with one another spiritually; in touching one another those bonds are being formed. Do you think I could come to a meeting for twenty years and only know twelve people intimately? With all the rest I may be merely on hand-shaking terms. That is not being united together. With whom do you walk home from the meeting? What do you talk about? On whom have you called during the week? Are they always the same saints? That is not being united together.
The apostle prays that the light and faith they had might be consolidated. That would follow naturally if their hearts were bound together in love. I am very much afraid of cliques. Is there any one I cannot get near to? Sometimes we find sickness brings us quickly in touch with one another spiritually. Perhaps we have not had any uniting together at all, and one sickness may do it. Do we follow it up then? Love begets love. I should be able to break through any reserve between myself and a brother or sister. A grand time for that is between the meeting and the house. Have we walked home fifty-two times a year from a prayer meeting with the same person? Or do we get away by ourselves, which is worse. How many opportunities we lose.
{167}
As the Lord becomes the supreme Object of my heart, and I follow Him across Jordan, are His interests to be supreme to me? What are the exercises of Paul as to it? He says, "I would have you know what combat I have for you". I can understand the Colossians saying, If Paul has combat like that for us, we cannot be unmoved by it. How blessed to think that all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are available to us through grace. What is the mystery? I think it includes all the will of God for us in Christ, but what Paul had before Him is the body.
What is Gilgal?
Gilgal is the point where, having come to the light of the position as risen with Christ, we now realise it experimentally. I see it very much now, that position hinders saints from getting near one another. At Gilgal I am prepared to deal with the very best I have. The apostle speaks of all he was naturally, and he does not touch the bad side. A Hebrew of the Hebrews, of the tribe of Benjamin, touching the righteousness which is in the law, blameless, a Pharisee of the Pharisees. We might say, What a fine brother he would make if only we could get him! That is taking account of a man naturally. Holding the Head would help as to that. Only in relation to Christ as Head do we touch the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. I am shut up to Christ for all that is going to fill the universe; all is found in Christ, in whom all the fulness of God dwells.
The apostle takes up three things to be refused: (1) philosophy and vain deceit, (2) an order of things in which ritual has a part, (3) the world of sentiment, the human mind. These things they were in danger of and he
{168}
warns them. First he presents what is positive in Christ; everything of value derives from Christ, not from any of those three sources in verse 8. So, to use the type, we are not to go to other fields to glean; if we do we shall get wild gourds. Boaz said to Ruth, "Go not to glean in another field" (@Ruth 2: 8). Naomi said, "not in any other field" (verse 22). There she comes in touch with the mighty man of wealth. It is Christ, and the supply would more than meet all her desires. So Paul would have them go to no other field to glean, but he first introduces them to the mighty Man of wealth, Christ. That is chapter 1.
What is meant by philosophy and vain deceit?
We are in danger of having human wisdom. The use of a proverb, for example, sometimes introduces a worldly principle, a wrong element. The bases of philosophy were established in Greece. It is the introduction of human ethics, the establishment of an order of things to bring in certain ends. We need to turn our minds from that kind of wisdom. It is brought in with the idea of regulation and order to a certain end. It is a system of ethics to secure a certain end. The apostle says in effect, Do not touch it.
Secondly, he warns them to refuse what had been set up as to holy days, feasts, and so on, things that had their place in a previous dispensation, but are now set aside. They have no place in the christian circle. "Having effaced the handwriting in ordinances". They were part of the Jewish system, divinely established, whereas philosophy is human. That is the second point.
The third point is very important at the present moment. It is the tendency of the mind of man, human sentiment, to intrude into unknown regions. They profess
{169}
to get into touch with unseen beings. But in the mystery are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge; we have everything in Christ. If the Lord Jesus Christ is held as Head in our affections in this way, we turn to Him for direction under the impulse of affection.
Is that individual?
Each individual does it, but as each individual is part of a circle, it becomes true of the company. We come under His influence, our affections are kept alive, and all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are available for us in Him.
How do we get them?
By holding the Head. It is a very simple expression. John says, "abiding in him". "Keep thy heart more than anything that is guarded; for out of it are the issues of life" (@Proverbs 4: 23). We give Him not only faith but affection. Holding the Head is the normal experience of every member of the body; abiding in Christ is John's way of putting it.
But the next thing is, are you going to come into the good of it all, so that being united together in love, maintaining unity together, holding the Head, the whole body becomes prosperous? The affections are moved; you appreciate a thing and enjoy it. That is not state yet, later you receive it with joy. The conscience is reached, and there is a feeling of disparity. If we feel that, the Lord will help us. Then there is a result for the pleasure of God. It is a living, present thing, holding the Head; there need be no interruption. On your part the exercise is, you know the sun is shining brightly, and you remain in the sunshine;
{170}
that is, all that makes for blessing and growth will come down to you.
We see that Paul gives us a ministry of divine thoughts, while John gives us a ministry of affection. Paul's ministry will have no effect unless John's ministry comes in to cement us in affection. "If therefore ye have been raised with the Christ ... have your mind on the things that are above" (chapter 3: 1, 2). If your affections have followed the ark of the covenant you can go on to experience risen life with Christ. But He says, Have your mind upon those things. We are not going to be established unless we are set upon these things. God has perfection before Him. He is going to put you there, but it will be through exercise, and the further you go the deeper the exercise. May the Lord give us all to go in for these things, that we may know more of the reality of risen life with Christ, having Him as the supreme Object of our lives.
*From Memorials of the Ministry of R Dunn, Volume 1, pp. 86 - 98, Prahran, November 1921*
{171}
FELLOWSHIP
R DUNN
Summary of a reading @1 Corinthians 10: 6 - 33
The greatest calamity that could happen to us is to be what is called, 'out of fellowship', and there are five steps indicated in these five verses (6 - 10) that must be avoided if that is not to happen, and they are given in moral order. We have not to think we stand, but to keep our hearts more than anything that is guarded, for out of the heart are the issues of life.
Decline begins by confusion of view. We lust after the earth-grown plants of Egypt, which, first allowed in the heart, subsequently get into the house. They spoke of the good times they had in Egypt. They lusted after evil things. It was the first step on the downward road. It is most important that the sense of being near the Lord should be always guarded, and that unseen things should be my object.
"The rock was the Christ". The idea is that He is always available. At the start, at Marah, they cry to Him, and the wood is cast into the waters (baptism); the Lord Jesus is presented in an affecting way, and the water becomes sweet. There never was any need to go to Egypt for anything. The Rock followed them. When they thirsted, He knew of it, and the Rock was smitten. Then, at Meribah, He knew they were thirsty, and the word is speak to the Rock. Through neglect of communion you return to the things from which you have been delivered - those
{172}
things you did before you were converted. I may be fond of music, and I have even heard of christians going to cinemas. The eye is off Christ. You are not satisfied with the Lord. This is the first mark of decline.
We now come to verse 7. In the first step your eye is off Christ, but in the second other things have become my object and this is idolatry. The people forgot who brought them out. "For this Moses ... we do not know what is become of him!" (@Exodus 32: 1). You have been indifferent as to where Christ is. Are you near enough to the tabernacle to hear the movements of Christ in heaven, like the bells on the high priest's garments? If not, the thing you have turned to has become your object instead of the Lord. I will be out of fellowship if I am on this road. This is the second step. Think of a brother who was once in touch with Christ's movements, attending canaries, attending to his garden, or playing the violin. We always take up the things we used to go in for. It has not become public yet, but I have taken two steps. I am trifling in the presence of eternal realities. These things happened as types of us. These are landmarks for me - not in historical, but in moral order. There is always a way back, if we take warning in time.
Verse 8 is the third step: Moabitish associations. We lose our attraction to the Lord, and so to His people, and make unholy alliances, giving Christ second place in our hearts. It is a serious thing to take a holiday where there is no meeting. We spend our holidays under the influence of natural relationships - our relatives - a grief to the Lord, and to our brethren. We may excuse ourselves and say we want to help them, but nine times out of ten we sink down
{173}
to their level. Can we company with our worldly relations with that which is spiritual predominant? If we take up these links outside the fellowship, the result will be we shall follow their gods, and go their way. This becomes public now and we are out of fellowship, actually if not positionally.
Then verse 9, "tempt the Christ". I am prepared to take myself out of the Lord's hand - and to put Him to the test. I move on an independent course, all warnings unheeded, and ultimately go out into the darkness. We take spiritual risks - spreading out when we should remain small. If I do anything, or go anywhere, without the Lord's support, I am moving away from the pathway of the will of God. "Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God" (@Matthew 4: 7).
Then murmuring against God (verse 10). Finding fault with one another, and everybody, and seeking other company than Christ's. The end is destruction. Now you are publicly out of fellowship, positionally as well as actually. It is a terrible thing. "Let him that thinks that he stands take heed lest he fall". Their carcases fell in the wilderness.
But then there are also the attractions of the fellowship. There is the faithfulness of the Lord, whatever temptations come (and we shall be tested), He is always near. Every test has its issue. I may find, perhaps, that I shall have to do with less to live on, but I shall probably be happier and have more time for the Lord, and have less worry too! I shall find the issue, and be preserved from going out of fellowship. A difficulty may arise that appears insurmountable. People say, You cannot do it; the law says you cannot do it; wise people say you cannot do
{174}
it; the brotherhoods of men say you must not do it. But David said: "By thee I have run through a troop; and by my God have I leaped over a wall" (@Psalm 18: 29).
As we stand in this world for Christ; Satan will mark us - he will say, Here is a man too many for the earth, and he will set out to crush us. But God is faithful; there will always be an issue, and the difficulties are only such as are common to men - what *all* the people of God have had to contend with. We may have to die. I like to think of the brethren as those who have died. We die together to live together. We are going to have glorious times. We have wonderful opportunities of being devoted in christianity. I have no doubt that in these last days things will become increasingly difficult, but they will be the brightest of the assembly's history. We live in a wonderful time - "upon whom the ends of the ages are come".
In the records of the future they will be referred to as the days of the assembly on earth. Think of the days before the flood; there were giants, men of renown, in those days, but where are the Napoleons and the Kitcheners of that day in the divine record? They are not found. We do not know the name of a single one of them. The only man whose name we know is Noah, and the days are called the days of Noah. The days of the assembly of God on earth are *great* days. Greater than Solomon's; greater than Hezekiah's; greater than the days of @Luke 1 and 2.
"The cup of blessing which we bless". Do you bless the cup? When you grumble about the brethren; you are not blessing the cup. Every christian has a part in the blessing of the cup in virtue of the death of Christ.
Does every christian, wherever he is, share in it?
{175}
No, alas! It is *for* every Christian, but not everyone avails himself of it.
It is not local, this fellowship. If I am on individual lines I am not in fellowship. As we keep in fellowship, we keep saying, We have known and believed the love that God has towards us. We bless the cup. We do not live in grumbling corner; we live in no-complaining street. As the day grows darker we realise more what the fellowship is. We die together. The martyrs lived as long as God intended they should live. As long as Almighty God chooses to leave us on the earth He will see us through. That little I do not want to lose. The enemy does not intend that we should hold a *foot* here, and will endeavour to overthrow us. But He says, I will see you through. The bonds of fellowship and its limitations I love. I love to be regulated.
*From Readings and Addresses in Australia, pp. 44 - 46, Sydney, December 1921*
{176}
{177}
CONDITIONS IN THE LAST DAYS IN THE ASSEMBLY OF GOD
R DUNN
@Deuteronomy 21: 1 - 9; @1 Corinthians 1: 1 - 3; @2 Corinthians 1: 1 - 3; @2 Corinthians 13: 7 - 14
G.A.v.S. During these meetings we have had more than once a reference to the divine principle of local responsibility. It is a principle in regard to which several of us have for some time past had exercises. I thought we might, perhaps, look into the subject in relation to the *universal* thought of the assembly, so as to be preserved, on the one hand from parochialism, and on the other hand from metropolitanism. I feel that the thought of local responsibility is one which contains a great deal more than we have, as yet perhaps, understood, and that there is the danger of putting into the background the universal thought of the assembly. I had @Deuteronomy 21 in mind.
Rem. I think that is the exercise of a good many.
R.D. There is certainly universal responsibility presented in Deuteronomy, and no room for metropolitanism, for you have not Jerusalem there, but Shiloh, which stands for the assembly as a whole. I think the important thing to notice in the principle involved in @Deuteronomy 21 is that we approach the local position from the universal position. I think that is important in regard to the exercises that relate to what involves a local assembly in any certain matter; that you do not take it up in a congregational way, but rather it is to be taken up in
{178}
relation to the universal position from the outset. I think that in referring to the principle of local responsibility there has been the tendency in certain quarters to say, 'hands off, this is our matter'. That is because it is not *approached* according to the order of @Deuteronomy 21, nor according to @Numbers 1, which gives, typically, the regulations of each part in relation to the whole. The whole is in view at the outset, so that whatever may concern a local company relates to the whole position. The matter is taken up, first of all, not by the local company, but by the elders and the judges of Israel. They, and the whole of the land, are concerned about this matter, because it affects all Israel, although it be traced to the nearest city, and has to be taken up in divine order and regulation by that city. At the same time an account has to be given to all Israel, as to how the matter has been dealt with. It is not that *that city* is cleared of the blood, but the *land* is cleared of it.
Rem. So that whatever is done locally there is unity of action.
R.D. Whatever is done is in relation to the universal position.
A.C. In relation to the whole assembly of God?
R.D. Yes.
W.D.R. Then a trouble in Sydney, if it were known elsewhere, assuming that such are gathered according to, 'Thus saith Jehovah' would affect them?
R.D. It would affect them as much as if it were in their own locality.
E.E.L. The slaying of the man would indicate the existence in Israel of a state of lawlessness, which was inappropriate to the people of God.
{179}
R.D. Yes, and it would disturb the happy relations of the family of God dwelling in the land, and the pleasure of the blessed God who lives in the midst of their affections. So that it has to be dealt with for God, and for the complacency of divine affections.
E.P. I suppose every Israelite would have been horrified at this man being found slain, irrespective of his tribe?
R.D. Quite so. It would disturb the conditions in which God found His pleasure. I think that is a very high point to move from in regard to any disturbance that comes in amongst us. So that, first of all, we should see that the complacency of the heart of the blessed God, as dwelling amongst His people, must be disturbed if violence takes place anywhere within the circle.
G.A.v.S. So that there will be the exercise that one's soul should be in the full light and enjoyment of what the assembly of God is, as a whole, for the pleasure of God; and it should be in that sense that any local trouble is taken up.
R.D. And the element of responsibility in the assembly that is represented in the judges and elders, would be concerned as to how this matter was to be dealt with so that innocent blood should be put away from the land. First of all, it is important to see that it is those who have the sense of responsibility who should take the matter up. The conscience of the whole assembly is affected, and it is brought home to the local conscience in the nearest city.
G.A.v.S. Do the elders and judges set forth a special class, or do they set forth, morally, characteristic conditions?
{180}
R.D. I think they set forth the responsible element that is qualified to deal with these things. First of all, these are the elders and judges of all Israel; they stand, as it were, for the universal conscience. It is important that every brother having to face difficulties in a locality should take account of the universal conscience. It would be a very serious matter for a local gathering to have to take up any matter, and give an account to all for what they do, so as to satisfy the universal conscience. The universal conscience demands that God's nature should be satisfied as to the particular question.
G.A.v.S. Individual judgment must be subordinated then to the universal conscience?
R.D. Well, your individual judgment would have in view, first, how it affected God; then, how it affected the local gathering, and the universal gathering.
F.W. Is the first thing to see that what has happened is a challenge to the Lord's honour amongst the saints here?
R.D. According to Deuteronomy it is even greater than that; it is a challenge to divine affections. As I said, in choosing this scripture, we have chosen a very high standard from which to regard things. You see the people are dwelling in the land for God's pleasure, and God is dwelling in the midst of them, in the place where He has been pleased to put His Name. This, we know, was at Shiloh - not a public place, but a place for the complacency of His affections. And there are certain commands, regulations, statutes and ordinances, that are given for the protection of those affections, for the maintenance of conditions in which the blessed God
{181}
should find His restful pleasure - in the affections of the saints whom He has brought into the enjoyment of the heavenly inheritance. So that again I say, in choosing this scripture we have chosen a very high standard. But it brings home to us all the more forcibly that we have to give an account, both to God, and to the conscience of the whole company in regard to how we take things up locally.
E.E.L. The judges of that city were put in a very serious position.
R.D. That is what I was feeling. I felt that if we took this matter home to ourselves, that in connection with whatever matter may be handed to us to be dealt with in our responsibility, if we took it up with the same solemn acceptance that the judges of this city did, it would materially improve our actions in regard to local troubles.
E.P. What had you in your mind in speaking of the principle of 'hands off?'
R.D. What I hear as I go about. A few people get into mischief in a locality, and they quarrel with one another. They get hold of something that has gone around about local responsibility, which they think they understand. So they feel that, as long as they can keep up a ferment amongst themselves, they can say to all the gatherings round about, 'You have no business with this whatever; it is not your responsibility, and so long as we are pleased to go on in this troublesome way your hands must be off'. I have met it in many places, and I feel the Lord has something to say to us about it. It is a distressing matter for those who may be spiritual in the midst of such a state of things. As having a conscience in regard to the condition of things here for the complacent affections of
{182}
the blessed God, we are all responsible as to what takes place anywhere on earth.
Rem. The measuring is done outside the locality where the trouble is.
R.D. Yes; the measuring is done by the elders of all Israel, but it is traced to the nearest city.
E.P. Do you think we have taken up @Deuteronomy 21 in order to safeguard our local position, rather than to safeguard the whole general position?
R.D. I am not blaming brethren at all. I am speaking of a tendency one sees on the part of mischief-makers to isolate local responsibility from the universal, as well as the district, responsibility. It will help us to see that local responsibility is subservient to the universal responsibility of the assembly of God.
E.E.L. The responsibility is really to see that any obnoxious state of things ceases.
R.D. Ceases for *all* Israel, yes.
G.A.v.S. The measuring of the distance to the city finds its answer in the exercise of those who seek to put the matter on the conscience of those who are immediately affected by what has happened.
R.D. Yes, and it is brought home to the local position that it is their immediate responsibility to deal with the matter; and deal with it to the satisfaction of God. So that the complacency and affections of God should be satisfied in regard to what has taken place, and the heifer slain in the ever-flowing watercourse that has neither been tilled nor sown, is the only means by which violence can be met.
{183}
A.C. You mean that the measuring to the nearest city, from where the man is found slain, is to connect it with the nearest local meeting?
R.D. Well, we do not want to dwell on the question of evil. We want rather to consider the principles that regulate us in view of blessing. That is why I suggested Corinthians, because in @1 Corinthians 1 you have, in principle, the elders of Israel addressing the matter to the local gathering at Corinth. When Paul addresses the saints at Corinth, he does not address them merely personally, but there is present in his address all the authority of the apostles. And he connects all the saints with him, as much as to say to those of Corinth, 'This is not your matter only; it is our matter'.
L.M. It was not only his concern, but it concerned the brethren with him.
R.D. Yes, he says that the Lord Jesus Christ is "both theirs and ours". Mark that, "both theirs", and he puts himself in with them and adds, "and ours".
G.A.v.S. Then you would say, in that form of address, it was directly calculated to arouse the affections of the saints in connection with the evil he was about to bring under their exercise?
R.D. Yes, and calculated to arouse the Corinthians to the deep and solemn responsibility which was theirs, in relation to the various things that Paul was about to bring before them. Indeed, the first epistle is very much taken up in readjusting the saints at Corinth. They had evidently swerved, and Paul's exercise was that they should be recovered, and he is about to bring before them that which would be the means of their recovery, and
{184}
which it would be their responsibility to attend to. But mark you, he approaches them from a universal standpoint, he addresses them with the whole weight of the saints behind him, and he brings it home to them that those local matters about which *they* were so insensitive, were matters that concerned the whole fellowship on earth. And Paul could speak with the affections, exercises and anxieties of all the saints in regard to it. It would be well if, on every occasion we had matters to adjust locally, we felt they had to be adjusted in relation to the universal position, or the brotherhood which is on the earth.
A.C. Would you say that when the apostle Paul wrote that epistle, with all the saints behind him, it would answer to the principle of the judges in Israel bringing home to that company the evil in connection with the man found slain in the field?
R.D. Quite so. That is why I suggested these three verses in @1 Corinthians 1. That answers to the principle. I do feel we would get great benefit in regard to our living relations to one another, as belonging to the family of God here for His pleasure, if we saw that the recognition of these directions afforded an avenue for divine affections to flow through the christian circle down here.
E.P. Like @Psalm 133?
R.D. Yes, brethren dwelling together in unity, that is not a local company merely.
Rem. I suppose affection would set us rightly in relation to the saints generally?
R.D. That is why one is very thankful it was Deuteronomy and not Numbers that was suggested.
{185}
Because I do not know anything that will affect us more than to see that if we are careless in regard to the commandments and the regulations, it is going to disturb the happy family relations that are proper to the family of God. In these God finds His present pleasure, and is getting His present response. Now, take a little meeting that shuts itself up; it may be a little meeting within a city. It goes on breaking bread, it may be, and says to the rest of the brethren who are very anxious in their affections for God, and for the brethren generally, and it may be for that little company, 'hands off'. What is that little company depriving itself of? Of the enjoyment of the love of God that is within the family circle. And I am quite sure that if we, brethren, knew better the living relations of love that bind us together as brethren, if we valued family relations, we would cherish the statutes and ordinances and principles that preserve those happy relations intact. A little meeting shuts itself off, say in Sydney. Do you not feel your affections are disturbed, as well as having anxieties in regard to the divine order? You feel that it is a positive loss to God as well as to us.
Ques: In what way is a meeting breaking bread shut up?
R.D. Oh, that the brethren simply say, 'Hands off'. In effect they say, 'We are going through disturbances, but please do not interfere'. And when anxious brothers in the meetings around, who have a sense of responsibility in regard to it - the responsible element that we were speaking of, as well as the qualified element - approach them and seek to bring the responsibility home to them of having wisdom from God, as to what is the real
{186}
issue there which is causing the strife, they are told that the principle of local responsibility debars them from having anything to say about the matter at all.
Ques. Would it be right for them to consult elders in another meeting?
R.D. It would be right for them to be anxious in regard to the universal position, and be very glad of anything which might be helpful on the part of those who have the care of things in the universal way. It would emphasise greatly their own local responsibility. I am not pleading for mere interference.
E.E.L. So that they might be clear of the matter?
R.D. Yes, and it is in order to see how the happy relations are arrived at that I suggested the last few verses of the second epistle. Judges and elders both give place to the priestly element, and I am afraid sometimes that is the element that is forgotten when we are dealing with exercise. We forget the priestly element.
Ques. Do you mean taking it up in a legal spirit?
R.D. Taking it up on the lines of authority, and stopping there. The judges and elders hand matters over to the priests.
G.A.v.S. What is to be understood by leaving out the priestly element?
R.D. Trying to do things in an arbitrary way. There is an insistence that there shall be a priestly discretion and consideration for God, and wisdom and spirituality to deal with the matter as well as authority enforced. That should be the first exercise when the matter is brought home to the local conscience - where is the priestly element to deal with it?
{187}
G.A.v.S. Then the priestly element is what seeks to put things on a spiritual basis in the exercises of those who are immediately involved in the trial?
R.D. The priestly element is the element in the meeting that considers for God.
E.E.L. Why are they the priests, the sons of Levi, and not the priests, the sons of Aaron?
R.D. Oh, I think it traces them back to their priestly tribe in Deuteronomy. Men who qualified for priesthood through refusing natural influences as Levi did.
A.C. Then you think, in every difficulty, the first thing is to consider for God, and then to consider for the peace of the brethren?
R.D. Yes, in Deuteronomy Aaron is not in view. The priests are always referred to as the sons of Levi - 'of the Levite'. They are included in the Levite. It is rather the spiritual element that cares. I have often seen troubles in meetings drag on and on because the priestly element does not get a chance. In a meeting in England there was a trouble that went on for years, and a brother told me how many brothers¬ meetings they had had. Now in all those brothers¬ meetings the elders and judges were busy, but some spiritual brother suggested they should come together in the name of the Lord, and wait upon Him, that He might give them a spiritual judgment in regard to the trouble. They came together one night and got to the bottom of things. You see the priests got a chance. Urim and Thummim were consulted.
Ques. Should not a judge be marked by priestly grace?
{188}
R.D. The thought is that they work together; the judges and the elders take up the question of responsibility. But the priestly element should be found in the same company, or persons, to consider for God, and for the complacency of divine love, and to deal with a thing at its very root.
G.A.v.S. It would be discriminative rather than prescriptive?
R.D. It would.
Ques. Do not the judges and the elders in the universal way, bring it home to the local ones and leave them to act?
R.D. The judges and the elders in the universal position bring it home to the judges and elders in the local position. The judges and elders in the local position do not begin to deal with the matter - they hand it over to the priestly element. The trouble with us is that the elders and judges begin immediately to handle the matter, and forget all about the priestly element. If you have a local exercise the point is - now is there spirituality and moral power to deal with the case, is there anybody with desires to consider for God and to act for God? And you know the thing is never settled till the priests settle it, and the priests settle it by regarding it in the light of the death of Christ.
The consideration of this heifer, whereon never had come yoke, demands that this thing should be dealt with according to the death of Christ, and then *the land* is cleansed - not simply the city, but the whole land. A local evil is a blot on the land.
G.A.v.S. That fifth verse is very beautiful. "And the priests the sons of Levi shall come near; for them Jehovah
{189}
thy God hath chosen to do service unto him, and to bless in the name of Jehovah". Then it goes on, "And according to their word shall be every controversy and every stroke".
R.D. And the trouble is never settled until the priestly element is ready to deal with it.
G.A.v.S. Do you think that is the reason why many things fester and go on indefinitely, and then break out again, because things have been settled in an arbitrary way without priestly intervention having been invoked?
R.D. If the judges and elders deal with it themselves, they will deal with it mathematically, but when the priestly element is called in they deal with it morally, and according to God. It is never settled until that is done.
E.E.L. Would you tell us what is the teaching in regard to the heifer that has not been wrought with? The heifer is taken to an ever-flowing watercourse, which is not tilled or sown. What does all that indicate?
R.D. It all refers to the death of Christ. The death of no other person had ever yielded a harvest of blessing to God, but the death of this Person was going to yield a harvest of blessing. I mean, it was to be in an ever-flowing watercourse not tilled or sown; there had never been any crop out of that valley before.
Rem. That means death.
R.D. Yes, and it means what accrues as a result of the death of Christ.
G.A.v.S. I suppose the ever-flowing watercourse involves that those who have recognised their responsibility, and have concern before the Lord, are taking up, in their own exercises, the way the death of
{190}
Christ has really gone to the root of all that has caused the trouble?
R.D. Yes, and the fruitlessness, the barren condition which must be there if God is set aside. If things are taken up in the ever-flowing watercourse, which has not been tilled or sown, in that way there is a yield of blessing as the result of priestly exercise.
E.P. Is that what Paul means by "perfecting" (@2 Corinthians 13: 9)?
R.D. Yes, I had that in mind, too. We want to see what is the normal perfect order that should mark us.
A.C. Why was it a heifer and not a bullock?
R.D. I think it suggests the subjective side of things.
Ques. Why did the elders bring the heifer? Why did not the priests bring it?
R.D. The elders are facing their responsibility. It raises the question of responsibility again. But the priests have to be satisfied as to the operations of repentance - the searchings of heart and judgment. So that the heifer is brought, in evidence of a moral condition that satisfies the priestly element that it can deal with it.
Ques. Would it mean that as the priests bring home the power of that death, there would be fruit resulting from it?
R.D. We know, in regard to the exercises of the Corinthian saints, that it was a very untilled valley for them. The conditions that they passed through demanded that the local conscience should satisfy the universal conscience, and this having been done, the conditions afterwards were such that delighted the heart of Paul.
{191}
E.S. I suppose in actuality the responsible element and the priestly element are found in the same people?
R.D. Normally they are found in the same company. But there is the distinction between what is capable and responsible, as seen in the elders and judges; and the priestly concern, discernment and wisdom, as seen in the priestly element, in regard to what will meet the holy nature of God.
Rem. All believers are priests, but all are not in a priestly state. Is that right?
R.D. Yes.
Rem. Should not the elders and judges have been in a priestly condition? Is there any excuse for the elders and the brethren not being in a priestly condition? I was thinking of @Acts 15, where there was a case of trouble, and the elders and brethren were present to deal with it.
R.D. There is no excuse, but there is a priestly state and there are priestly conditions. Not only is it important that there should be a priestly state in the gathering, so that there is capability to deal with things according to God, but the priestly state should be in priestly conditions - that is, that it may be available at any time. We are dealing with a type here, and we see how some were judges, some were elders, and some were priests. But, as our brother was remarking just now, those elements should be present in the same people. It is a matter of exercise that we are not formed much in priestly state. We are careless as to the conditions because we are not ready to deal with matters at their inception - "watching lest there be any one who lacks the grace of
{192}
God; lest any root of bitterness springing up trouble you" (@Hebrews 12: 15). There is priestly grace and discernment, priestly alertness, as it were. Bitterness is in the root, you know; it must be nipped in the bud. "Lest there be any fornicator ... as Esau"(verse 16). There you have a priestly state exhorted to be looking diligently.
G.A.v.S. It goes to the root of everything that causes dissension and pain and sorrow to the people of God.
R.D. And, of course, the priest's lips should keep knowledge (@Malachi 2: 7).
F.W. I suppose in bringing the heifer to the ever-flowing watercourse, and breaking its neck, there would be conveyed the idea that the spirits of those men would be in accord with all that the watercourse suggests?
R.D. Yes, quite in accord with them. So that the matter would be taken up in deep contrition, repentance, and searching of heart. There would be, as Paul said, "what vengeance" (@2 Corinthians 7: 11). It would work out in the "vengeance", showing how the priestly element had been able to bring things home to the conscience of the assembly at Corinth.
Rem. We get in @2 Corinthians 7: 8 - 10, "For if also I grieved you in the letter, I do not regret it, if even I have regretted it; for I see that that letter, if even it were only for a time, grieved you. Now I rejoice, not that ye have been grieved, but that ye have been grieved to repentance; for ye have been grieved according to God, that in nothing ye might be injured by us. For grief according to God works repentance to salvation, never to be regretted".
R.D. That is very beautiful. There is unexampled evidence that there was a priestly element in Corinth,
{193}
which was preserved in priestly conditions; but the judges and elders would not hear it. There were Fortunatus, Stephanas, the household of Chloe, and there may have been others who kept in touch with Paul in regard to their spiritual exercises all the time. I can imagine some of these Corinthians saying, 'Don't you think Paul had better keep his hands off this matter; this is local responsibility?' I can picture somebody saying, to Chloe, 'Why did you write that letter to Paul; this is our local responsibility?'
Rem. In @Deuteronomy 17: 8, 9, if a matter arose which was too hard for them to deal with, these were the instructions - "If there arise a matter too hard for thee in judgment, between blood and blood, between cause and cause, and between stroke and stroke, matters of controversy within thy gates, then shalt thou arise, and go up to the place which Jehovah thy God will choose. And thou shalt come unto the priests, the Levites, and unto the judge that shall be in those days, and inquire; and they shall declare unto thee the sentence of judgment". Does that help on local responsibility?
R.D. Do you not see that Scripture is intended to convey a principle to us; that is, that if there are difficulties about which there seem to be no solution, we must not conclude that there is no solution? The solution is with God, and immediately the mind of God is sought in assembly, that is, you go up to the place where God's name is, God will give His mind by way of the priestly element. Read what is said of Levi in @Deuteronomy 33: 8 - 11. So that we have a resource in coming together in the name of the Lord, and inquiring of God in regard to the difficulty concerning which we desire a solution. God will
{194}
give the answer. But do you know what is the real cause of trouble simmering and not being settled? It is a little bit of self-will somewhere. Immediately self-will is set aside, you will have the mind of God in regard to anything; the thing would be solved in a few minutes. But if you tell me of a meeting where, for years, they have not been able to break bread, or walk together, although they are in the same meeting, I know that self-will is going on there.
Rem. There is no question of innocent blood.
R.D. The question is taken up in this way, that we can take account of innocent blood. That is the way God is pleased to deal with the case. Of course it is the way God will yet deal with Israel, just as He did with Saul of Tarsus. Saul of Tarsus had to pass through all this in regard to his own soul, but then that prayer of the Lord's, "Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do" (@Luke 23: 34), gives the outlook that God has for the repentant here.
G.A.v.S. I suppose in every trouble there is the innocent blood that suffers, those who are really concerned and exercised about things. And so whenever self-will asserts itself it must always involve innocent blood in their trouble.
E.P. We say a good many things to one another, but we do not say much to God. That is one of the weak spots.
R.D. Yes. In turning to God you very soon judge, in yourself, any self-will that may be there. I would rather be the victim whose innocent blood was being shed than the person who sheds it.
Ques. What is the remedy for all this?
{195}
R.D. We have just been speaking of the remedy. If I am the person that is the cause of it, I have the way of repentance open to me - what they did at Corinth.
Rem. Self would always judge number two, or number three, but never number one.
W.D.R. Hitherto we have always judged that, when trouble occurs, the most orderly manner to get at the true facts was by way of the local assembly. Brethren on the spot would be in touch with the matter. Otherwise brethren out of close touch might get a wrong view.
R.D. But all that is very carefully ordered. That is, the elders and judges of Israel say in effect to such a local gathering, 'It is your responsibility, and it is for you to deal with it. We do not care to touch the details, but mind you we have as much sense of responsibility about it as you have, and we care about it as much as you do. Ours is from the universal position, yours is from the local position. It is for you to attend to the details, but do not take the matter up as if it were your affair alone, because it is not - it is the affair of all Israel'.
F.W. Why is it here a city?
R.D. In Deuteronomy it is to bring out the point of local responsibility.
F.W. That is what I wanted to get at, because in many centres that we know now as cities there are a good many meetings, and the question of how local responsibility lies in a city where there are many meetings is not always quite so easy to understand.
R.D. Well, we have the principle in Paul's epistle to the assembly of God in Corinth, which would be the assembly in that city. But I do not think the city here is
{196}
intended to convey quite the thought of city, as the thought of a local company which was responsible. It would really suggest a local gathering, and local responsibilities in relation to the whole. But if you have a city, like Sydney for instance, with nine or a dozen meetings, it is important that all that is done in that city should be done in the recognition of what is to govern the position of the assembly of God in Sydney.
G.A.v.S. So it is the responsibility of the locality that they should recognise their relation to the universality of the assembly?
R.D. Yes, and if you have got one local meeting (that is one of the meetings in the city) taking up a matter, it takes it up as having a certain responsibility in regard to the local company where they are, but always in relation to the assembly of God in Sydney.
E.P. It struck me how grave the results even in a very small gathering may be. Take Alnwick, for instance, it was a small meeting, but what took place there measured the spiritual stature of every gathering in the world.
J.H. To deal with a matter that affects the whole, without having in view the universal thought, is simply to act in independency.
R.D. Yes, a little company in Sydney would have the greatest concern in regard to the conscience of all; it would have regard for the universal position. Now, in the beginning of 2 Corinthians you have another idea added, and that is district responsibility. So he speaks to the assembly at Corinth and he also connects with them the districts surrounding. Now that has to be considered.
{197}
A.C. Then you would say there are four responsibilities? There is local responsibility; then there is that which is connected generally with the truth of the assembly in a city; there is the district responsibility; and then what is universal.
R.D. Yes. You might even add your personal responsibility too, for @Romans 12 shows how the individual is responsible as being of the body. You remember the order of the camp in Numbers. The simple position of a believer is that he is in his father's tent, or in his own tent; he stands by his father's standard in relation to a certain quarter of the tabernacle, either the north, east, south or west, where there were three different tribes. But you proceed by way of that to the universal position, to the tent of testimony: so that you have these positions: - You have your father's standard, which stands for your local company; you have the district position - the two tribes on either side of you; and then you have the universal position, where you look out upon the twelve tribes. Evidently the apostle Paul intended that the Corinthians should feel that what took place at Corinth affected the immediate district, and the result was that there was a move towards recovery. He mentions this city, and he mentions this district. You can understand how much the brethren around Corinth, and in the region round about would be disturbed by what was going on there, and how much it affected their relations together.
Rem. One on a self-willed path would forfeit his tent.
R.D. Yes, one on a path of self-will is in a leprous condition. I fear that self-will is allowed in the
{198}
assembly of God as something which is excusable. I think we have given self-will a good deal of rein in the assembly of God.
Ques. Would you distinguish between self-will and leprosy?
R.D. If a man goes on in self-will he is leprous, and we must not make room for self-will in the assembly of God. We should be able to deal with it. What was it that killed this man? Was it a leper? It was self-will that did it. That is what self-will will do. It will commit murder. Mr Darby asks the question: Is the church of God the only place on earth where a man is to be allowed to do what he pleases?
E.E.L. That is the last place is it not?
R.D. Yes, I feel we have been too lenient in regard to self-will, and we should have a holy judgment about it. I do not mean a man losing his temper. That is bad enough. There is an immediate way of recovery there, but if one continues on a path of self-will it will mean that he is out of fellowship at the finish. We ought to have power to deal with it.
Rem. You mean power to deal with it by way of recovery?
R.D. Yes, and dealing with the thing, too.
E.E.L. You cannot always recover.
R.D. No. Sometimes a man has to go a certain way to learn. Now, dear brethren, I think it would be a pity if we lost the lovely moral conditions that are suggested in Paul's great exercise at the end in regard to the Corinthians. In the second epistle he is free to bring in a line of ministry which was for building up. There are now
{199}
such conditions that a line of ministry can be brought in which would build up this local assembly, and now he speaks of "perfecting". That is, that they should rise up to the enjoyment of the Ephesian state of things. To this end there must be all this care, regulation and order, so that they can get on with one another in such wise that the precious work of God can go on in their souls together. I feel that immense blessing awaits us if we are prepared to be governed by the Lord, and pursue the normal local conditions. We would each one of us be exercised that no finger of ours moved to disturb the brethren, that nothing we allow in our homes, or in our businesses, should be of such a character that it would have a wrong influence upon the fellowship, or on the local gatherings. There will then be spiritual prosperity. Paul desires our "perfecting". Just look at the happy conditions that he suggests. "For we rejoice when *we* may be weak and *ye* may be powerful. But this also we pray for, your perfecting". He says, "For the rest, brethren, rejoice". Now, I think that is a good beginning. When there is a deep sense of thanksgiving in the local company, you come in and you look at the brethren and they are all happy. There are no clouds on their faces. You see them speak to one another, and they speak to one another with rejoicing. That is normal. Do you love to come into the meeting and feel that things are such that brethren are happy together. They are not afraid to open out before one another. The youngest in the meeting, if he has a difficulty, can state it; and if he is free to pray, he can pray? There is such an atmosphere of confidence and gladness amongst the brethren. You cannot have that if you are not careful as to the regulations and
{200}
the order and one's associations. I would like to come into a meeting where the brethren do not feel that everything is going to pieces, but where "the shout of a king" is amongst us. He says, as it were, 'Be encouraged, things are not going to the bad; things are moving up to Colossians, and on to Ephesians'. Now you have a clear avenue to move up into the highest position. And then he says, "be of one mind". You say, 'Ah, that is quite another proposal'. He says, 'I am not asking anything from you but what is the normal happy lot of a local company according to God'. "Be of one mind". It is not a difficult thing. I may not see eye to eye with a brother to start with, but we can be of one mind.
Rem. There is no blemish on the divine side.
R.D. No, but Paul is not asking for it to be on the divine side, he wants it to be on the subjective side.
E.E.L. Will you amplify that a little: that we may not be able to see eye to eye, but we can be of one mind?
R.D. Well, you and I may not be able to agree upon the meaning of a certain line of truth. But we are both set for the one thing, there is no self-will with us, and I am quite prepared to wait and to weigh up all you have to say, and if I do not see it, I am happy to consider it. We may not be able to speak the same thing, yet we can all be of one mind. It might be a question of a brother having something which I have not been able to see yet, but I am happy enough to wait upon God about it, and ask Him for light, whilst at the same time I can be of one mind with my brother. Then the apostle goes on, "be at peace". It should not be a difficult thing for all of us to be at peace. You say, Why have we not had this before? We were all too busy
{201}
with our rules and regulations, without the priestly element. But now there has been a priestly element coming in, and Paul observes an increase of spirituality amongst them. He says, "be at peace". And peace is not simply that we are a lot of companies that have no quarrels with one another. That is not peace.
F.W. The priestly element, and the judges and elders are hand in hand here.
R.D. Yes, and they were hand in hand in Deuteronomy.
G.A.v.S. The elders and the judges work together with the priestly element, so there is no chance of metropolitanism.
R.D. How could you bring metropolitanism into the book of Deuteronomy where you do not have a Jerusalem? You have a lot of cities, but they are cities of equal standing, and God dwelling in the midst of them in Shiloh. There is no metropolitanism there. In regard to the position at Corinth there is no metropolitanism, which agrees with the beginning of Numbers, where the centre is the tent of testimony, and the twelve tribes around it. There is no idea of metropolitanism, but you have still these district influences and the universal position.
Rem. In reference to the Acts of the Apostles, the centre was recognised as Jerusalem up to a point, but then the centre had shifted, so to speak, to heaven.
R.D. Quite so, but there is the tent of testimony in the affections of the saints down here, and there is that universal position which is, of course as you say, under the control of Christ in heaven. But one has to take account of it practically in relation to all the brethren all over the
{202}
world. The brotherhood is in the world, as our brother was saying, under the influence of heaven. But do not let us get occupied with troubles. Let us, instead, be occupied with this peace. The apostle says, "be perfected; be encouraged; be of one mind; be at peace; and the God of love and peace shall be with you". I like to think of the saints presenting such an answer to the blessed God, that the God of love and peace is with us.
G.A.v.S. Do you mean that these conditions will ensure the God of love and peace being with us?
R.D. He says so. In presenting these conditions he says that the God of love and peace shall be with us. That is with us as a local company, so that you have something now growing in that watercourse. All the exercises through which we are passing are going to yield a precious harvest to God, where before there was no harvest at all. So the first consideration is for God, then for the company, or the saints as a whole, and then for the individual concerned. You see how beautifully they considered for the individual concerned after Paul had exhorted them. The consideration was more in his heart than theirs, but how beautifully it was to work out - that they should confirm their love to him.
G.A.v.S. Does verse 12 follow on verse 11, "Salute one another with a holy kiss"?
R.D. Think of what it would be if we could all greet one another with an holy kiss! That means I have not been criticising one brother to another. They all get so near to one another that they can greet one another with a holy kiss. I have been careful of my associations, and have a *holy* kiss for you - I would like you to look into my heart
{203}
because there is nothing but love there. That is the idea. Think of a whole meeting of brothers and sisters able to greet one another with a holy kiss. Now just look what he says, and this is what was really before me in reading this scripture, "*All* the saints salute you". Paul and the judges and elders are perfectly satisfied now: they are quite satisfied as to what has taken place in Corinth. He says, 'I can speak for the affections of all the saints now, the doors are all thrown open, and all the saints salute you'. Do you think that those little gatherings that shut themselves up and rob themselves of the affections of their brethren would waste ten minutes over their difficulties if they could have an outlook like this? Why, the affections of all the saints would be thrown around them. If I am in a local gathering where there is trouble, and I look for the salutation of all the saints, I am quite prepared to receive the benefit of their wisdom, care and prayers. I do not say 'hands off' to them. I would have it very much the other way. So here you have the saints at Corinth, looked at locally, brought back into certain conditions, not perfect conditions, but into certain conditions where they can have a pleasing outlook upon the universal position. Then he finishes up with what we would not wish to go on without, "The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the Holy Spirit, be with you all". Think what that means. He desires that the local company should have this. He says, 'I want this for you, not only that you should get on peacefully together, but that all the grace of our Lord Jesus might be with you'. What does that mean? The wondrous bounty of Christ, and the love of God. Not simply the love of the brethren, precious as it is,
{204}
but the love of God. You see, the heifer has been slain, the conditions have been satisfactorily met for the priests, and God's complacency and affections can now be unfolded to this company again, and he desires for them what he was not able to express at the end of his first epistle. It is interesting to compare the reserved desires that he has in the first epistle, with the full boundless desires he expresses in the second - the love of God and the communion of the Holy Spirit.
*From Readings and Addresses in Australia, pp. 108 - 132, Sydney, December 1921*
{205}
THE SPIRIT (1)
R DUNN
@2 Kings 2: 9 - 14; @2 Kings 4: 17; @Romans 8: 1 - 5
R.D. As it has been suggested that there is an exercise in regard to the Spirit, I proposed these scriptures, feeling that, perhaps, we should start by regarding the manner of the *reception* of the Spirit. Then we might go on to consider, the Lord helping us, the use of the Spirit, or the recognition of the Spirit. In the first scripture, in @2 Kings 2, I think we get suggested to us, in type, how the Spirit is received, whilst the second (@2 Kings 4), has more to do with how one takes advantage of the grace that lies in the Spirit for us.
A.C. Would the mantle that fell from Elijah, and which Elisha took up indicate to us the power of the Spirit?
R.D. The attitude of Elisha suggests the attitude of a soul to whom the Spirit is given. I think the Spirit is given in connection with our apprehension of the Lord Jesus gone up to heaven. Here there was a heart that had been attracted to Elijah, one who was prepared to follow him all the way in purpose of heart, with an appreciative attention to his master. On the other side of Jordan he apprehends that his master is going up. His master asks him what he would like. Not only had Elijah attracted Elisha to him, and drawn him into his company, so that he knew what he was asking, but he asked him to say what he would like.
{206}
F.W. Is that parallel to the attitude of the one hundred and twenty in @Acts 1: 12 - 14?
R.D. It is. That was a company who had been drawn by the Lord to Himself, and who preferred the Lord to themselves, and desired that they should be like the Lord. I think if you look at that chapter in the Acts, you will see how careful Luke is in giving the narrative, to repeat that they *saw* Him go up. "He was taken up, they beholding him" (verse 9); and "As they were gazing into heaven, as he was going" (verse 10). So it was a company of people who saw the Lord go up, and who had the most intense desire to be like Him down here.
A.C. Why did Elijah test Elisha when he said, "Abide here, I pray thee"?
R.D. I have no doubt it was to test Elisha's affections, so that Elisha should come practically into the appreciation of the new position into which Elijah was going.
A.C. In that way, you would say, our affections are tested from point to point, as to whether we are prepared to follow the One who was going up?
R.D. Yes. The Spirit is received by each one of us in answer to desire.
Ques. Would @Luke 11: 9 have any connection with it, "Ask, and it shall be given to you?"
R.D. Yes. You ask and you receive Holy Spirit. In @John 4: 10 the Lord says, "If thou knewest the gift of God ... thou wouldest have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water". Now, what Elisha wanted was that he should be like his master. The exercise was that we should see how the reception of the Spirit in the
{207}
believer, and the recognition of the Spirit, are necessary for spiritual formation. That is in view in the scriptures before us at this time.
H.B. Is that the way it is put in @Luke 11, that you are exhorted to ask the Father, and He will give you the Holy Spirit?
R.D. But then, who asks? You are an asker, and the answer to the asker is the Holy Spirit.
Ques. What is involved in asking?
R.D. Whatever your exercise might be; in whatever way you might express yourself, the asking would involve that you want to be like Christ.
Ques. Why was a double portion of Elijah's spirit asked for?
R.D. Well, typically it is christianity that is in view. All the possibilities of christianity are there immediately you receive the Spirit. But what Elisha saw were the excellent graces that his master had, and he said, 'I would like to be like him, and like him in the fullest possible way'. So, he asks for what is, typically, the fulness of blessing in christianity - he asks for the full portion, and nothing less than that. When it is opened out it means everything that is in the heart of God for us is available now by the Spirit.
Ques. Would @James 1: 5 help in connection with it, "If any one of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God"?
R.D. Well, if one lacks wisdom, and has not the Spirit, he asks. The gift is the Spirit, and in that gift all is made available to one. I may have the Spirit and ask for wisdom, as James puts it, and this wisdom will be available by the Spirit.
{208}
F.W. There had been an antecedent work in Elisha's soul before he had this desire. Would you say a word about that?
R.D. I have no doubt there was a work with Elisha at the very outset of his being taken account of in Scripture. Evidently his heart was with the God of Israel. The first time he was found, he was ploughing with twelve yoke of oxen, and he was with the twelfth. There was deep spiritual exercise going on in that young man's soul in relation to God, God's people, and God's interests. And God, by way of the prophet, laid a claim upon him at the very start. He threw his mantle over him. He did not appreciate at the beginning how much that mantle meant, because he did not then know Elijah. Consequent upon the mantle being thrown over him, which really claimed him as a disciple, he became acquainted with his master and with his master's interests. Then he is tested as to whether he is prepared to follow his master. The testing which comes out in this chapter, of course, is not the subject before us, but it brings us to the point where Elijah asks him what he would like. Now, I believe that is the question that arises in regard to the reception of the Spirit. What is it that we desire?
W.J.H. The point is to see Elijah go up.
R.D. The Spirit is given in relation to Christ being received into the new position. I mean if our hearts follow Him up to where He is, the Spirit would delight to place us in a suitable correspondence to where He is. The very height of christianity is in view from the outset.
Rem. The Lord takes up a natural father, and He says a natural father knows what to give to his children.
{209}
And then the Lord says, "How much rather shall the Father who is of heaven give the Holy Spirit" (@Luke 11: 13)?
R.D. To those who ask, yes. Whatever you ask of God, the answer lies in the Spirit. That is the point in Luke's scripture.
Ques. Would you not say that in the beginning of Acts the affections of the disciples were transferred from earth to heaven?
R.D. They were. The fact of the matter is, if you link up Luke's gospel with the beginning of Acts, you see how Christ going to the right hand of God links the disciples affections up with the right hand of God too, and all their desires and hopes take form from there.
W.J.H. It was a continuation really, of what was seen in Christ here. The desire was for that.
R.D. Yes; and the normal desire of anybody who has been brought into touch with Christ, would be that he should take character from Him. And I believe that that is how every believer moves when he receives the Spirit.
Rem. The difficulty one has is that the Lord Jesus Christ is not here personally now, and so we are exercised in our souls before we have the sense of Christ in glory. That does not come from Him personally; so the Spirit must be active in other ways before that point is reached.
R.D. Of course the Spirit is active in other ways, as He had been active with the one hundred and twenty in the beginning of Acts. There was a good deal that was formed in their souls before this. They had been in Christ's company, they loved Christ, and they loved one another. That could not be but by the work of the Spirit, and there
{210}
was material there in their souls; but still they did not possess the Spirit.
G.A.v.S. "Receive the Holy Spirit". Does that touch it; when the Lord rose from the dead and came into their midst (@John 20: 22)?
R.D. I think the Lord in @John 20 gave them an impression of the greatest possible gift that could be theirs. I mean the reception of His Spirit.
Ques. Was that the Spirit of life?
R.D. More than that - a wonderful bestowal. It was made good when they received the Spirit at Pentecost.
F.W. Does not Elisha's request imply a sense in his soul of inability to answer to his responsibilities in the absence of Elijah, unless his spirit is given to him?
R.D. I doubt whether the question of responsibility was very much before Elisha's heart at the moment. Rather, I think, there was the desire that comes to every soul at the start when he hears the gospel, and comes into touch with Christ. The desires are connected with Christ in another place. That is, there are simple desires to be like Christ. That is where the exercise begins. In answer to that the blessed God is pleased to communicate the Spirit.
H.B. So the object on God's side, would be that there should be a continuance of Christ here in this world.
R.D. That is your desire. A soul, having received the gospel, there is brought to him the light of the forgiveness of sins. He begins to be attracted to the Lord Jesus Christ. He wants to be a little more patient, a little more meek. He asks for that. The answer is the gift of the
{211}
Spirit. One cannot be patient, or meek, apart from receiving the Holy Spirit.
Rem. Elijah's reply to Elisha is practically, 'If you want what you ask for, there must be intimacy; you must be with me'.
R.D. 'If you want what you ask for you must apprehend me going up'. And the Spirit is given in relation to Christ ascended. The object, of course, is that all our hopes and aspirations should be connected with Christ in the new place where He has gone.
F.W. Is what we get in @2 Kings 2 the very beginning of the believer's *positive* history?
R.D. Yes. Here you have things now taking a definite form in regard to Elijah, and all that flows from Elijah's ministry, the development of the double portion of the Spirit. It is really a setting forth of all the graces and blessings of christianity in its fulness. It is what the Lord speaks of, "That they might have life, and might have it abundantly" (@John 10: 10).
F.W. So that this is really normal?
R.D. We do not get help by looking at what is abnormal. As one apprehends Christ gone up to the right hand of God, the gift of the Spirit is given in connection with that. So that we can go on to the next scripture, which is a very important line of truth, and that is the way we come into all the subjective gain of the gift of the Spirit.
A.C. What is the thought of Elisha following Elijah over Jordan?
R.D. It is what I have been saying. You come to the point where you can apprehend Him going up. It is very much like where the disciples followed the Lord in
{212}
@Luke 24 (which is connected with @Acts 1) - on the other side of His death. He went up from their midst, and they beheld Him go up.
Ques. What was the "hard thing" which was asked?
R.D. It was to convey to us the sense that there was exercise in view of the reception of the Spirit, and exercise begins like this, that I want to be like Christ. There has been a great deal said about whether a believer has the Spirit or not. One would like to encourage every young person who may be exercised about things, as to the desires that are proper in the heart of young believers, which turn the heart to God, in such a way that God's answer is the gift of the Holy Spirit.
G.A.v.S. The very desire springs *from the work* of the Spirit?
R.D. Yes.
Ques. Has every believer got the Spirit?
R.D. We read of believers who had not the Spirit. It really raises the question of how much a person believes. Now Elisha apprehended his master was going up, and if he was to be left behind he would need his master's spirit, so he watched to see him go up.
Ques. The disciples stood gazing into heaven. The object of their affection was being taken up into heaven.
R.D. Yes, their hearts went up. They followed Him where He had gone. And the Spirit in that way would connect all our hopes and affections with Christ where he is; and our occupation down here would be in that blessed One's interests. So there is the expression of the features of that blessed Person whom we love.
{213}
E.P. Is your thought that the asking is continuous?
R.D. I think the reception of the Spirit is in answer to asking; but no doubt there is this continuous exercise that I might get all the gain of the Spirit received. But first of all one must have the Spirit.
E.P. I was thinking of Paul, when he speaks of the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ.
R.D. That has got more to do with our second scripture. What was observed on the part of Elisha, after he had seen his master go up, was that he was not wearing his own garment. He had disposed of his own garment. He rent it in twain. He had no more use for it. Now he was wearing his master's garment. That is the effect of a person having received the Spirit; he now comes out in the garments of Christ.
Ques. Was that seen in Stephen?
R.D. It was. They saw as it were, the very garments of Jesus on Stephen.
E.P. The Spirit is not only a gift, but is formative.
R.D. It is in view of something that we are conscious we need. First of all we express the desire. And in connection with apprehending Christ in the faith of our souls, gone up into glory and the Father's reception of Him there, the Spirit is now given, and *I* can receive the Spirit. But I can receive the Spirit as giving me the power to be like my Master.
Ques. Why did Elisha rend his own garment?
R.D. Because, in keeping with what he desired, having received his master's garment, he has no use for his own.
{214}
G.A.v.S. Is that not a test?
R.D. Yes. The truth is he preferred his master to himself, before he knew that he had received the capability to be like his master. Now he disposes of his own garment, and mark you, he does not hang it in the wardrobe.
G.A.v.S. Do you mean if Elisha had put his mantle in the wardrobe he might take it down and wear it again?
R.D. Yes. He had no more use for his old garment. For the rest of his days his desire and object was to wear his master's garment.
G.A.v.S. Do my garments, in Scripture, represent my natural characteristics?
R.D. Yes. That is what Paul did, you know. In a very beautiful way he speaks of it when he said that what things were gain for him, he counted loss for Christ. He said, 'I had very good garments, naturally speaking, but now I have no more use for them'. Paul had upon him the meek and gentle habiliments of Christ.
E.E.L. How can I rend my garment so that it can be of no further use to me?
R.D. It is an act of mind that you arrive at. You put them off. We are in the presence of the graces of Christ to dispose of all the natural characteristics that once marked us. Having now received His garments, the power to partake of His Spirit and graces, you have done with yours.
W.J.H. It is the appreciation of Christ.
R.D. As a matter of fact you put on Elijah's garment before you dispose of your own. You have appreciated in your affections those features of Christ, and you have no more use for your own characteristics.
{215}
H.B. I suppose, to put it in the language of the New Testament, it would be the old man put off and the putting on of the new man?
R.D. Well, that is what it comes to.
F.W. How did it come to pass, in the second scripture, that there had been no consciousness of the value of the oil?
R.D. That raises an important point. I have not so much difficulty about people having received the Spirit. I believe there are many who have not received the Spirit, many who believe to a certain point. They have not apprehended Christ gone up; and if one got into touch with them one would like to present Christ as having gone up into heaven, and seek to exercise them as to the possibilities that are theirs in the gift of the Spirit. But in the second case it seems to me we come to a great practical difficulty, a difficulty that is very evident amongst us, and that is whether we have the use of, or all that is available to us by, the Spirit. I believe that the great drawback with souls today is that they may have the Spirit yet not be in the gain of having the Spirit.
A.C. I suppose typically in the Old Testament, when the rock was smitten, the Spirit was given; but it was not until they had passed the brazen serpent and digged wells that they got the gain of the Spirit.
E.P. Do you not think we have been very deficient in the presentation of a glorified Christ?
R.D. It is an exercise for us. It is an immense moment when a soul apprehends Christ gone up to the right hand of God, Christ in glory. When a soul apprehends that you see what immense desires are
{216}
produced in the heart, in connection with which the Spirit is given and received.
E.P. It is the way Christ is presented, you love Christ.
R.D. The first effect of the Spirit's reception in the heart is this - that it makes me conscious of the love of God. I think that is what is typically referred to when the rock was smitten and the water was given.
H.B. That is demonstrated in @Romans 5, where the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts.
R.D. Yes. The Spirit, like all that God gives, is given on the line of desire. It is a divine principle with God that He gives on the line of desire. And the scriptures we have been referring to speak of desire. Before Elijah departs he says to Elisha, 'What do you want?' 'Well', he says, 'I want to be like you'. The Lord Jesus in speaking to the woman at the well, said, "If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that says to thee, Give me to drink, thou wouldest have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water" (@John 4: 10). The scripture quoted in Luke is very simple - "how much rather shall the Father who is of heaven give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him". That is the way things are presented in Scripture.
Ques. How is the desire produced?
R.D. The desire is produced by the Spirit of God, and in connection with those desires, the Spirit of God would lead our hearts to the apprehension of Christ at the right hand of God, because, if He is not there, the Spirit could not be given.
W.J.H. Every believer professes to know Jesus is in heaven, but all do not know Him there for the affection of their hearts.
{217}
R.D. That is what we have before us. We have, in the case of Elisha, a man who would keep in touch with his master, and whose affections followed him every step of his journey towards Jordan, to the other side of Jordan, and right up to heaven. The sons of the prophets knew as much as he did, as a matter of light. They said, "Dost thou know Jehovah will take away thy master from over thy head today"? We know all these things; you may have light about them, like the sons of the prophets; but when it came to the point of crossing the Jordan in affection and desire after this blessed master, you find fifty against one. At Jordan they know as well as he, that Elijah was going up; but this is a heart that has moved after his master, and he was prepared to follow him all the way, because he had the desire to be like him.
W.D.R. Do those who know their sins forgiven have the Spirit?
R.D. It is quite possible to know your sins are forgiven, and yet not have the Spirit.
G.A.v.S. Would you call that abnormal, to know that your sins are forgiven, and yet not have the Spirit?
R.D. Well, I think it is a step on the way.
W.D.R. How could you know your sins were forgiven, if it were not by the Spirit?
R.D. I would know it by faith, and faith is not the Spirit.
F.W. Is not the Spirit given in response to faith?
R.D. It is given in response to faith in relation to Christ where He is. The gift of the Spirit is given in response to desire.
{218}
J.H. @Hebrews 10: 15 shows us that the Holy Spirit is witness. That is, the Holy Spirit witnesses to us that our sins and iniquities God will remember no more. Is it not the Spirit that removes the sense of sins from the conscience, so that we can have no more the conscience of sins?
R.D. It is the Spirit that gives you witness. You could not receive the gospel apart from the work of the Spirit. But that is not the reception of the Spirit.
W.D.R. If you had the consciousness of the forgiveness of sins, would that not be by the Spirit?
R.D. It depends what you mean by consciousness. If you have the enjoyment of the forgiveness of sins it would be by the Spirit. But you might have the light of the forgiveness of sins on the principle of faith, without having received the Holy Spirit. Indeed we have in Scripture, in the Acts, those who had believed, and yet had not received the Spirit. I believe there are many today who believe who have not yet received the Spirit, and it is because there are such, one is anxious we should know how to help them.
J.H. Does not @John 7 tell us that they did not have the Spirit given, because Jesus was not yet glorified? But now we are in the good of the day of Pentecost, and the Lord Jesus has been glorified so that we have the Spirit both as life and power.
R.D. We have presented to us the forgiveness of sins in view of the gift of the Spirit. The Spirit is here, but that does not involve that I have the Spirit
Ques. Did the Ephesian believers have the Spirit?
{219}
R.D. They did not have the Spirit at the start. They were asked the question, "Did ye receive the Holy Spirit when ye had believed"? Their answer disclosed that they had not. There are many like that today.
Rem. They could not have entered into the counsels of God, until they had received the Spirit.
R.D. Quite so.
Rem. They had a knowledge of God, and they believed, but they had not the Spirit.
R.D. They believed a certain testimony that had been given to them, but that testimony evidently, was not to Christ in glory; and because they had only a limited testimony, it was not suitable that they should be sealed. God is not going to seal what is defective. What He does seal is an apprehension of Christ gone to the right hand of God, because of what God has in view in regard to those to whom He communicates the Spirit.
W.D.R. And when that is so the spirit in the believer cries, "Abba Father".
R.D. Yes; that is so. But it is not going to help souls who have not received the testimony, in the apprehension of their souls, of Christ gone to the right hand of God and what that involves, to tell them they have the Spirit because they are believers. You are going to damage their souls if you do that, and I would not like to have any part in it.
A.C. Would you say this, that we can go some way on the road, and not touch christianity proper at all? I suppose in a future day the earthly people will enjoy the forgiveness of sins, and peace with God, but they will not have the Spirit in the way in which we do.
{220}
Rem. Many souls have a wonderful knowledge of the letter of the word without the living power of the Spirit.
R.D. The recognition of the Spirit is necessary for the enjoyment of christianity.
Ques. "Do ye not know that your body is the temple of the Holy Spirit which is in you, which ye have of God; and ye are not your own" (@1 Corinthians 6: 19)? Is that of general application?
R.D. I believe those Corinthians had the Spirit; but we are raising the question whether there are not believers who believe a certain testimony, but who have not the Spirit. Paul, in @Acts 19, does not give them a lecture and tell them that all believers are bound to have the Spirit, whether they are conscious of it or not. That would put them in a wrong position. He exercised them as to whether they had the Spirit or not; and, having raised that issue with them, they disclosed to Paul that they did not so much as know that the Holy Spirit had come.
Rem. Your point is that the apostles had been with that blessed Person for three and a half years, and they had desired to be like Him so much that they were in a suitable state to receive the Spirit.
R.D. Elisha really typifies the remnant who followed the Lord from one point to another, even to the other side of His death. We have that at the end of Luke's gospel, and the beginning of the Acts. They had, as it were, the most intense desire to be like Christ, and to be here for Him.
{221}
W.D.R. If a soul knows Christ, "delivered for our offences and has been raised for our justification" (@Romans 4: 25), would not God seal that soul?
R.D. He would. That is @Romans 4 and 5. There you have a soul brought into the light of Christ raised. His being raised there may go beyond the fact of His resurrection, to the testimony as an object of faith. He has been delivered for our offences, and raised again for our justification, and the light of that apprehended, means that I am justified for another world entirely, and I am taken up in another Man. Now, if I receive that testimony, do I not wish to be like that Man? Do I not wish to have the blessed God as my object? Such a presentation of the glad tidings, which would bring that into effect, must mean that that person has the Spirit, and the Spirit brings home to the affections of that person the love of God. But if the testimony falls short of that, God cannot seal it; and if He does not seal it, that person has not the Spirit. I may be able to apprehend Christ on the cross, and yet not have followed Him to resurrection.
Ques. Would you say something about that scripture in @Acts 19: 2?
R.D. It is simple, Paul asked the question, "Did ye receive the Holy Spirit when ye had believed"? In referring to it afterwards he said, "Having believed, ye have been sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise" (@Ephesians 1: 13).
G.A.v.S. In reference to that scripture in Ephesians - would that indicate that the gospel had been presented in its fullest character or otherwise?
R.D. We know the history of it, that Paul went to Ephesus, and he found a testimony had been given which
{222}
was not a full testimony, and the effect was that there were some believers in Ephesus who believed up to a certain point. They believed possibly all the testimony that had been given to them. It exercised Paul, because he discerned that they had not the Spirit. I think all that is related to us, in order to exercise us as to the reception of the Spirit. We have these types too, to help us, and we see how Elisha takes the journey, and reaches the point where he is ready for the reception of the Spirit.
G.A.v.S. I must confess I had never thought of connecting @Acts 19 with the epistle to the Ephesians in that sense.
R.D. It was at Ephesus that he was writing to those very brethren. They would well understand the reference.
Ques. Is there any connection between what you have been saying, and what we have in @Luke 4: 18, "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me"?
R.D. There the Lord is speaking as the anointed Preacher, and He speaks of the Spirit of the Lord being upon Him. God had anointed that blessed Man to be the Preacher of all the bounteous grace of God.
Ques. How would a person know whether he had received the Holy Spirit or not?
R.D. He would know surely, if he were conscious of the love of God being shed abroad in his heart. I believe there are many who have a certain amount of light, and who are real in regard to it, but who do not enjoy the love of God shed abroad in the heart. It is not going to help such souls to tell them they have the Holy Spirit. It is going to help souls if one would lead their thoughts up to
{223}
Christ, and show them what possibilities there are for them now that Christ has gone up on high.
J.H. @Romans 8: 16 says, "The Spirit itself bears witness with our spirit, that we are children of God".
R.D. Yes; but @Romans 8 is not a question of the reception of the Spirit. First, you have the love of God shed abroad in your hearts, then you have the witness of the Spirit. That is the Spirit of God speaks to your spirit and He makes known to you, in real consciousness, the blessed place that Christ occupies now, and He witnesses that we are children of God.
Ques. May a soul have the conscious joy of the forgiveness of sins, having reached a glorified Christ at the moment of the forgiveness of sins, and still not have the Spirit, as having been sealed?
R.D. A soul may get relief, and may be able to rest upon that. That is to say that all that alienated a soul from God has been dealt with, and the light of that may be in the soul. But that is by faith. The *enjoyment* of divine things is by the Spirit.
Rem. Mr Darby has said that although a soul may receive the Spirit in that way, he may still have to go through the wilderness journey, and learn himself in @Romans 7, and be as one who has not received the Spirit.
R.D. That is right; but that was not the question that was asked.
Ques. Is not the object of the Spirit that I may know Christ where He is, not where He was?
R.D. Yes; it is in connection with where He is now; but I need the Spirit to understand and enjoy all the perfection that came out where He was.
{224}
W.D.R. At the end of @Romans 4, we get this, after the statement is made that "Abraham believed God, and it was reckoned to him as righteousness" (verse 3), that "it was not written on his account alone that it was reckoned to him, but on ours also, to whom, believing on him who has raised from among the dead Jesus our Lord ... it will be reckoned" (verses 23 - 25). Could it be said of such a one that he had not the Spirit?
R.D. What you have been quoting is a matter of faith is it not? We must distinguish between faith and the Spirit; what faith apprehends, and what the Spirit confirms.
F.W. I think the difficulty is pretty general here. Many of us have had the thought that the Spirit commences a work in our souls, and leads us through certain exercises, until a point is reached when, in faith, the testimony of God is received, and that faith in the testimony of God is what is sealed by the Spirit.
R.D. The testimony of God is a very *full* thing. It involves Christ at the right hand of God. Now the moral sequence is this - the Spirit of God began the work in us, and He led us up to a point where there was repentance, and the reception of the testimony in Christ raised and exalted, then the gift of the Spirit. This is simple.
F.W. Yes, only I thought from what you were saying, it was necessary there should be a great deal more apprehension of what was *involved* in Christ in glory before the soul is sealed.
R.D. Oh, no. When you say 'the testimony of God', you are including what I am anxious we should all apprehend (and I have taken this scripture before us to
{225}
illustrate) *what it is to be sealed*. But supposing, Mr W., when we come to practical difficulties, that the testimony is just a bit of the testimony, do you think God is going to seal that, and confirm the soul who has before him less than God would have before that soul? Now, there has been a good deal of defective presentation, and the fact is that souls have received a certain amount as light on the principle of faith, but they have not received the Spirit.
E.E.L. The testimony the saints at Ephesus had received was defective, because the Holy Spirit had either been unknown, or, having become known to them, He was ignored by them in their preaching.
R.D. Quite so.
Ques. You have spoken of first, the reception of the Spirit; second the witness; would there not be a third, the controlling power?
R.D. That is what is evident with Elisha - he came out in the power of his master, and then too, another mark of having the Spirit is that I love the children of God.
*From Readings and Addresses in Australia, pp. 5 - 25, Sydney, December 1921*.
{226}
{227}
THE SPIRIT (2)
R DUNN
@2 Kings 4: 1 - 16; @Romans 8: 9 - 30
R.D. I think these scriptures view two exercises. First, that which has been dwelt upon somewhat as to whether one has received the Spirit. Second, as to whether, having received the Spirit, one is in the gain of it. In regard to the first exercise, I think we saw that, normally, every christian has the Spirit - everyone who may be counted a believer in the testimony of God has the Spirit. But we saw from one scripture that there were those who had received a certain gospel from a man who knew the way of the Lord, and the things concerning Jesus, but only the baptism of John. So his testimony was limited, because his converts at Ephesus had evidently not heard that the Holy Spirit had come. It does not say Paul told them about the Holy Spirit, but they had not heard the wonderful news that the Spirit of God had come. So Paul raised this great question with them, and it involved great consequences for them. That is, their hearts being set in right exercises by what Paul presented, the Spirit was given, and they received Him. One would raise the second question, as to whether we have the value and all the gain of the Spirit of God, who is with us and dwelling in us?
A.C. Did the woman in @2 Kings 4 get the gain of what she had in her house?
R.D. Yes. I think she sets forth one who has the Spirit, but does not know how much there is in the Spirit.
{228}
A.C. I suppose that it is only by the Spirit of God that we can meet our obligations down here. Evidently she was not able to meet her obligations.
R.D. Her difficulty was she had all those obligations, and she did not know how she was to meet them.
F.W. How did she come into the knowledge of the value of what was present in the house?
R.D. The prophet drew attention to it. I am sure the Lord would draw our attention to the immense resources consequent upon having received the Spirit.
Ques. Would the woman set forth the affection side?
R.D. Yes, the subjective side. She speaks of the heart's exercises as to moral obligations; and we are not free to have part in assembly exercise apart from characteristically fulfilling all our obligations by the Spirit. So the question is a very necessary one, if we are going to make advance in soul and find our part in the exercises of the assembly today.
G.A.v.S. I suppose we become bankrupt simply because we have been seeking to fulfil our obligations in the flesh?
R.D. Yes, and of course that is bondage.
G.A.v.S. When you speak of our not getting the gain of the Spirit, how do we get awakened as to the loss that has accrued through our not getting the gain of the Spirit?
R.D. The question of our responsibility is raised, and when we have practically decided the question of our responsibilities, we are able to live. I think it is important that we should face the question of our responsibilities. The proposal the Lord makes for us is that we should come out of the sphere of our responsibilities, not only characteristically meeting everything in the power of the
{229}
Spirit, but with much over - more than overcomers.
E.E.L. You deduce that from the fact that this woman, after she had sold sufficient to pay her creditors, had something left upon which she and her sons could live?
R.D. Yes. She had the principal left. It was only a part of it that she had used for the paying of her debts, and she had the great thing left - that upon which she and her sons could live royally afterwards. If we were to follow the type, she comes out in the next case, really, as the great woman.
F.W. Do you mean that she not only filled all the vessels, but when she had done filling them the original vessel was still there full?
R.D. She was still able to pay her creditors, and live on the principal which was left. It is really an amplification of what we were speaking of this afternoon, the double portion of Elijah's spirit. It is christianity entered into in all its fulness, in the power of the Spirit, but from the direction of fulfilling all our obligations.
Ques. Meeting responsibilities is righteousness, but here we get grace, do we not?
R.D. But it is all grace you know; grace enables us to meet righteousness. That is why it is oil in this case. It is oil as suggesting the supply of grace that is in the Spirit. It is not exactly the Spirit personally, but the gain that accrues to us by recognising the Spirit, and using the grace that is available for us.
G.A.v.S. So that it is in the multiplication of grace that our obligations are fulfilled?
R.D. Yes. I think it is when we begin to recognise
{230}
our responsibilities, and have the desire (that the gospel put into our hearts), that we should be in liberty to live in all the blessedness of the grace that has come out in Christ, that we come to recognise the necessity of using the Spirit, and availing ourselves of the grace that is ours by the Spirit.
Ques. Are you speaking of the individual or the assembly?
R. D. I am speaking of the individual. @Romans 8 is individual.
A.C. Elisha did not give the woman anything, but he said, "What hast thou in the house?" I suppose we may have the Spirit, and yet not get the gain of what there is in the Spirit?
R.D. Yes, and what I think about it is this: there is not so much difficulty in regard to having the Spirit. As I said this afternoon, I believe there are some who, on account of defective preaching, have not reached the point where they have received the Spirit. That is not normal. What *is* normal is that all believers have the Spirit. I would like that to be remembered by all. I think it is a serious thing too, that so many may have the Spirit and yet be careless as to their obligations.
A.C. If I am not able to meet my obligations in connection with my responsible pathway as a christian down here, the danger would be I may come under the power of something here in this sense?
R.D. But you are able to meet your obligations. I want to press that. Are we exercised about meeting our obligations?
{231}
G.A.v.S. That is to say there is no defect in power or grace, but there is defect in the appropriation or enjoyment of the liberty that that power and grace imply.
R.D. Quite.
Rem. And in the recognition of the Spirit?
R.D. The recognition of the Spirit, and availing ourselves of all the supply which, in grace, the Spirit of God brings in.
Ques. Is responsibility in view of the company of saints here?
R.D. It is in view of coming into the fulness of christianity, and that involves a very great deal. This is the Spirit's day, when we may have life in all its abundance; but we cannot enjoy that apart from facing the question of our responsibilities.
G.A.v.S. Would you imply that the saints have not been awakened to their responsibilities on that side?
R.D. I think there is the danger. We see a woman here, now awakened to the exercise. The creditor has come along and he claims her two sons. This stirs her up. What she wants is liberty and life. The creditor has come to deprive her of both. Now she comes to the man of God, and she says, 'Help, I am in exercise now'. When people get a little move on in their souls you know, they begin to pray, and pray in regard to everything that would hold them in bondage. The first thing the soul desires is liberty and life.
Ques. Is the flesh the difficulty?
R.D. Well, you know, we have a good husband. In @Romans 7 the Lord Jesus takes that name really, the name of the husband, not to the assembly, but to the
{232}
individual. Each one of us has a good husband. It is important, in approaching the subject to take account of this, that the Lord Jesus loves each one of us. He would have us so free that we should be fruitful for God. The way by which we become fruitful for God is that He brings in a supply by way of the Spirit.
A.C. That does not become available till we pass the brazen serpent aspect of the death of Christ.
R.D. But you are very glad to come to the brazen serpent aspect when you discover how utterly incapable you are yourself. You are glad to set aside the incapable man and turn to the Lord Jesus, who draws attention to what there is for you in the Spirit. The brazen serpent is not a question of the gift of the Spirit. Typically, the Spirit is given before. It is a question of recognising the Spirit, the following of the Spirit, and the singing to the well. So it is not a question of the well not being there, but rather of moving the stones that are before the well.
W.J.H. That is a kindred idea to borrowing empty vessels.
R.D. Yes, and when you borrow empty vessels, you go to your neighbours.
L.M. What do you imply by that?
R.D. If you had vessels from your neighbours it does not matter how many vessels you have, and your neighbours are those who live nearest to you. You are able to meet your obligations amongst all your neighbours; not only so but you go on to live.
Ques. Do you mean one's brethren?
R.D. Your brethren, or your fellow-men, the man next door, anybody with whom you come in touch. It is a
{233}
most blessed proposal that I should be able to come out in the grace of God, in such a way, that I can leave all my relationship with men, having been enabled to meet all righteous claims. I can leave them all in the sense that, in the Spirit's power, one has no encumbrances but rather the reverse.
E.E.L. What is the idea of selling the oil in regard to one's obligations? It was said of old, "Eye for eye, tooth for tooth" (@Exodus 21: 24). It is something very different from that is it not?
R.D. Yes. It is the realisation of the resources in the Spirit, the grace that we have in the Spirit.
Ques. Those to whom this widow owed money got the oil, did they not?
R.D. She sold the oil, and paid her creditors. That is to say, she had exercises which realised that grace, so that she was able to meet everybody in grace.
Ques. Is the obligation pressed upon everyone of us when we come to know the Lord - our love to God, and our love to our neighbour?
R.D. Yes, that is good.
A.C. During our pathway through this world many things arise, in one form or another, to turn us aside, and we really have to meet them according to God. If we do not, we fall under their power. If we are in the good of what we have before us here, we are able to move through a scene that is against us and meet every obligation.
R.D. Yes. We have to do business in the land of Moab. We have our relationships in the land of Moab. We have to deal with men in that territory. The circumstances of the earthly pathway have to do with the natural
{234}
relationships. But the Spirit's power would enable us to come out in grace in such a way that every relationship of life, and every responsibility, is met, not as other men would meet them, but in the power of the Spirit of God.
L.M. She had nothing else in the house. "Thy handmaid has not anything at all in the house but a pot of oil".
R.D. Yes, the doors are shut, and she is inside with God, taking up this transaction; so that how she fills her obligations is all in a spiritual way by the power and the expenditure of grace.
E.E.L. Does the shutting of the door in regard to the Spirit answer to the rending of the mantle?
R.D. I think so. It puts you on an entirely spiritual ground. Now you have God before you, and the obligation is met in relation to God. In @Romans 8 it says, "they that are in flesh cannot please God". Now in the discharging of your liabilities, that these creditors justly claim, the question is one of pleasing God. And so if one thinks of one's relationships of life, business matters, household matters, or whatever relationships they are, and our responsibilities in connection with them, we can meet them and please God in doing so, in the grace that is supplied by the Spirit.
F.W. So that you now move forward, not with any sense of your own greatness, but with the sense of the greatness of your possession.
R.D. Yes, and you become great, like this great woman. And as having no debts upon you at all, you begin to pay attention to this man of God who passes every day. The testimony begins to get the place in your heart. You
{235}
feel you would not like to miss the opportunity of having a part in the testimony. But you could not take up the testimony if you were in debt with your brothers, or in regard to business, or in any other way. Everything has really been met in grace, and I can now devote myself to maintaining the testimony. I would like, as it were, to ask the man of God, the holy man of God, who has got the mind of God, and the interests of God before him - I would like, as it were, to ask him to my house.
Ques. How did the woman become in debt?
R.D. It is the creditor who raises the question about it. We have to live amongst our neighbours, those with whom we have dealings. We are either characteristically meeting all the obligations in grace, or else we become indebted to them; we are detained, and we cannot get into assembly exercises that our hearts would long to be in. If I am conducting my business badly, I am in debt. If I cannot get on with my neighbours, I am in debt. If I cannot get on with my brethren, I am in debt.
G.A.v.S. Any assumption to take up what is spoken of as the testimony when one is under obligations to others which are undischarged, is an assumption in the flesh, not in Spirit.
R.D. Yes. You cannot afford to do it, because you have no money. This woman was a great woman; she had plenty of money, she paid all her debts, and she had excess. She could have a chamber built upon the wall, and furnish it, but that was with the capital she had. If we were to take up the chapter we would see that. However, that is not our point tonight.
G.A.v.S. She has that good husband, and when she
{236}
gets into debt, she says, 'where is the man of God'?
R.D. That is it. Then you are ready for all that is involved in the new husband. The husband meets everything from his resource; he enables her to pay all her debts and live on the rest.
Ques. Is that the thought at the end of @Romans 7?
R.D. Yes. The beginning of @Romans 7 is the presentation of the new husband. But the experiences you go through are because you do not know your husband's resources. @Romans 8 shows you what a supply the husband has, and how he gives it to you in the Spirit.
Ques. Is the righteous requirement of the law, the obligation - love?
R.D. It is an obligation which expends itself in the supply of grace. So that you are able to meet every obligation to your wife and children; the men in your business; and everybody you touch. You are able to do it in a large and royal way, and find yourself moving in and out amongst your brethren, in spiritual relations, without any kind of reflection and as to how you have been treating men of the world.
Rem. That is to say, the Spirit is life on account of righteousness.
R.D. Yes. When you come up from the market place you do not need to do as the Pharisees did, go and wash your hands. You never dirty them. And when you come up from the house you do not have to say, as you leave your house, to your father and mother, 'I am going to neglect you because I want to attend to the house of God'. God does not want that kind of money. He wants the
{237}
expenditure of the grace of the Spirit from those who have been characteristically fulfilling their obligations.
G.A.v.S. Would you repeat that about the Pharisees washing their hands?
R.D. I was referring to the scripture in Mark, where the Lord is speaking of the Pharisees. He speaks of those who come from the market place and wash their hands, and those who, coming in from the house, leave the house in this way - that a man may say to his father and mother, 'I ought to care for you, but I care for divine interests, so you will have to do without my care'. Now God would send that man back to his house to care for his father and mother.
Ques. You must not shut out obligations then?
R.D. He might be a man who has a quick temper, and if all the brethren know he is quick-tempered he may think they have just got to put up with him. Is that how you come out of your obligations, with an admission that you have failed, when you have the Spirit, and the graces of the Spirit, that would meet every kind of demand and responsibility, and leave you free and at large for divine interests?
F.W. Does this suggest what is formative in us by the Spirit?
R.D. Yes, what is possible. In having the Spirit you have the germ of everything, all the grace you need is available by the Spirit. It is not state. Romans does not give you state.
F.W. I was thinking of what is said as regards the law, that the righteous requirement of the law is fulfilled in us, not by us.
{238}
R.D. Yes, it is "fulfilled in us, who do not walk according to flesh but according to Spirit". Now as the Spirit is taken advantage of in that way, as the graces of the Spirit are used, I am formed; that takes you beyond Romans. It is a proposal in Romans. @Romans 8 is a scripture where the Spirit of God really turns aside to draw attention to all that He has for you. It is one of those remarkable scriptures in which the Spirit of God would engage you with the wealth that He has for us, an unfolding by the Spirit of all that He has for us; and you know it *is* immense.
Ques. Was Zacchaeus a good example of one who met his obligations in a royal way?
R.D. Zacchaeus was a man of little stature. He follows on the blind man in the previous chapter. He is attracted by the Lord Jesus and follows in the way. Now with Zacchaeus there were just those exercises that we are talking about. Zacchaeus is beginning to discover the importance of righteousness, and so, before he saw the Lord on this occasion, no doubt as the fruit of divine operations, he had become engaged in the discharge of his obligations. If one might put it that way Zacchaeus had begun to know the good of @Romans 8. And so after the Lord called him, he comes down, to be controlled by the Lord. You know there are many who have the gift of the Spirit, but who have never come to be controlled or regulated by the Lord. It is a very interesting scripture in that way, because just when the Lord secured him, he was on the line of discharging his obligations. You remember that he was walking along with the Lord, and a very remarkable thing took place as they were going along the
{239}
way. As we watch them we see this little man standing, and the Lord Jesus standing too, both very alert. It suddenly occurred to him the Lord was going to his house. He had not thought of that before. He says, as it were, 'I wonder if He will see anything in my bookcase that He would not like; I wonder if He will see anything in my household that He would not like'. So he says to the Lord, "Behold, Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor, and if I have taken anything from any man by false accusation, I return him fourfold" (@Luke 19: 8). The Lord says, 'I will go to the house of a man like that and I will abide in it. I am going to link him with the testimony, and with my interests. He is a man who seeks to be regulated by Me, and if he is little of stature he will soon grow'.
Rem. He received the Lord joyfully.
R.D. Yes.
Ques. Would you say the Lord had an exercised heart to work upon, like the oil in the vessel?
R.D. Quite so, and there was a heart that was using it.
G.A.v.S. What about Onesimus? Was he discharging his obligations when he went back to Philemon?
R.D. Well, Paul has a young convert there. The question with Paul was this; Was he going to have this young convert in the good of his ministry? So he says, as it were, There are many reasons, but one of the reasons why I must send him back is that he should practise the ministry he has heard from me. Onesimus goes back to take up his obligations. And, more than that, he merges into the exercises of such an assembly as that in Colosse, in the fulness, not only of the discharge of his obligations,
{240}
but of living on the rest. He would need a good income to live in the meeting in Colosse.
F.W. Just to make plain a remark you made just now; @Romans 8, you indicated, was our capital.
R.D. Yes.
F.W. You said, Romans does not give us state.
R.D. It does not.
F.W. Where do we go for state?
R.D. I think state merges from Romans. You have state that can be taken account of in Colossians and Ephesians. You have what will form state in the recognition of the Spirit in Romans. The beginnings of things are there, but one would not use the word - stature. The grass is just beginning to grow. The blade, if you like, is there, but the corn in the ear, and all that is to come, comes out afterwards.
Ques. "*Ye* are not in flesh, but in Spirit"?
R.D. Yes. All this is available for you in the Spirit.
G.A.v.S. @Romans 8 is the discovery that things are available for us in the Spirit.
R.D. Yes, and it is going to work out in this way, that one is able to live on account of righteousness. The Spirit is life in view of righteousness. I have the power to discharge, characteristically, all my obligations.
F.W. Why then does it speak of Christ being in you?
R.D. That is by way of argument, "if Christ be in you". He raises the question, and he raises it for exercise. In reading @Romans 8 it is important to distinguish when Paul uses the words 'we', 'us', and 'me'. Sometimes Paul
{241}
says, 'I must speak for myself' - "I reckon". He speaks generally at other times. He says, 'I can raise the question with you as to how far on you are'.
Ques. What is it to be "in Spirit", in @Roman 8?
R.D. I think that is what you have arrived at, that the Spirit is recognised. You value the Spirit, and so you are in the Spirit. If one is in the recognition of the Spirit, one is in the Spirit, and not in the flesh.
H.B. In verse 2 he uses "me".
R.D. But he said it to them in the way that might exercise them, as that which was possible for them. He is raising the question whether the Spirit is with them or not. That is the question that I was raising this afternoon.
J.H. I thought that referred to the state that God takes account of as being not in the flesh but in Spirit.
R.D. Well, you may call it state, but I keep the word state for something else. State to me always involves what is formed in the believer. The point is whether one now has recognised the Spirit, and gives the Spirit His place. What is true of one who gives the Spirit His place is, that he is not in flesh, but in Spirit. But it is for each one of us to answer to.
G.A.v.S. Is it then a question more of really recognising dependence upon the Spirit in regard to the progressive resulting state?
R.D. Yes, it is that one should give the Spirit His place in that way, so that state is formed.
F.W. I see you have here all that which is going to produce the state.
R.D. All that is in the Spirit is for you, but until it is formed in you it is not state, so Romans does not take
{242}
you quite far enough for that. @Romans 8 is presenting it to you, as that which is possible for you.
F.W. Evidently it is important that I should know that?
R.D. Of course it is. It is important you should know you have the Spirit, and then it is important you should know the wealth that is there. That is really unfolded in the oil because of your having the Spirit.
A.C. I suppose you have what is available in the Spirit in @Romans 8, and in the epistle to the Colossians you get the work of the Spirit - what has been wrought in the souls of the saints at Colosse?
R.D. Yes, and Colossians gives you, not simply the discharge of your obligations, but the living on the rest. The question in Colossians is one of living. It is life in all its abundance.
G.A.v.S. It occurs to me then, that the real question is as to how far we have recognised what comes with the Spirit.
R.D. Yes. Now take such an expression as this, "if indeed God's Spirit dwell in you". The personal name of the Holy Spirit is the Holy Spirit - Father, Son and Holy Spirit. "The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the Holy Spirit" (@2 Corinthians 13: 14). But here Paul uses these expressions, "God's Spirit" and "Spirit of God". Now what would be the moral effect in us in recognising the Spirit in relation to God? It would be this; that we would be exercised that everything in our walk, and in connection with what we pursued was of *God* - the Spirit of *God*. Then you go on to the Spirit of Christ. Now that is characteristic. It means that I am marked by
{243}
the grace of Christ in my spirit. "If any one has not the Spirit of Christ", it does not say 'he is none of His', but "*he* is not of him". That is to say, that characteristically, he is not of Christ. One might have the Spirit and not be marked by the Spirit of Christ. I hope nobody will deny that.
A.C. I was thinking of that scripture, "But if the Spirit of him that has raised up Jesus from among the dead dwell in you, he that has raised up Christ from among the dead shall quicken your mortal bodies also on account of his Spirit which dwells in you".
R.D. Well, think of being conscious of having the Spirit of resurrection.
A.C. Then it is the Spirit of the God of resurrection?
R.D. Of course it is. I know I have now the Spirit, which is the power to touch my mortal body.
W.D.R. It refers to the resurrection, the coming of the Lord for His saints.
R.D. Yes, and the power that will give the finishing touch to the body, is dwelling there now.
G.A.v.S. Would you say a little in regard to the Spirit of adoption?
R.D. You have the possibility of entering into the good of the revelation of God as the Father, and along with that the power by which we are enabled to enjoy relationship, which is the Spirit of adoption.
F.W. So that Romans really lays the foundation for everything you get afterwards.
R.D. In @Romans 8, I recognise the resources I have in the Spirit, and I see now that a double portion of
{244}
Elijah's spirit *is possible*. I mean that Elisha immediately set about using what he had. And I am able to look into the world to come. I can take two looks from @Romans 8. I can look into the world to come, and I can see the glories of the world to come, where the glory of the God that I love is going to shine out in the universe, and the whole universe vibrate in happiness to God. But I can look up to heaven as well, and I can see my part in heaven with Christ, and I have the power now to enable me to enter into the blessedness of it. So that it is not, as you have in Galatians, the Spirit crying "Abba, Father", but in @Romans 8 it is what *we* can say by the Spirit - "*we* cry, Abba, Father".
H.B. It is not that I will not fail through lack of watchfulness; this becomes the habit of my soul.
R.D. It is what marks you.
H.B. It is characteristic of you.
R.D. Yes, and if you are conscious of having failed, you judge yourself for not recognising the Spirit and drawing upon the wealth you have, nor the grace that is there by the Spirit.
A.C. I was thinking of @Luke 10, where it says, "having put him on his own beast". Is it the same power that carried the Lord Jesus Christ here through this scene as a Man in dependence upon God?
R.D. @Luke 10 is what He does. Our brother was speaking last night about the Lord having many friends. He is our Friend, and He keeps His friends. He has all the wealth of supply to meet those whom He would endear to His heart, so they never leave Him. And @Luke 10 is our
{245}
Friend, and all that He supplies. @Romans 8 is my exercise to avail myself of all the wealth.
*From Readings and Addresses in Australia, pp. 26 - 43, Sydney, December 1921*
{246}
{247}
CONDITIONS IN THE LAST DAYS IN THE FAMILY OF GOD
R DUNN
@Deuteronomy 19: 1 - 3; @Deuteronomy 22: 4; @Deuteronomy 23: 17 - 25; @Deuteronomy 24: 7, 10 - 14; @Deuteronomy 29: 1; @Deuteronomy 31: 9 - 13, 26
R.D. The book of Deuteronomy typically, gives instruction as to the manner in which we should be governed, as being together really on family lines, in the occupation of the land of purpose. The object of these instructions is that we should all be set at liberty for the service of God, and for God's pleasure. So that it is important to see that this book presents a different law to that given at Horeb. This was given in the plains of Moab, and it was to be put in a different place from the law that was given at Horeb. The law which was given at Horeb, the ten words, was to be deposited in the ark. This was to be laid up in the side of the ark - up against it. But the purport of it all is that we should take up these blessed divine instructions and commandments, so that we should be in whole-hearted liberty together as brethren. And that our service toward one another might be such as to set each other at liberty, in order that we might be together for the service and pleasure of God. I think it would be well to consider a little the character of these commandments.
W.J.Y. Would you say, generally, what the difference was between the two laws?
R.D. I think in connection with the first law, at Horeb, God's purpose is that we should come into the
{248}
good of eternal life. Whilst what is in the mind of the Spirit of God in connection with this law, in the book of Deuteronomy, is that we should come into the good of life - *life in all its abundance*. The commandments at Horeb propose that there should be such blessing for us, that we should be set free for eternal life. But what is before the mind of the Spirit here is, I think, that we should come into the enjoyment of the line of divine purpose in *life in all its fulness*, so that we should be for the service and pleasure of God. In these scriptures, cities of refuge in the land of Moab are not mentioned. In the book of Joshua there are three cities of refuge on either side of the river, but here it is supposed that all Israel are together as a family in the land of Canaan. The Spirit of God only refers to the three cities that way, that are on the other side of Jordan. If we listen to these injunctions, and answer to them, we are sure to increase in spiritual prosperity, so that if we need more cities of refuge we can have them. I understand the point in connection with these cities of refuge is that mercy and consideration should be amongst us. So that even in the case of the slaying of a man, we should be able to save one another.
E.E.L. What have you in your mind in regard to the slaying of a man?
R.D. It might be carelessness on a brother's part. That is to say, I may act in some way that offends a brother - I may do something that has the effect of our losing his value for the moment. You see I have been using my axe carelessly, and the head has come off, and hit this brother. Now, what am I going to do? Am I to be lost over it?
{249}
Now we get certain instructions here, showing the goodness and mercy of God, so that a brother can throw himself upon his brethren. We should not lose one another you know. To this end it is most interesting to see that the way must be kept open for this to be brought about. No grass must be allowed to grow upon it so to speak. The road must not be neglected.
W.J.Y. Is your thought that, although the highest christian privileges are suggested by being in the land, God makes provision for weakness and breakdown in individual cases?
R.D. Yes, the intent being that we should not lose anyone. If a brother has been mortally offended by my treatment of him, there is a way by which he may be reached, but so far as I am concerned, what am I to do? Throw myself upon God! It is then that I find the brethren have kept the door open for me. I can go into my brethren with confidence, and tell them what I have done, and I can throw myself upon mercy. The point is that there should be these tender compassions amongst us, that invite the confidence of anyone who may have, inadvertently, been overtaken in such a fault as this.
Ques. Would that lay the basis for the brethren to act, so that that brother might be won back?
R.D. That is another side of things, but you do not want to lose two brothers.
W.J.Y. We are inclined to look rather lightly upon what is done inadvertently.
R.D. We are; and it is important to see that these instructions are given so that we should not look lightly upon these things. But that there might be a solemn
{250}
exercise, as I come to the city of refuge, as one who has done this deed, looking for the compassion which God has for one of His own family who has been overtaken in this fault. The point is not the brother offended, that is dealt with in another way. The point is the brother who has offended.
G.H.C. Where does the question of discipline come in?
R.D. It does not come in here at all.
G.H.C. Where do you place this?
R.D. The injunction that there should be shown those tender compassions, which are in the heart of the blessed God, so that one might cast oneself upon God, and his brethren, and not lose the enjoyment of life. It is not the end of a course that is involved here - it is something done inadvertently, or through carelessness. The very fact that he turns to God, and flees to a city of refuge, thus taking advantage of the refuge that there is for him there, proves repentance on his side.
W.J.Y. Do you suggest the cities of refuge imply a spiritual condition amongst the people of God?
R.D. Yes, and it is in the family in this case - it is in the land. So that there should be afforded at all times a sense of confidence to cast oneself upon God, and upon one's brethren. What I had before me was that we should see in these various commandments, the importance of everything making for liberty amongst us. There should be no waste of time in regard to anything that might occur amongst us; but rather every inducement and encouragement to have things out at once, so that the brethren may all be in liberty.
{251}
G.A.v.S. In these tender compassions there is really established a principle proper to the condition of things as they exist now.
R.D. In the family of God, yes.
F.W. Are you distinguishing between the family circle and the assembly as such?
R.D. What I have before me is that these commandments govern the family circle.
F.W. The question of discipline is a matter for the assembly.
R.D. Another matter entirely, and I do not think this is quite a case for discipline. It is a case where someone has done something inadvertently, and which was not premeditated. I mean, it is not the result of a deliberate course.
Rem. In regard to being overtaken in a fault, one is reminded of the injunction, "Ye who are spiritual restore such a one" (@Galatians 6: 1).
R.D. Yes. The greater the spiritual prosperity amongst us, the more necessary will these cities of refuge become. We will need three, four, or even more as God prospers us. This is a day when God is prospering us. People are being attracted today to God's good land, and He would have us exercise those tender sensibilities, and gracious compassions that open the way for brotherly confidences.
G.H.C. That raises the question of state.
R.D. It does, and as I say, we are drawn in compassion to one another, and there is such confidence in each other that whoever it is who is overtaken in a fault, can safely cast himself upon his brethren.
{252}
F. W. Is this the John's gospel of the Old Testament?
R.D. It is. At any rate you have both John and Paul in Deuteronomy, but it is John's side I have before me this afternoon.
E.E.L. Has what you are saying any connection with what we get in James, "Confess therefore your offences to one another, and pray for one another, that ye may be healed" (@James 5: 16)?
R.D. Well it would be in the exercise of these tender compassions that we would do that. One of the most important conditions governing the saints of God, is that we should have confidence towards each other. And that we should so livingly express our love towards one another, in brotherly relations, that it would be the easiest possible thing for one to cast oneself upon one's brethren. That is what applied to the manslayer, which, however, is not the point here. The point here is that we should have these compassions, that we should keep the way into the city of refuge always prepared, as it says, "Thou shalt prepare thee the way". One should see that the grass does not grow upon it, that the gates are not closed, and that no barriers are there, so that the man-slayer may flee there at once and have ready access.
G.A.v.S. The brethren would see to it that such was the case.
R.D. Yes.
Ques. Is it really that the compassions that lie in the heart of God should be expressed in the people of God upon earth?
{253}
R.D. That is right. That God's infinite love should be moving in all of our hearts. The effect of that would be that we would express ourselves constantly to-wards one another in washing one another's feet, and looking after one another.
W.J.Y. It implies that we are all living in the land.
R.D. Yes. These instructions are for the land only. As I was saying, you have not the three cities on the other side. It is family-wise here.
G.A.v.S. It would also imply that we are in the life of the family. Is that the life you speak of?
R.D. It is life proper to the family of God, in the enjoyment of the land of purpose. To put it simply, it involves us enjoying our portion in the family of God, as the beloved children of God, and in the enjoyment of what belongs to sonship. Now in the second scripture which we read, I think what we have enjoined is the way in which we are bound up with one another in precious moral obligations, so that we become very much attached to one another.
F.W. In caring for one another in matters of detail?
R.D. Yes, only we are so much involved in our care for one another that it just amounts to this, that whatever I have is yours, and whatever you have is mine. We care because that is a feature of the commonwealth. If you have a sheep or an ox, or anything else, it belongs to the commonwealth, and I care for it on that account. I think @Philippians 3: 20 is beautiful, "For *our* common-wealth has its existence in the heavens". We often use that in connection with a city. The point is, our commonwealth
{254}
has its existence in the heavens, and the book of Deuteronomy is written in order to give us some conception of what that commonwealth is. It means that all the wealth of that land, and all its privileges, belong to us. And so we are encouraged to care for one another's souls, to care for the spiritual things of one another, not looking every man on his own things, but on the things of others. We get so involved, do you not see, that the best thing we can do is to live together and enjoy things together. I do not like the idea of being independent when it comes to the commonwealth. I would rather be involved, so much involved in fact, that bookkeeping is useless. You can see, in that very remarkable little epistle to Philemon, how, in regard to Onesimus, Paul is in debt to Philemon, and Philemon is in debt to Paul. So that it is quite evident we shall all have to be in debt to one another, and go on together in that way.
F.W. We are committed to each other's interests?
R.D. Yes, so much so that it is a commonwealth. I do think, if confidence is established amongst us, it is well worth pursuing these lines, so that we are bound together, and we have the most loving consideration for one another, and we look for the prosperity of one another. You could not think of going out of fellowship if you know all the affections that are there, proper to the family of God. You could not afford to dispute with a brother. How could you? Why, that is to sacrifice all those spiritual affections, and the enjoyment of your commonwealth. Nobody can be independent of the commonwealth.
Ques. Is the commonwealth suggested in chapter 33: 3?
{255}
R.D. Yes. Chapter 33 is a beautiful spiritual conception of what we are speaking about. It is the end proposed in all its spiritual life and fulness. It is a sort of summing up of the book of Deuteronomy.
Rem. Every individual blessing is for the benefit of the whole of the company.
R.D. For the prosperity of the company, and not only so, but for what is going to add to the pleasure of God. Think of brothers and sisters coming up with one another's lost property saying, 'I have found this; it belongs to you'. How much obliged we would become to one another.
W.J.H. How would that find expression practically?
R.D. I think it finds expression in this way, that we take up one another's burdens. If you were in sorrow, I would be prepared to share your burden of sorrow. If your reputation was being surrendered, I should look to it that you got it back again. If I saw that you were becoming reduced spiritually, if you were losing the benefit of things, I would be exercised about it and come along to you and say, 'I feel you are missing something, you are not as fresh as you were. You have lost an ox, you have lost a sheep, and I would like to see you have it back again'. It is that gracious, loving attention towards one another. So that there would be nobody you would love, like one who attended upon you like that. Fresh bonds are formed, and that is how we enjoy our life in the commonwealth.
E.E.L. It is not that you are good-natured simply, in passing over a brother's little faults, and so on; but you bring them under his notice in the right way.
{256}
R.D. There is really no room for what is good-natured in the things of God. We do not want any 'honey'. There is nothing like divine love, the love that the Father has bestowed upon us, so that we should be the children of God; and as the children of God we love one another. That brooks no unrighteousness.
W.J.Y. It is God's answer to, "Am I my brother's keeper" (@Genesis 4: 9)?
R.D. Yes. We are not speaking about something we do not know a good deal about. It is what has kept us, and one can speak humbly and thankfully of the way the blessed God has preserved us all, through the affections of the saints. Now going on to the next scripture in chapter 23: 18, "Thou shalt not bring the hire of a harlot, or the price of a dog, into the house of Jehovah thy God for any vow; for even both these are an abomination to Jehovah thy God". This is a word to shut out anything that is unspiritual or unholy, in the presentations of the sacrifices of God's people.
G.A.v.S. Why is it in connection with the vow?
R.D. Because the vow is the excess of devotedness on the part of the believer. God does not want presented anything that is in an alliance with the world. If I am going on in an alliance with the world, and getting material gain, God does not want that. Or if I have been selling a dog, that is, if I have been dealing in anything that is unclean, God says, 'I do not want that, those are abominations to me'. Nothing but what is spiritual, the fruit of divine love moving in our affections, is of any pleasure to God.
F.W. You mean this in a practical way?
{257}
R.D. Yes. It is practical indeed. If in my business I am defiling my hands, or engaged in unholy associations, do you not see that if I seek to present anything which is the outcome of that to God, I am presenting what is equivalent to the hire of a harlot. In other words, what I present is the result of an evil alliance, and God says, 'Do not bring it here'. On the other hand if, personally, I am defiling my hands in the way I do my business, God says, 'I do not want it'. It may be you have sold a dog, and it is the price of this unclean dog which is yielded to God. Well it is of no use to God; it is an abomination to Him.
W.J.H. A gift does not blind God's eyes.
R.D. No, but a real gift, the fruit of the affections, delights the heart of God. It is something of Himself in His beloved people.
F.W. And then we are not to be harsh with each other in our dealings. Is that the next point?
R.D. Yes, that comes out in verse 19, "Thou shalt take no interest of thy brother". It goes on, "That Jehovah thy God may bless thee". Would you not like God to bless you? There are two things which I think are quite legitimately desired. One is that God should bless me because of what I am doing, and the other is that my brother should bless me. In this case it is God that blesses you, because you see your brother in a necessity, and out of pure, unadulterated love, you go along and you help him. It may be spiritually, or it may be in temporal matters; but you do it in such a way that you do not want any interest from him, nor do you expect it. Indeed, you do not want him to pay any particular attention to you, or to think well of you, or any other brother, because you have
{258}
done it. That would be interest. Just to be considered a very good, giving brother would be a bit of interest, would it not? What is the effect of that going to be? That as I draw interest from my brother, I destroy his liberty. Now I want to see my brother and sister happy amongst the saints, without any kind of undercurrent, such as for instance feeling that he or she is indebted to me, or that he or she should show me some little respect. We are not above that kind of thing you know.
W.J.Y. What about your brother blessing you; is that not interest?
R.D. Well, you do not hear about that you know. If he lies in his bed and blesses you, how are you going to know? But do you know what will happen? If you have a care for a brother, he will lie in his bed and bless you (chapter 24: 13).
W.J.Y. So that it really tests your motives.
R.D. If I am looking for interest, I am diverted from divine interests.
G.A.v.S. The previous scripture showed that we are committed to our brother's interests. This one shows that I am shut out from all self-interest.
R.D. If a brother needs a little help you give it, but you do not want any spiritual interest from him. I do not think it is intended to interfere with simple business transactions with one another, which should be carried out in a business-like way; but it is rather intended to encourage us in relation to our spiritual dealings with one another. We should have these simple, affectionate, motives, that find their spring really in my being occupied with Christ; because my motives will not be pure if I have
{259}
not Christ before me. In doing this I will answer to the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and it is good to treasure up in our hearts the sayings of the Lord Jesus - "It is more blessed to give than to receive" (@Acts 20: 35).
G.A.v.S. Why does the foreigner come in here, in chapter 23: 20, "Of a foreigner thou mayest take interest"?
R.D. Well, he does not belong to the commonwealth. That is another matter. The point is what to do for a brother. You see you are looking now at the brother and the brethren, and you are anxious that they should enjoy the commonwealth. A foreigner has no part in it.
W.J.Y. So that you would give any help possible in a way that would leave both the brother and yourself at perfect liberty?
R.D. Yes. We help one another to get through. There is no place for the brethren in the world, and there is no help for the brethren from the world. Things of the world are becoming more difficult for the brethren, and it seems to me important that we should see, as moving in divine love, that we are helping one another through.
Ques. Is the foreigner allowed to feel indebtedness for any expression of the character of God seen in the saints?
R.D. It may be so, but I think the point is the brother - that is, a distinction should be drawn between the brethren and foreigners. Now, in regard to the vow, God delights in a vow. A vow in scripture is never legal. Even in the Old Testament it is not put upon legal conditions. It is a provision which is made. It is a sort of safety valve,
{260}
given to you by God, in which to express your excess of devotedness to God (see chapter 23: 21 - 23).
F.W. But that which you have vowed, you must perform.
R.D. Having committed yourself to the vow, you must perform it. But God says, 'You do not need to make a vow'. It is not committal in the sense that we are bound to a committal.
Rem. It is voluntary.
R.D. It springs from spiritual devotedness.
W.J.Y. It is the outcome of spiritual energy.
R.D. The blessedness of all God's ways of love has had this effect upon my heart that I wish to go further in devotedness. You start in a simple way, and your devotedness increases as you go on. You start with a little prayer and fasting, and then you are encouraged to take up some definite exercise between your soul and God. It may be that you feel you would like to visit a few of the saints, say just for a week. Perhaps you have a week's holiday, and instead of going off on your own, you are going to set apart your time for attendance on the Lord's people in the locality where you live. God loves a definite engagement like that. It is, so to speak, in the form of a vow, the entering into of this engagement, and God expects you to see it through. I believe this vowing increases until at last you are encouraged to take up the true vow of a Nazarite.
F.W. The Nazarite vow in @Numbers 6, has a time set to it?
R.D. Yes.
F.W. What would you take from that?
{261}
R.D. The time set to it is the time for which it is necessary, and you could not have any time less than the whole period of your sojourn here, because what determines the Nazarite vow is where Christ is at this moment. The vow in that way remains until the end. If I take up a Nazarite vow, I take it up until it is no longer necessary. It will be necessary so long as Christ is absent, and the testimony is in conflict here. That is why it comes in in the book of Numbers, in connection with the movements in conflict in regard to the testimony, and the time of Nazariteship shall only pass away when we have gone into the world to come.
F.W. So that, "afterwards the Nazarite may drink wine" (@Numbers 6: 20), really refers to the world to come?
R.D. I do not want to drink wine until He drinks it. If I am a Nazarite I would not wish anything short of that. Now, moving in this direction, we take account (verse 24), of one another's wealth; we can have a walk in one another's farms.
W.J.Y. Before you come to that, would you say a word about the lips and mouth in connection with the vow? Has that any place today, or is it a matter of your purpose of heart?
R.D. I think the lips here indicate the thought expressed. I mean it was in your heart before, and so long as it is just in your heart, you are not bound. It is growing there. You may nurse it. One can think of a very simple matter like this, that I feel I would like to serve the Lord's people in some way - serve the Lord in serving His people. It might take the simple form of going along and visiting the sick in one's own meeting. Now, I am not
{262}
bound to do that. I may be just a young brother, but it is growing up in my heart. The Lord takes account of that, and I have no doubt the Spirit of God helps me to nurse it. But immediately I express it, I am committed to it, and the Lord will hold me to it.
W.J.Y. Express it to God?
R.D. Of course. Our vow would be to God. Do you know, one would get such cheer in one's soul in desiring simply to effect a little service, seeking strength for it from the Lord in connection with visiting the Lord's dear sick people. And when one's vow was finished, so to speak, and one went to the Lord and told Him that, in weakness, one had sought to carry this out, and in that way offered service to Him, one would get such joy that one would want to do it again. The next time it would be a fortnight. That is the way we grow in devotedness. The proposal is that we should love the Lord our God with *all* our might, with *all* our strength, with *all* our heart, and our neighbour as ourself.
G.A.v.S. What about going into the vineyard?
R.D. I think this is what we find when we begin to move towards one another. When I go to see my brethren, and I have a walk through their farms, I see they have good prosperous farms, and I get a very good feed, and I wonder why it is the meeting does not get the benefit of it. I am sure we do not sufficiently know one another in our spiritual wealth. I have often found when I get near a brother or sister in their own circumstances, how rich they are when it comes to spiritual thoughts and affections, and what a loss I had sustained in not having given the farm a look up before. You see, one finds too, that there are four
{263}
vineyards close to him; so that a man who gets on well spiritually, would be sure to be in touch with his brethren.
E.E.L. What do you find in connection with the four vineyards?
R.D. We find we have got neighbours. A man who is going on, enjoying the land, finds he is in company with his neighbours. He is in a commonwealth.
G.A.v.S. You mean that he comes into touch with the farms of his neighbours around him, and he never realises it until he has made the most of his own farm?
R.D. Yes. You have to get seeds from one another. We could not develop our farms without seeds.
Ques. Do you mean four is indicative of the neighbours all around one?
R.D. Yes.
G.H.C. So that it is not the pastoral visit?
R.D. No. In this case you go along for something.
G.A.v.S. You go along to get a feed.
R.D. I want to know more about my brother, and his spiritual wealth. He is in the commonwealth. It would be all the better if I could take another brother with me. Together, we could walk through his fields, and enjoy to our full, within his limits, all the prosperity of this brother.
G.A.v.S. On the principle then, that when one is exercised in regard to the spiritual state and condition of those around, in going around and paying these visits, one begins to find others who are also exercised, and together we can share one another's exercises.
R.D. And you come away a good deal wealthier than when you went. Only you have not pocketed anything.
{264}
W.J.Y. What do you mean by that?
R.D. Each one is preserved in his distinctive place with his own wealth. We do not need to copy one another. I do not take from the brother something that he has, and make it my own, so that I am going to use it for myself. If I get any seeds from him, I am very glad and I will plant them in my own vineyard. When I grow them, then they are no longer seeds, but fruit.
W.J.Y. In that case you are dealing with things without their ever touching your conscience.
R.D. If I take away fruit from my brother's vineyard, I shall be very much tempted to put it in my empty basket when I go to offer up my first-fruits, and present somebody else's fruit instead of my own. That is not acceptable. There is a bit of it done, but it is not acceptable. What is enjoined here is a lovely conception that we should move together in one another's farms, helping one another spiritually, and enjoy together the spiritual wealth of one another, so that we get the value of one another, and we grow in spiritual stature.
G.H.C. Coming into touch with different ones, certain thoughts are suggested to us?
R.D. Yes. Supposing I am at your house and we begin to speak of things together, and I enjoy something on your farm. Then I find you at the reading meeting. I say, here is a brother who has got something very good for the saints. I did not know it until I was at his house the other day. How ready I would be to give place to you, and really to draw you out a bit, in view of the brethren getting the good of the neighbour. So that the brethren find they are wealthier in their meeting than they thought, because
{265}
here is a brother who really has something. The tendency would be, if we looked over one another's vineyards like this, to treat one another with greater importance spiritually.
W.J.H. Barnabas and Paul were evidently on that line together in the early days?
R.D. Yes. One says, as it were, 'I have been at brother Paul's house, and I see a big blank amongst the brethren just now - things are very critical, and Paul has on his farm the very things that are needed'. And so he feels that Paul is the man who has the supply the saints need at the moment. I think that is the effect of visiting one another.
G.A.v.S. What about chapter 24?
R.D. Well, in verse 13 we have what I was referring to - your brother blessing you. Here is a brother who has been under an obligation to you; you have lent him something unpledged; and you find when you come for this pledge, that he still needs this garment. And you say, 'What is needed here is more grace, and more help; I do not want his garment if he needs it'. And so you say to the brother, 'Look here, I am not on arbitrary lines with you; you take your garment back again and sleep in it'. That brother goes back into his house, he gets into bed, but he does not sleep, for he lies there blessing you - blessing his brother because of the love that is there. It is these tender compassions towards one another that really promote affection, and strengthen the bonds that bind us all together.
G.A.v.S. It is the divine consideration which the grace of God puts in one's heart, in view of the
{266}
circumstances of the people of God.
G.H.C. Did you mention verse 7?
R.D. The reference to verse 7 is very simple, and it is in keeping with all we have been saying. What we are after in our relations with one another is the liberty of the brethren, and not their bondage; and he speaks of the possibility of stealing a brother. That is a thing that is done very commonly, alas, especially when we get any trouble in our meetings. If I am taking a wrong course, and getting at cross purposes with my brethren, I must of necessity steal a few brethren.
G.A.v.S. Do you mean attaching them to oneself?
R.D. I use an authoritative influence over them, because of my greater personality. Having a strong will, and greater natural attractions, I get a few followers. It means I have stolen them - the simpler brethren, you know. How often we have seen it, and it has helped immensely towards the disintegration of little gatherings where there is trouble
G.A.v.S. When a strong will, or a naturally attractive character, is allowed to dominate people, it is stealing?
R.D. Yes. In that way he attaches them to himself, until he can almost do with them what he likes, and can deal with them as slaves. Here is a solemn warning in regard to it. It says, in regard to that person, that the thief will die. How often we have seen the thief die. A person perhaps, who has loomed great in the presence of his brethren, has gone on these lines, and he has gone down as a thief.
G.H.C. He not only steals, but he sells.
{267}
R.D. You are bound to sell after you steal. The stolen brother is merely traded with for the personal ends of the thief. He steals the brother, and after having used him - probably more than one - he sells them as slaves. That is very solemn in the eyes of God. These things are not to be allowed amongst us. We are to be together in the enjoyment of brotherly relations and affections towards one another, and all the brethren at liberty. The effect of abiding in Christ is that we are set together in liberty. You see it works this way: the stronger willed brother will come along and say, 'There is trouble in the meeting. Do you remember how I have helped you; do you remember how on different occasions I have come along and helped you? Very well, I expect you to stand by me in this trouble'. Well, you say, that is a very serious thing. And so it is. But this person, instead of doing that, instead of claiming any kind of pledge at all, says, 'Now, I want you to be free to act for yourself; I do not want your garment; you take your garment and sleep in it'. Thus he feels the touch of divine love and consideration on the part of his brother, who would have him to be free. He lies in his bed, and blesses his brother. How happy the brother, to be blessed like this, and he does not know it.
Well now, we come to chapter 31: 10, 11, "And Moses commanded them, saying, At the end of every seven years, at the set time of the year of release, at the feast of tabernacles, when all Israel cometh to appear before Jehovah thy God in the place which he will choose, thou shalt read this law before all Israel in their ears". Now, consider the greatness of the moment when this law must be read. It was to be in the year of release, and in that
{268}
year, when they were having the feast of tabernacles, this law was to be read. The year of the release was the time when all the brethren in the country withdrew their claims upon one another, and each man came back free, into his own inheritance. Would you not like that to be the case amongst the brethren, that all the brethren were free, every man occupying his own plot in the land? Every man was entirely free, all his debts cleared off, and if he had been a slave he was given his liberty and property. If there had been any debts, they were all remitted, and the brethren are all free. It was not only to be the happy year of release, when every one came back into his own property, but it was the feast of tabernacles. It must have been a very happy thing, if this was ever once answered to in Israel. It must have been a very happy thing for the brethren all to be free in this seventh year. And for all to come up to the feast of tabernacles as happy, free brethren, without a cloud, or any distance between them, to enjoy together the eight days of the feast of tabernacles. Think, what a wonderful proposal it was! And when they were enjoying it all, this law, which was in the book of Deuteronomy, in the plain of Moab, was to be read to them. Why was it to be read to them then?
W.J.H. Was it that the family conditions, thus reached, should be continued?
R.D. Yes, it was to set everybody at liberty, so that they could all go on together, without any feeling of fear or disparity, and surround and enjoy the blessed God, and the blessed God enjoy them. The love of God spreading itself across all of their hearts, so that He could rest in his love amongst His own.
{269}
G.A.v.S. Everyone would be at liberty, because everyone was sensible that he was not encroaching on anybody else, or anybody encroaching upon him.
R.D. Yes. It was really the supreme moment, when the saints are brought into the fulness of their relations with each other.
Rem. So that, "Great grace was upon them all" (@Acts 4: 33).
R.D. Yes, and we are to share the commonwealth together. You may say, 'but our commonwealth has its existence in the heavens'. Quite so, but does it not give immense importance to these commands, when you take account of them at the very moment when you are enjoying all that they secure? Well, the next thing is that we are free to take this law and lay it, not inside, but up against the ark of the covenant. And it was to remain there. I think we have omitted the second law very much, but the Spirit of God is calling attention to the second law now, because it is of all importance to the people who are dwelling in the land.
F.W. How does that work out in a practical way now as regards the saints - the year of release, and debts being remitted and so on?
R.D. What I have been suggesting, that in following the divine compassions, and having consideration and regard for one another, we are bound to come out in the year of release with warm affection towards one another, thus setting one another at liberty. There is no party spirit amongst us, the one brother ruling over three or four brethren, or brethren not free to act. But everybody is in the enjoyment of divine love, which is the fruit of this holy
{270}
confidence having been secured, and we can live together in that way in the enjoyment of the feast of tabernacles. It must have been a wonderful thing for these people to live together for seven days. Then, on the eighth day, for brethren from all over the land of Palestine - Simeon, Levi, Benjamin, and so on, all scattered promiscuously around Shiloh, God finding His joy in the bosoms of a happy family bound together, no shadow upon them at all, and the sense of the delight in the blessed God being present, as they speak together of God and of all His precious thoughts.
G.A.v.S. Is that why men, women, and children are spoken of?
R.D. Yes, it is the whole family. It is a family idea. I think the thought of the law being laid up against the ark is this: that I have got to see that if anything of this is to be found among the people of God today, it must be that they study it in Christ. The Lord Jesus went down into death to bring to life such results for God, and whatever grace, whatever moral beauty we might see in all these precious things, we must learn them in perfection in Christ. It is the revelation of God in the blessed person of Christ, which brings to pass such happy conditions as would set us all free, and if the Son sets us free, then we are free indeed for all the super-abundance of divine living together.
*From Readings and Addresses in Australia, pp. 133 - 154, Sydney, January 1922*
{271}
READINGS ON THE EPISTLE OF JAMES (1)
R DUNN
@James 1: 1 - 27; @James 2: 1 - 26
R.D. I simply suggested this scripture because I think James gives us a good start on spiritual lines practically, and I think it is important to have a good beginning and to maintain it.
S.F. In that way you do not consider it everything merely having a start?
R.D. Oh, no.
J.S. The Galatians had a start.
R.D. Yes; but they were stopped. I think if we get a start according to James, it would save us an immense amount of trouble for the rest of our lives.
J.S. In what way?
R.D. James puts you on the lines in which you can have the Lord's support, and if there is one thing desirable it is to have the support of the Lord. James tells you where the Lord will support you, and he also tells you where He cannot. He writes in view of the kingdom of heaven being presented, and the idea of the kingdom of heaven is that there is support from where Christ is for those who answer to the principles that are proper to the kingdom. So he prepares you for what is entirely spiritual. There is one very interesting thing in connection with James; he himself had known what it was to get onto entirely spiritual lines. I refer to the probability of his
{272}
having been the Lord's brother according to the flesh. At all events he had known Christ after the flesh.
J.S. There is no recognition of nature whatever?
R.D. There is no recognition of the flesh at all, and moving on that line there is unlimited support from the Lord. One would be anxious to always have the support of the Lord, but He only supports what is of Himself, and He does not support what is not. The proposal that James has at the outset of the epistle is that we should be "perfect and complete, lacking in nothing". That is a very good proposal, is it not?
W.H.U. Yes; I suppose there would be another principle that would come before that - the Lord would only support the one He subdues?
R.D. Yes; but what James has in view is that the saints should be "perfect and complete, lacking in nothing". It is important that we should start right down at the rock bottom with James. Rightly taken up, this leads to the full enjoyment of the Ephesian position. James takes a soul up and immediately tells him what his conduct should be, the conduct that secures support from the Lord, that leads you into standing perfect and complete, lacking in nothing. God begat us that we should be a certain first-fruits of His creatures; and that is a very great place to have. James was in the assembly, and appreciated the immense favour of it. What a great thought the assembly is; and the only way to reach the participation of being first-fruits now for God, is by way of the kingdom of heaven.
S.F. Would you say James followed on the lines of @Matthew 5?
{273}
R.D. Yes; he really supports the line of things presented in Matthew's gospel. The view he takes of the saints is the condition in which what is stated in the parable of the wheat and tares in @Matthew 13 would take place. That is, the tares and the wheat grow up together. James takes account of the tares and speaks sternly to such, and he takes account of the wheat and gives instruction and comfort to them.
S.F. That is very good.
R.D. It is good if you are wheat; very serious if you are not. It has a very definite moral application to us in the presence of christendom today, and in the presence of all the profession. James speaks to us to encourage us. When he addresses the wheat he always says, "My beloved brethren;" he commits himself to the wheat.
S.J.B.C. James has been spoken of as viewing things in a transitional state; would you go with that?
R.D. Well, if you take account of the present state as a transitional state it would be so.
J.B. That is, he looked right on to the coming of the Lord?
R.D. Yes; he takes account of the mixed conditions, for those conditions would continue. This is the ministry - very needed ministry - to start us and encourage us as to our conduct in that condition of things. Perhaps no other writer puts it to us in just that way.
J.B. He never supposes the condition of things getting better?
R.D. No. James is the Ecclesiastes of the New Testament. He speaks to the wheat and the tares. And what you feel is that he is not winking at the unreality that there
{274}
is in the profession. But you are cheered on spiritual lines to count upon the Lord's present support, and to have in view the end of it all, which will be the coming of the Lord. There is only one thing that you are really to be anxious about, and that is the glory of the Lord whom you love. James himself came in a peculiar way into the good of this.
J.R. Why does he address the twelve tribes?
R.D. Because he is having in view the whole position. There are those professing to have to do with God, but they are unreal; and there were brethren there who loved the Lord of glory. It is no doubt intended that there should be instruction for us in the presence of christendom today.
J.B. There is a similarity in our position and the twelve tribes?
R.D. Yes; quite so.
J.B. Two things are called for - faith and endurance.
R.D. He delineates to you the conditions you can be in, in which you can have the Lord's support, and if you have the Lord's support, what else do you want? If we all here in Auckland were definitely set on the lines on which we can count upon the Lord's support in all our doings, we should be blessed in our doings. James is very practical, but who of the scripture writers is not practical? It is *we* who are not practical.
J.S. You suggest profession in the twelve tribes?
R.D. In that case it was the twelve tribes scattered abroad, but in our case we are in the presence of the same practical difficulty. We find that there is a path of
{275}
separation that 2 Timothy enjoins upon us, but there is the public part in relation to the whole of the profession today, and in the presence of which we are placed as wheat amongst tares. That goes on until the end of the age, and we are in it now, so there is conduct here enjoined upon us, the result of which will set us free for the answering to @2 Timothy 2. If any person listened to James, he would be ready for the path indicated in @2 Timothy 2.
J.S. Having the support of the Lord, you would rightly act in the midst of the mixed conditions.
R.D. We have to live in these conditions every day, and you cannot escape from the profession, but you can escape from participation in iniquity by way of @2 Timothy 2.
J.S. That is why faith and endurance are necessary?
R.D. Yes; because it means you are going to grow up with the tares and the wheat until the coming of the Lord. How necessary to be set for that which brings glory to the Lord of glory! You honour Him publicly in the profession, but if you are to bring Him glory, everything depends upon your conduct.
S.J.B.C. Do you think that the twelve tribes involve the thought of general profession?
R.D. It did at that time, and now there is an analogous position in christendom. We do not have to think about the twelve tribes today. We look upon all that claims the name of the Lord and we have no escape; we cannot go into seclusion from it like the monks and nuns. The Lord says, "Let both grow *together*".
{276}
S.F. If we are on spiritual lines that would mean life and vitality.
R.D. The first thing called for is the right motive, and not a double motive; I believe many of us have spent our lives having a double motive. The idol in your heart will come out, no matter how much you may screen it from view. One may be very humble, and lowly outwardly, and yet hold an idol in one's heart. Look at Gideon. Who would have suspected that at the last he would have set up the ephod in self-glorification? How graciously he spoke of his littleness at the outset, how humbly and wisely he answered the jealousy of the men of Ephraim, and when later on they sought to make him king, he refused that honour, and yet at the end he set up the ephod. He was just a simple brotherly man among his brethren, until the hidden thought of his heart betrayed him. If we permit the word in this chapter to search us we should be cleared of every idol. With Gideon the idol was the very thing he was so careful about in his language, and we may know how in our conversation to depreciate any self-seeking in our service, but if we cherish this as an ambition it will come out at the end. James says, I want you to get clear of it *first*.
S.J.B.C. You may knock it on the head and it will come up again.
R.D. If you come into the presence of God He is so good He will give you a judgment about it. If you knock it on the head it only shows you that it is there. Come into the presence of the law of liberty and you will hate the thing, and judge it root and branch. There is another side to it, and that is you cannot deal with the thing merely by
{277}
judging it; you may put it into a corner of your heart and repress it, but it will come out. For instance, whatever indulgence, hobby, or pleasure I go in for it must be displaced by Christ, or I shall return to it again. You see a brother who came into fellowship ten years after you getting on a little better than yourself, and you feel that the Lord is supporting him. Do you not feel a little bit on edge? He is displacing you; you feel that, and yet you say you have judged it, but you still have the idol in your heart. You are not established in the perfect law of liberty.
You think these things develop at the close of a person's career; I do not. A brother may be in the meeting for twenty-five years, and serving the saints; and at the finish he may say, After serving you for twenty-five years you have let me down. What does that disclose? That the idol was in his heart all the time. When Gideon should have shone in moral greatness, the very thing that was in his heart all the time now showed its face. The Lord is good, and He raises the question with us at the very doorstep of our spiritual career, and your wisdom and mine is to have things out with the Lord. To go and sit down under the apple tree is what we really want, and if we get there all desire for idols will be chased out of our souls for ever. It is in this spirit we pass through certain exercises, and endurance leads us to the perfect issue.
W.H.U. What you are impressing us with is that we should not only judge *it*, but ourselves.
R.D. With our hearts moved under the influence of the new covenant, looking into the perfect law of liberty, I act the man that I am, not the man that I was.
J.R. What you would suggest, is to be what we are?
{278}
R.D. But then you want to know what you are, and you must have a good look into the mirror. We do not look enough into the mirror. The mirror is the man that I am. Supposing I have a desire to preach on Sunday night. I want to preach, but when asked I say, 'Oh, well, I would rather you could find somebody else'. That is not a transparent man; that is not the man I am. If I have a look in the mirror, the perfect law of liberty reflects what I am spiritually. I say, 'I would be delighted to preach; I would like to tell people how good God is; but if there is another brother who is free, then I would like to listen to him'. That is the man I *am* - the man in liberty; not bound up in envy because there is an idol in his heart. We all know what it means, we have all been there. The question is raised in simplicity with God as to whether you are a double-minded man or not. Now here is the start - the spiritual start - and it indicates how you can come into the presence of God with *only one thought*, the Lord of glory. The truth of Matthew's gospel has got into your heart. It simply is, there is nobody you love like Christ, and you have been brought into the kingdom of heaven. You want to see the Lord exalted in the presence of the saints, and you want to see Him exalted in the presence of the world - you are not a double-minded man if you have that before you. The kingdom of heaven is this: God has found in His beloved Son One who can administer everything to the glory of God, and secure everything God had in view. If God has sent out to the high-ways and hedges for two worthless beings, like you and me, you know it is that we should be here for the glory of His own Son.
{279}
James speaks of Him as the "Lord of glory" - how sweet it is to hear it coming from his lips! Just as with Jude - the Lord's brother in the flesh - he speaks of "our Lord Jesus Christ". James had passed entirely from the natural line to the spiritual. What must it have cost him to write an epistle like this in which he does not refer to any natural relationship to the Lord at all! There is no doubt James had come into the good of this himself, so that he had no double motive, "unquestioning, unfeigned" (chapter 3: 17). I am quite sure James and Peter are two most important epistles to give us a good start. Both are on the line of Matthew's ministry to prepare us for @2 Timothy 2. It is James¬ transparent man who calls upon the Lord out of a pure heart.
J.R. A man with a pure heart is not double minded.
R.D. Some of us have lost weeks, months, and sometimes years in our spiritual career because we had two kinds of motives. We say, We want to get on spiritually, but we have certain reserves for getting on. Now that kind of person, though perhaps double minded in only one respect, is "unstable in *all* his ways".
We may have to admit as we look at this, that this is just our portrait, but let us take courage, we have the rest of our days. Let them be good days! Jacob, at the commencement of his spiritual career, was called upon by the Lord to consider what was the perfect law of liberty. He awakened after a very pleasant vision, and said, 'Lord, it is very beautiful, I would like to be in it, but I have some personal arrangements for myself'. For twenty years he went a zigzag course. He discovered a good deal in spite
{280}
of all his crooked ways. God was still as good as He ever was, and so at length He brought Jacob face to face with the question as to whether there was an idol in his heart, and then he made a good spiritual start. I think some of us would be able to shake hands with Jacob and say, We know all the milestones up to that point. Do you not feel that Jacob could well understand our exercises? There may be some things in which the Lord will support us so far as He can, but do not let that mislead us; do not let us deceive ourselves by this. After Penuel, *Jacob limped home*. There is no doubt Jacob was one of the most blessed men in the Old Testament.
Rem. The last thing the Lord would do is to make our folly public.
R.D. He will give you many a chance; He will call attention to our idol time and again, but the best opportunity of having it out is at the start. The best opportunity is now, so that we may be cleared for the rest of our days. Look at God's way with Balaam! Balaam wanted money; he pretended a great many things, but Balaam wanted money. God was angry with him and told him not to go, but he went. He set out on his ass, and the angel of the Lord stood in his way, and Balaam's foot was crushed against the wall; but he persisted, and then the dumb ass spoke to him. Now do you think the Lord would do all that for a man like Balaam, and leave us without many a warning? If He has been searching your heart through your conscience, and disclosing your idols to you, such as pride, love of position, or jealousy, and you argue back that you can control your own thoughts, and repress your selfish ambitions, you will deceive your heart, and
{281}
you will destroy your sensibilities. Lust conceives a thought of evil - that is the time to deal with it; otherwise it will come out in words or deeds. The Lord says, 'Hearken to me'. It is so blessed to turn to the Lord and say, 'Here is my heart! I am prepared to hearken'. He will disclose to us what is in our own hearts, and bring us to the point where we gain a deep sense of mercy, and then we are humbled and lowly.
Nothing will put us right like a sense of mercy. It subdues us; it is the way the Lord approaches us at the very bottom; He gives us the start we were talking about. Owning mercy is the line upon which I am supported. If you give me a man with a great sense of mercy, I will give you a man who will not give the people of God any trouble. A soul with a deep sense of mercy delights to see anybody go to the top, and will be willing to go to the wall himself. As taking this up in its reality, I am able to move in amongst my brethren, having had my heart examined, and every idol cleared out of my heart. One Person alone is supreme there - the Lord of glory; He is enthroned there. Now if the Lord of glory be enthroned there, I shall love my brethren all the better. You can only call a thing that displaces Him an idol. He is supreme in your heart. Even if you should be entrusted with much of this world's goods, it is not any trouble to you if you have Christ enthroned; and what a delight just to get amongst your brethren who have obtained like mercy!
W.H.U. What is meant by "perfect and complete, lacking in nothing"?
R.D. He is set up in all the fulness of christianity, and James has really the great end in view that we should
{282}
enjoy christianity to the very full. Whatever circumstances a man may be placed in, in the providence of God, if the Lord Jesus has the supremacy and has displaced every idol, he moves in amongst his brethren in a sense of mercy. And he will do nobody any harm, just like the little child in Matthew's gospel.
J.S. "Let the brother of low degree glory in his elevation, and the rich in his humiliation".
R.D. If a rich man were brought low by this sense of mercy, and he were to come into the company of God's people, he would be a very simple man. He would be very sorry if anybody brought a footstool for him. The brother of low degree has nothing in the world, but what he has is a part amongst those in the christian circle. This would displace the very idea of socialism. It is a spiritually established order of things, cherished together in hearts, each one of which has crowned the Lord of glory. It is not autocracy, neither is it democracy; what you have is a theocracy. All are happy subjects of Christ because they love Him, and a company would be a happy one where these conditions obtain. I believe a great deal of our trouble is because we have not started at the very bottom. We do not come into the train at the first station, and we do not know the route.
James starts you with a clearance from all idols, and John leading you into the joy of things says, as it were, Do not forget to maintain what James gave you - "Children, keep yourselves from idols" (@1 John 5: 21). Let nothing come in between your affections and the blessed God. In @Philippians 3 you have a man - not a double-minded man - "perfect and complete, lacking in nothing". How did
{283}
Paul come into that? He had to come in by the way of James. You know the start he had; the Lord of glory spoke to him. The sun *has risen*, not is going to rise. In @Philippians 3 the sun has risen, and the sun has withered up every flower in the garden; and Paul had some lovely flowers in his garden: a Benjaminite, Hebrew of the Hebrews, blameless, and so on. The light of Christ's love, and the love of God expressed in the new covenant left him without an idol in his heart. Things have to be worked out practically. Paul's conversion was a very distinct one. The Lord of glory could speak down to him from the exaltation where He was; in the power of the kingdom of heaven everything was withered up for him; he was glad to let somebody take him by the hand. Paul came to the proportions of a little child at the moment of his conversion. I like that; I think that is the way to come amongst the brethren. The idol has not only been chased from his heart, but it has no vacancy to which it can come back again.
J.S. You can take account of a moment of weakness in a brother, and that not be a characteristic feature of him. What about Paul's defection in going to Jerusalem? (@Acts 21).
R.D. We want to refer very gently to that occasion. Remember the visit the Lord paid to him in prison, and what He said to him as He stood by him: "Be of good courage; for as thou hast testified the things concerning me at Jerusalem, so thou must bear witness at Rome also" (@Acts 23: 11). If that is all the Lord said about it, we had better be quiet. That blessed Person speaking into that dark cell to cheer His servant is my Lord, and He
{284}
is a very good Lord, and it is the kind of way He is going to treat me; that is the Lord of glory.
Ques. Was Paul sitting under the apple tree during the three years in Arabia?
R.D. I think he was; he was looking into the perfect law of liberty. At the end of Paul's career, when in prison, he refers to himself as the chief of sinners. He does not say that he was the chief of sinners long ago. No, he says, I am the chief; I have never lost the deep sense of mercy to me; and that was the secret of Paul's excellent spirit. Such ministry as James¬, reproves us as to every mean thing, and all that is not transparent about us in relation to our brethren. If we look into the perfect law of liberty, we shall not be stoical; we cannot help letting ourselves go out in delight and spiritual emotions to God in praise, and to others in blessing. I love to express what I enjoy of the blessed God. I am bound to find an outlet; so he says: "Pure and undefiled religion" - is there some sick sister or brother, who needs comfort, some orphan who needs care, some distressed heart? You look out for an object for this love bubbling up in your heart, upon whom you can pour it out; and at the same time keep unspotted garments. We sing about when we get home to heaven
<blockquote>With Thee in garments white,<br>Lord Jesus, we shall walk (`270:2) </blockquote>
But the proposal in James is that we should walk in garments of white *now*. As looking into the perfect law of liberty, we see the kind of man we are. We are here for the
{285}
expression of love, and we shall then have neither time nor disposition for self-seeking or criticism, but will grow fat in soul.
So this chapter closes with the word: "Pure and undefiled religion before God and the Father is this: to visit orphans and widows in their affliction, to keep oneself unspotted from the world".
READINGS ON THE EPISTLE OF JAMES (2)
R DUNN
@James 1: 16 - 27; @James 2: 14 - 26
J.S. Had you in your mind that what we have in verse 17 links with the new covenant?
R.D. Yes. We were speaking of the sun having risen and withered up everything. But it is important also to see we have the sun for the formation of something: "the Father of lights, with whom is no variation nor shadow of turning". God dispensing everything that is good for the prosperity of our souls, so that our souls are imbued with a sense of blessing.
E.P. Is the "perfect law, that of liberty" connected with our being set in relation to the "Father of lights".
R.D. I think it is the influence that comes down from the Father of lights, a beneficent influence that speaks of life and blessing.
{286}
Rem. We are only in this liberty as we are under the influence of the Lord Jesus?
R.D. Yes; as we are under the influence of the law of liberty, which is really dispensed from the "Father of lights, with whom is no variation nor shadow of turning".
J.C. It is a peculiar word: "Father of lights".
R.D. Yes; it refers to the sun as Father of lights. It is a figure expressing how things come to us from the very heart of God, but dispensed by the Lord Jesus.
J.B. Would there be the thought of source in "Father of lights"?
R.D. Yes; source of blessing and influence. You think of the sun; it is giving light, warmth, and prosperity to the earth, so that there should be an answer in fruitfulness.
J.R. The sun is the 'father' of the solar system in that way.
R.D. Yes; it is an illustration drawn from the solar system. That we should be a kind of first-fruits of His creatures is an agricultural idea; it is for the development of first-fruits for God's present glory and pleasure.
E.B. I thought it might have reference to @Psalm 19: 6, "There is nothing hid from the heat thereof;" its influence goes throughout the whole earth.
R.D. It is under the influence of the sun that the implanted word is developed. As I said, it is an agricultural figure, and the important thing from our side is that there should be conditions so that the seed fructifies for the praise of God.
{287}
S.F. It has a very blessed application for the present moment.
R.D. It has; it shows how spiritual growth takes place in our souls. "We should be a certain first-fruits", but if that is to be the case there must be an answer in spiritual stature on our side. @Psalm 19 speaks of the influence of the sun in the heavens as being like the law of the Lord: "A bridegroom going forth from his chamber; he rejoiceth as a strong man to run the race. His going forth is from the end of the heavens, and his circuit unto the ends of it; and there is nothing hid from the heat thereof". It suggests that the influence of the law of the Lord is just like that. It has a wonderful effect upon its object. I think James thus refers to the blessed God as source of all blessing, but His goodness and beneficence shine out in Christ, "with whom is no variation nor shadow of turning".
Ques. Does it give us the thought of the effectual character of the shining?
R.D. Yes, it does; but the main thought is the unchangeableness of God as the Blesser, so that if there is not an answer, it is our fault. The sun is always shining; the conditions that make for growth from God's side are always present - all centred and shining forth in the Lord Jesus, in view of growth on our side, for He cannot be anything else than what He is. He cannot deny Himself.
J.S. The promotion of what is of God in us depends upon the condition with us.
R.D. I think that is a very interesting word: "the implanted word" (verse 21). The seed has been planted, but if that seed is to develop and produce fruit, it calls for certain conditions.
{288}
Rem. In @Matthew 6: 27 it says, "Which of you by carefulness can add to his growth one cubit"?
R.D. That is the sun's side of it, to use our figure here - what God does. But our side of it is to maintain suitable conditions for the seed to fructify under the sun's influence.
J.S. I suppose that is why we have verse 16: "Do not err, my beloved brethren".
R.D. There is intended to be an answer for God to the word implanted, an answer in soul stature on our side, otherwise there is no fruit. You have the word implanted, but it has not developed.
C.C. Is that how this ministry works out?
R.D. Yes. He says, I want to see the thing worked out; I want to see the truth expressed. You do not express a thing in the seed, you express it in what has grown from the seed; but you begin with this, that everything comes down from the Father of lights. Paul may plant, Apollos may water, but God gives the increase.
Ques. How does the rain come in here?
R.D. The rain comes in from God's side, all comes through the heat of the sun; everything comes from the sun.
J.R. It is the way you receive it.
R.D. It needs meekness to receive it - when you come to discover that what you heard is going to cost you something. The Sower has sown the word, and He has sown it by the way of ministry. You have had a word implanted through the ministry of a brother. It may be perhaps in a meeting, but it comes from the Sower. You have approved of it, so it has a lodging-place in your soul,
{289}
but it has not grown yet, and the time comes when you are called upon to put into use the seed you received - then you will need meekness. The word must search the conscience, and it will mean displacement - in every case it does - but when we come to put it into practice we are tested as to whether we are prepared for the displacement. Suppose now I get a fresh thought: I need to retire into the company of Christ and see it in its perfection in Him. Then also I see it in its proper place in relation to the system of blessing, so that I now intelligently delight in it and love it. You see it in Christ as He trod this scene, and put into perfect practice all that the new covenant suggests. We have to look into the perfect law of liberty, because the full import of anything implanted in our souls can only be received with meekness, and expressed in practice as we delight in it. So we express it in the movements of love which are produced by coming under the influence of the new covenant. It is a very important thing, because we are inclined to think that when the seed is implanted we have it in formation, whereas we have only the seed.
G.C. We have to put it in practice in that way.
R.D. You cannot express anything until it is formed in you.
Rem. It is formed in view of testing.
R.D. Yes; but in the presence of the testing I feel the need of being under the influence of the blessed shining of the Father of lights; the law of liberty; so that the seed may be developed in my affections. And so I am enabled to receive it with meekness. It is thus proved in the presence of the testing, and as it finds expression, there is new fruit for God.
{290}
S.F. Do we see it all in Abraham and Isaac going to the mountain?
R.D. Well, Abraham had a certain communication, and it immediately tests him right to his very vitals. He receives it with meekness; he does not give way; he is supported to carry out what is in his heart. I do not think we get anything that is of moral gain to us that has not very deep surrender connected with it. Ministry comes by way of the conscience. It may be that you are brought to judge an association with which you are linked which does not honour the Lord.
J.S. We were noticing in connection with Paul, how he could say, "Whereupon, king Agrippa, I was not disobedient to the heavenly vision" (@Acts 26: 19). He had received light and was not disobedient to it.
R.D. Every fresh ray of light we receive calls upon us to see that certain conditions are provided, so that we get all the benefit of Christ as the Father of lights. If the ministry does not affect our conscience, it has no result.
S.J.B.C. There must be the displacement first before there can be the reception.
R.D. Well, there has been the implanting, and now we need meekness to accept the displacement, and express the word practically. God in His goodness takes care in regard to the circumstances into which we are brought, that they will be the necessary and suitable circumstances for the seed that has just been planted. To bring the seed out, God brings us into the very circumstances - it may be in discipline - which will serve His ends. The last word of ministry we hear, is the next
{291}
thing we need, and it will make demands upon us. There is the question as to what we are prepared to part with, in view of that thing being made fruit in the soul. The word is implanted in the soul with perfect precision and wisdom by the Sower. I have to face that tomorrow, if I enjoy it at the meeting today. The question then arises, Am I going to brush it away from me, or am I going to face all the circumstances with meekness, so that room should be made for the development of this fresh seed?
Rem. Ministry puts you in more direct contact with God.
R.D. You appreciate the seed planted, you look into the perfect law of liberty, and then you say, I love to do it! I know it will cost me much, the breaking perhaps of links with which I have been associated for years - it may mean a moral revolution - but now I love to do it as I look into the perfect law of liberty. I need the objective, so that the subjective might be wrought in my soul.
J.S. You suggest the objective in the way of ministry?
R.D. I suggest that the ministry calls attention to the next thing you need in your soul; but the objective is seen in Christ, and I am looking into the perfect law of liberty in Christ. We need the objective lest we become occupied with the subjective in ourselves. You see it all perfectly expressed in Christ; you come under the influence of the new covenant - all the love of God expressed in Christ.
S.J.B.C. How do you see your face in it; by seeing what you are in Him?
{292}
R.D. That is it - the kind of man I am. "According to his own will begat he us". What you have just had your attention called to should have its subjective effect in you. You have the objective, you look into the perfect law of liberty, and you love to see it. Looking into the perfect law of liberty, I love to express what is according to God.
Ques. Is that sitting under the apple tree?
R.D. That is the apple tree.
Ques. When you speak of the objective, would the transfiguration scene come in in that way in the case of the disciples?
R.D. Well, they saw the perfection of everything in the transfiguration. The effect of looking at the thing in relation to Christ is this: that your heart approves it, loves it, and loves to express it. Take a very simple thought: Suppose I feel that I am harsh, and I desire to be more gentle; then a word is sown in my soul that exercises me as to gentleness. I find I cannot express gentleness. If I read a book on culture, I might learn about gentlemanly ways here in this world. But I turn to Christ and I see gentleness expressed in Him, and the next opportunity I have I express that feature with great delight. I have enjoyed it in Christ, looking into the perfect law of liberty. Meekness shone out in its fullest expression in Christ, and all ministry is in view of development.
S.F. As Christ went through His daily life here, the perfect law of liberty shone out in perfect expression, did it not?
R.D. Yes, indeed. And so everything that is ministered to us is as a seed being implanted in our souls,
{293}
and is the next thing we need, for the Sower sows with method. James encourages us to "Count it all joy, my brethren, when ye fall into various temptations". It is our opportunity for development. We shall not fall into various temptations in heaven; *now* is the time for growing. If we are tried and tested in our circumstances - in our body, or in our business, or in the meeting - or wherever it is, "count it all joy" - it is an opportunity for development, because God uses these things in view of the implanted word.
Now I am a little afraid that we sometimes see a thing clearly in ministry, and we think we have it, and at the first opportunity we can talk about it, and be as clear as possible in our terms, but we do not have it. All we have is the seed; it has to grow. We talk a great deal of 'subjective' and 'objective', but let us be clear about this, the thing will never fructify in our souls unless it is formed there through sitting at the feet of Jesus. You may say, I can see it, but God does not merely want you to see a thing. James says, "the demons even believe, and tremble". God does not want you merely to see things clearly; He wants you to be formed in these things, because He is not after light in your soul, He is after first-fruits. James judges according to the spirit in which we do things, not according to the letter, and the light we have. If, on the other hand, we are occupied with the subjective side alone, we shall be continually taking the thing up by the roots to see how it is progressing, and we shall find it is not getting on at all. We need to take the precepts home to our own hearts, and turn to Christ until the spirit of the thing as expressed in Him, becomes formed in the soul,
{294}
and we learn to love it. If I say, Yes, I know what meekness is; I know what brotherly love is too; James says, Do you? Let me see some of it. Let me see your grace amongst the brethren. James says, I do not want the letter, I want to see the thing in you.
Rem. A little test often proves if we have it or not.
R.D. Yes; and we have to turn, after attempting it, and say to the Lord, Lord, show it to me in its expression. And I see it expressed in the perfect law of liberty. James is not telling us to attempt it, but to *do* it.
J.S. You mean the thing becomes part of yourself?
R.D. Yes; and you love it. What deep spiritual impressions James had gained in those three and a half years that he walked with the Lord!
C.C. The Lord Himself suggests that line: "Come to me, all ye who labour and are burdened, and *I* will give you rest" (@Matthew 11: 28).
R.D. Note the continuation: "Take my yoke upon you, and learn from me; for I am meek and lowly in heart; and ye shall find rest to your souls". The Lord presents two most attractive virtues to draw us to Himself. If I want to be educated, I want to come to One who is perfectly meek and lowly in heart, because the span of all graces is between these two; lowliness is the lowest and meekness is the highest. I would like to go and get my education from that Person who could span the distance between meekness and lowliness. Lowliness would take you to the wall, and meekness would take you to the front. I think we have in the thought of meekness, moral courage and grace to face the circumstances, bearing all that might affect one
{295}
personally, so that good might triumph. There may be an association you are linked with that is not of God. To break with it may mean your bread and butter. If you are a meek man you say, I will face it for the spiritual gain that is there; so be it if it sweep the deck of all I count dear; it means the shining of the face of Christ upon me.
Lowliness means I am prepared to be trodden on, so long as nothing vital regarding the glory of Christ is at stake. Meekness will never give way. A man who has meekness will not give way in anything relating to what is of God, though he may give way in what is personal. Moses got his impressions of the forbearance and compassions of God at the bush (@Exodus 3). Such impressions of God so affected his spirit that he became meek in character towards God's people. At the close of his career God allowed him to be tested as to the effect of the impressions which he received at the burning bush. Moses in his lowliness went to the wall on that occasion, for it was what was *personal* that was at stake. He stood, and never answered a word, and his lowliness shone out. But the Spirit of God remarks that the man Moses was the meekest in all the earth. When it was personal he could be silent, but when God's glory was involved, Moses stood firm.
J.B. It gave God a wonderful opportunity to come in.
G.A. You connect meekness with courage then?
R.D. I do.
J.S. You have the idea that 'receive with meekness', is you receive it with triumph?
{296}
R.D. Yes. You allow it to take form under the influence of the blessed objective before your heart, and as you do, it saves your soul. Supposing I am accustomed to be harsh with my brethren, and the Lord just drops a word into my soul, and I become conscious that I am severe and harsh with them. I weigh it over, and I say, I am harsh with my brethren; and I recall these ten, fifteen, or twenty years, in which I have been riding rough-shod over their sensibilities. It means coming into the presence of the Lord in a lowly way and saying to Him, I want to be educated in gentleness and grace amongst my brethren. And as I look into the perfect law of liberty, in the glory that shines in the face of the Lord Jesus, I see His lowliness, gentleness and patience - I see them most beautifully in the gospels. The seed is there, it begins to grow. I come in amongst my brethren. Now somebody tests me. I say, This is my opportunity to express this gentleness and meekness of Christ; and as I do it, I enjoy it. I have enjoyed the opportunity of expressing the lowliness and gentleness that is new-born in my soul. It is the kind of thing that will put us together and keep us together, without respect of persons, and on spiritual lines. It is really the way the features of the new man are formed in us for expression now, so that God gets in us an answer to the shining of light. There will never be growth in your soul unless you study the objective - Christ. It is bound to produce the effect. One great lesson that Jacob learnt, when he was twenty years away in Laban's country, was that the subjective was formed by the objective.
E.P. Meekness is always courageous, but it is expressed in a lowly spirit.
{297}
R.D. Always. One is prepared to surrender so far as one's own rights and personal things are concerned; but such a person will stand at the front in order that all that is of God may be maintained, holding on to it, although everything else go.
J.R. There is no thought of any boasting.
R.D. Indeed, it would prove you had not gone through your education, if you boasted at the end of it; it would only show that there had not been displacement.
J.S. In @Matthew 11, the Lord says, "for I am meek and lowly in heart".
R.D. Yes. So all we have been pressing is the value of spiritual conditions, as the scripture says: "Keep thy heart more than anything that is guarded; for out of it are the issues of life" (@Proverbs 4: 23). The Lord could say, "Do *ye* let these words sink into your ears" (@Luke 9: 44).
J.S. You think the heart is reached through the conscience?
R.D. I think one of the most serious things, in regard to ministry, is to take it up apart from its having reached the conscience, and tell it over again just as I received it. Now if I receive ministry, I value the light that is a seed in my soul, but that would be a very different thing from the fruit God wants. I am taking the agricultural figure: you put a little seed in the ground, and, given the needful conditions, you have the result in the plant that emerges. It is the same in kind, although the thing itself is greatly enlarged. It is received as seed in the soul, and has grown to a beautiful plant - what a difference between a seed and what it produces! It grew up under the influence of the Father of lights, and on my part there is the
{298}
maintenance of conditions; and thus it becomes *my own*, part of myself. It is not a repetition of what you have heard; and what is formed in you in this way is different from what is formed in me.
Rem. Hence the value of one another.
R.D. Yes; and it is all put together for God. We should receive one another on these spiritual lines, not as having respect of persons, but on spiritual lines. I want your fruit, and I want my fruit to be there too; what I have before me now is that we should be a kind of first-fruits - what you are and what I am, and what all the brethren are, beautifully put together in spiritual order. It is important to see we are not merely a group of individuals. We should be formed under the influence of the sun, each one individually, so that we should be put together spiritually and move *together*, all the fruit being available in the company.
Ques. Do you think that is the thought of the assembly?
R.D. I do. We should move and touch one another on spiritual lines, and if we are to do that, we must be severed from natural links, and be linked up together spiritually and practically - a very important thing if God is to get His first-fruits in His people. There is such a tendency to cliques and parties, which always indicates a double motive. James says, That must not be; indeed, he says it is sin.
"My brethren, do not have the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, Lord of glory, with respect of persons". If I have faith in my soul, the faith of the Lord of glory, it shuts out everything that would make anything of man naturally.
{299}
There is no trace whatever in the epistle that James was the Lord's brother after the flesh; he does not in any way claim the natural relationship. Think of what it must have been to him, who had known Him in connection with the household at Nazareth, with all the family relations that there would be! How completely he had travelled the way he suggests we should travel. It is a very blessed lesson for our souls to be able to take account of one another in spiritual ties, and to appreciate these spiritual ties, so that one is able to look upon all the brethren with the same affection and delight. If I am looking into the perfect law of liberty, I love all the brethren. I am not thinking of masters and servants, handmaidens and mistresses, but of all the brethren. James here mentions a brother, and a sister, so to speak, and what a disparity naturally between Abraham and Rahab! But they are together morally.
Ques. What about using other peoples thoughts?
R.D. The Lord will not support you, if you put forward the seed that is sown in your soul as if it were your own; it is simply the implanted word yet. We do damage to our souls if we use a thing in its embryo, because we hinder it from growing. You cannot give it out fully and profitably because it is not formed in you, and you could not give proper expression to it. The Lord will not support you, and it falls flat.
James links us up together practically. He says, "What is the profit, my brethren, if any one say he have faith, but have not works?" So he says, Here is a brother or a sister, and they are in necessity. The law of liberty, the ministry of the new covenant, has surely got a subjective and practical side, for the effect of coming under the influence
{300}
of the love of God, is to set our affections in movement with delight. Now, here is a brother, or a sister, *in necessity*. You do not pat them on the back and say, Be warmed and fed. Love does not do that. Love says, This is my opportunity for expressing the reality of divine affections thus formed. Thus fresh bonds are formed between you and that brother or sister. I am sure we do not know one another in brotherly love until we meet one another in needy circumstances. A brotherly spirit is a liberal spirit developed in the presence of necessity, and God takes good care that He gives us plenty of occasions for expressing it.
James speaks of the smallest thing - the material thing, which is the smallest thing - love will look after that. If I am not moved by a brother's necessities, I shall not be able to help him much spiritually. It is the way in which spiritual ties are developed amongst us, so that we are brought *together*. Thus God is getting His first-fruits; and whilst you are expressing the love, you have not gone out from the influence of the Father of lights, for that is what gives it life and impulse. God looks down and sees this with deep joy, and it is not type and shadow now, but reality. The Lord Jesus has risen, it is the sun in the heavens, and there is a present moral answer in our hearts, and God is getting a kind of first-fruits of His creatures. To me it is a wonderful thing. One loves to remember that this is not type and shadow now, it is Christ in the hearts of the saints, and the present answer to God in the way of first-fruits. There is a real, risen Christ, and in the people of God there is a living answer in moral concert to the shining of the Father of lights; but this is how it is reached.
{301}
J.S. We have a figure of Christ set forth in the sun?
R.D. Yes; and, if you like, God expressed in the Lord Jesus. Now what is in the ministry of the new covenant is this: not exactly Christ written in the affections, but Christ writing in the affections by the Spirit of the living God, and thus God is expressed in the saints.
J.S. In @2 Corinthians 3: 3, we are said to be "Christ's epistle".
R.D. It is a most beautiful conception: "*Ye* are our letter, written in our hearts, known and read of all men, being manifested to be Christ's epistle ministered by us, written, not with ink, but the Spirit of the living God; not on stone tables, but on fleshy tables of the heart". It is Christ's letter - what Christ is writing by the Spirit of God in our affections.
S.F. In that way God has gained His own end.
R.D. Yes; God gains His own end!
READINGS ON THE EPISTLE OF JAMES (3)
R DUNN
@James 3: 8 - 18; @James 4: 11 - 17
R.D. In these two chapters we have the conditions that make for peace, and for the promoting of the glory of the name of the blessed Person whose name is called upon us, so that they are two very important chapters. But we might just refer back to the end of
{302}
chapter 2 for a moment to see the way in which we are put together spiritually. Abraham and Rahab are quoted to bring before us those whose works in that way brought them together, the result of their faith.
S.J.B.C. You would think that Rahab and Abraham would be the last that would be quoted together. Abraham was an outstanding man of faith, called of God, and Rahab was a harlot, and a betrayer of her country.
R.D. They are two extreme cases, and the bond between them was not according to flesh. If we are to be together as brethren, there should be no recognition of links after the flesh.
S.F. They are of a spiritual order.
R.D. Yes; our relations as brethren are entirely spiritual. Status in the flesh has no part in the christian circle.
J.S. That would help us to move about, taking account of ourselves and others definitely as those who are begotten by the will of God?
R.D. Yes, to be a kind of first-fruits. The only links we have spiritually are in relation to Christ risen. As we have said, James had passed through this experience in a very real way as parting with Christ after the flesh, as the other disciples had also. In regard to James bringing forward Abraham as an instance, even Isaac after the flesh had to go, and Abraham in that way was tested in regard to the word sown in his heart. His faith was tried by that test, so that he was prepared to part with Isaac, as he knew him naturally, and receive him back from the dead in figure, so that God has him now on entirely spiritual ground.
Rem. Everything was wrapped up in Isaac.
{303}
R.D. It was. For the Jews, to whom James was particularly writing, it was a very necessary thing that they moved in that direction; that they should be set together in the liberty of grace; that is what Rahab has reference to. We must accept the death of Christ as setting aside all that might be used to give us status in the christian circle.
Abraham's faith is proved by his works, and James¬ word to us is, Prove your faith by your works! Whatever I may have after the flesh - reputation, status, family lineage - all has to be parted with, and I have to recognise my links with Christ risen in a new and spiritual order. I might even be hindered by my religious connections. Supposing my father was in fellowship before me and possibly my grandfather also. It is only what is spiritual that has any place here.
S.F. It must be wrought out in your own soul.
R.D. It must: it was in Abraham's own soul. The point is, he offered up Isaac, and he counted that God was able to raise the dead; so that Abraham passed through that experience in his soul, and all now was to be on the resurrection platform. Here the point is he gave him up, and when I am prepared to give up natural advantages, I am ready to be a simple brother amongst my brethren.
S.F. You mean his hand followed his heart.
R.D. Yes; and it is a very real test to part with something that might give us a place in the eyes of our brethren. If we pass through this in reality at the beginning, we shall never want a place of prominence, nor shall we ever fight for it. We shall have parted with the idea entirely. Abraham could get on with a 'sister' like
{304}
Rahab, because she comes in on the line of pure grace, and possessing moral qualifications.
S.F. James stands out in a way like Solomon: "Vanity of vanities", he says, upon all that is not of Christ.
R.D. And like Rahab, we can say God has thrown open the whole circle of blessing to us in pure grace, and we could not regard ourselves thus, without looking into the perfect law of liberty. It shuts out entirely what gives us status, but gives us liberty in spiritual affections.
Rem. It is a wonderful thing to be called 'brother' by James.
R.D. Yes, it is; you are being addressed by a very spiritual man. One would love to see brethren more at liberty in the christian circle like Rahab. She was one who claimed her portion in grace, as in the liberty of love, and it will never be taken from such, for we read in Joshua that her portion is among the people of God to this day.
S.F. Rahab married into the tribe of Judah.
R.D. When James is quoting Rahab, he puts it the other way to @Hebrews 11, where it speaks of her *receiving* the spies; James speaks about her *sending them forth*. When the spies came to her house there were stalks of flax on her roof, indicating I suppose, the beginning of exercise as to righteousness, but they were not spun and woven. Flax suggests the elementary idea of linen, which is the righteousnesses of the saints. She felt, however, the great possibilities that the occasion afforded for her, and her faith counted upon God's mercy, even to her. Her exercises found her prepared to commit herself to sending them forth, and in sending them forth she used the scarlet cord, and let them down. That is to say, she committed
{305}
herself to identification with God, and His people. She entirely surrenders any place in Jericho, and definitely commits herself with the people of God. She received the messengers, and she "put them forth by *another way*" - the emphasis is on "another way". It was very much like what Lydia did with the two 'spies' that came to Philippi. She received Paul and Silas into her house, and they departed from her house, for she, so to speak, sent them forth in peace, and thus had a scarlet cord she had used to bind upon her window. Thus Rahab acts with the two spies, and they said, Now you bind the cord that you used to let us down. The question is whether we all have a scarlet cord, *that we have used*. She opened her house to the brethren under the influence of the perfect law of liberty, wholeheartedly, with no regrets, and sent them forth another way. Her heart was closed to Jericho; she was never more to walk in the streets of Jericho, for the door of her house into the street was to be closed, but her window open to committal to the interests of Christ.
Ques. What is the scarlet cord?
R.D. The scarlet cord is your act of committal to the testimony. If you have not used it, you do not have it. If you were to ask Lydia, Do you have a scarlet cord? Yes, she says; I opened my house to Paul and Silas; finding my inheritance amongst the people of God, my house is marked by that. Some of us have the light of this, but do we have a scarlet cord? They came in and they went out, and came back, and the last place they went to before leaving Philippi was Lydia's house.
J.S. Paul in that way identified Lydia with the vessel of the testimony.
{306}
R.D. She found her place amongst the people of God, and she has it to this day. I begin in Egypt by having the blood on the lintel, and that is for shelter from judgment. So that I can leave Egypt, but having a scarlet cord in my window, I become identified with God's people in conflict, and come in this way into my portion amongst them in the land.
S.J.B.C. Would not the cord shelter her from judgment?
R.D. The cord represents the rights of Christ, and she and the people of God are bound together in owning the supremacy and the glory of the name, 'that worthy name', by which we are called. You say you are in fellowship, but the question James is asking is: Have you a scarlet cord that you have used? Bind *this* line of scarlet thread in the window.
Ques. Is there any thought of shelter from judgment in the scarlet cord?
R.D. No, I hardly think it is a question of that. Shelter from judgment is the blood upon the lintel. If I want to speak of shelter, I speak of the blood on the lintel; but committal to the Lord's interests among His people, I think, is seen beautifully in the scarlet cord she uses. If people do not commit themselves they are not in a very safe position. Stability is very much connected with committal. It shows how faith expresses itself in this way *practically*. She committed herself to the position at that time, refusing Jericho, the city to which she previously belonged, and all the principles of Jericho, to find herself among the people of God in the liberty of love. It is open
{307}
to each one of us to verify our committal practically. Many of us have held ourselves back.
Rahab saw that God had delivered His people from Egypt by way of the Red Sea, and had given them power to overthrow their enemies at the brooks of Arnon. A test has come to her now as to whether her faith can act in seeking divine favour and grace to throw in her lot with Israel. Her action means, The whole position has been put to me, and in view of that I am making a practical committal. The reason many of us do not find a place amongst the saints is because we hold ourselves back practically. I say the word 'practically' advisedly. Lydia said: "If ye have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my house". They not only came into her house, but they abode there, and they left Philippi from her house. That worthy, excellent name is called upon us, and if we love His interests, having come under the influence of the love of God, we cannot help committing ourselves wholeheartedly to the present position. By looking into the perfect law of liberty, you come to delight in opening your heart and house to the testimony, and in doing so you get a scarlet cord. When we have done it, there is a scarlet cord in our window, and not till then, although we may have been breaking bread for twenty years. With the spies¬ assurance, Rahab could say, I gladly offer myself in the sense of this wondrous grace that gives me a share in it all. So that, although a native of Jericho, having a slur upon my name, I can take my place with Israel in a sense of grace, and can be as much in it as Abraham; and Abraham would have been delighted to own her as a sister.
{308}
J.S. The people of Jericho may not have understood what the scarlet cord was, but the people of God understood it.
R.D. Yes; but it was not quite for the people of Jericho to see, but what the Israelites could take notice of. You get a similar thought when Paul was let down in a basket; also in Ruth, when she says, "Thy people shall be my people". She came in like that. Rahab announced her committal to the people of God by displaying the scarlet cord in her window. She said, as it were, By this I am bound to them. In Paul's case, the disciples identified themselves with God's elect vessel in circumstances of difficulty and disgrace. The cord means the practical taking up of, and putting your hands to, the thing. It means death as far as Jericho goes, but life as far as the land goes; and remember it is death *practically* and life *practically*.
The supper is more the thought of a company of people who all have scarlet cords, and they come together, and are glad to commit themselves to the death of Christ, the One who has the royal right to all. In Acts you get many named who have scarlet cords, but one of the best cases in the New Testament is Gaius. We may say Gaius had his window bound with many scarlet cords. He was always receiving the brethren, and sending them forth in peace. If I am indifferent to these things, I may outwardly claim the position, but I am not enjoying the *liberty* of the christian circle. One would like to see all the saints enjoying this liberty, and how freely and happily we would then take up our relationships! If we do answer to what James sets before us, it means a definite break with all that is here, but there is a wonderful avenue of grace given us
{309}
among the brethren. We would feel at home together, for there are no back seats. Why is it many of us hold back and do not enjoy this liberty? Would you not welcome Lydia to your home, without having any other introduction than her committal to Christ's interests? How much of this spiritual, holy liberty has been lost amongst us on account of a status being held to!
J.C. Coming back to Rahab and Abraham, we are brought in by the grace of God, and it would be disastrous for them to look upon each other in nature's way.
R.D. It would. If Rahab had looked at Abraham according to status, she would say, Well, that shuts me out. If Abraham had looked at Rahab, he would say, I could not walk with her. James has all that in view, and before mentioning it he says, look into the perfect law of liberty. And as we look into the perfect law of liberty, there is the forming of affections that will bind us together. But some of us, it may be, are not in the good of this. We talk about fellowship, and yet we need introductions to one another; and why is it? Abraham and Rahab would have sat down together, and held fellowship, although centuries lay between them, and they would have spoken about the same theme - the true Isaac and His glory.
John writes about speaking "mouth to mouth" (@3 John 14), and this is a family idea. Clericalism is 'mouth to ear', and is destructive of true christian enjoyment. Thus James quotes a brother and a sister - a family idea. He suggests that our holy affections find liberty in that blessed circle, the sphere of the Spirit. There we would be bound to converse together; and if we were in the freshness and
{310}
power of these things, we would not be able to withhold ourselves. We would not stand off, as alas! we sometimes do.
We are nourished under the apple tree: "In his shadow have I rapture and sit down" (@Song of Songs 2: 3). This is a reference to where we are nourished, and brought up under the influence of love. Our hearts go out to Christ and all who love Him. How free and at home Mary of @Luke 10 would have been with all the brethren! She sat, so to speak, under the apple tree, and what wonderful results there were! It resulted in her anointing His feet with ointment, and the whole house being filled with the odour of it.
You are not looking for somebody to love you, but you are looking for some one to love. Your thought would be, I wonder if there are any orphans and widows? I would like to go and expend on them some of this love springing up in my heart, born and matured under the perfect law of liberty. This, of course, is just the beginning of christianity. It is not very far on. If we were all like this there would not be distance of any kind between us, we should all be together.
Now chapter 3 says, If the brethren are together like this in love, do not disturb that. If Satan is after one thing amongst the brethren, it is the destruction of unity. I would just like to remind you James says, do not be many teachers. In many things we have all failed; and if that is the case I am going to get down from the chair. I am not going to be a critic in the midst of my brethren, but will be a brother amongst them. That would put us all in the same position, even in regard to weaknesses, and that sort of
{311}
thing. It is not something I am going to say out of pure mock modesty: "We all often offend". It is perfectly true about me, I often offend, and the brother who says, This is not true, differs from James, who speaks by the Spirit. If we really came to that, how gracious and considerate we should be to one another, even in our words!
And now "confess therefore your offences to one another" (chapter 5: 16). It will do you good. Our affections are let loose in an atmosphere of confidence. Instead of a brother being shut up in his house, so that he tells the Lord about it, but he cannot open his heart to his brethren, he can throw himself upon the Lord and upon the brethren. Let us live in the open! The sad truth is that conditions amongst us sometimes, only indicate that we do not love one another practically, and as a result, that holy confidence is destroyed. We hold back from one another and so hamper one another. Let us throw ourselves upon the Lord and upon the brethren! Is there any one in the christian circle who does not love us? James says, Let us have a look at it: faith without works is dead. There is not one in the circle who does not love us, and so you move in the enjoyment of this love that sets you free. Like Rahab who says, I was a poor harlot belonging to Jericho, with not a thing about me that could claim anything at all, and the brethren have thrown open the gates to me. I have a home there; you come in now in the power of grace, and the one thing before your soul is blessing. The result would be brethren dwelling together in unity (@Psalm 133).
Now you are going to disturb that if you are many teachers. James gets at the root of the matter when he says, Watch your tongue. You cannot stop a thing after you have
{312}
given vent to it by the tongue. You can think a thing. He says, I am anxious that nothing may slip from your heart to the tongue. Ten minutes afterwards you regret it, but there is no post swift enough to overtake it. You can judge the thought in its conception, but beware of giving expression to it. Just a little of the new covenant will thoroughly kill that which invades this precious circle. There is nothing so infectious amongst us as a little love. But remember we have to be taught to love. We cannot love simply because it is enjoined upon us. We want our hearts warmed under the influence of the new covenant, and then see what will come out: "Love never fails" (@1 Corinthians 13: 8). Love will kill the official and the critical alike.
Let us not be on the line of a critical spirit, but on the line of blessing. We have only one tongue, and it is not right that we should be both cursing and blessing with it. It is a perfect blight on a gathering if we begin to criticise our brethren. If you are using your tongue like that, then it is a double life. It is all open before God, and we cannot deceive one another long, for we cannot buy spiritual power. As soon as I am not on spiritual lines, those of positive blessing, the Lord simply withdraws His support from me. If the Lord withdraws His support from me my wisdom is to turn to Him and say, Why hast Thou withdrawn Thy support from me? Because you have been sowing a lack of confidence among the brethren. You may say, I am not telling the brethren wrong things. But *you* were wrong, *you* were critical in your spirit, and there is only one Lord for the people of God, and I am that Lord. There is nothing so testing as to have the Lord withdraw His support from one. One would like to have the
{313}
sympathy and confidence of all our brethren. Peter, who is much on this line, says, If you do these things you will never fall, the Lord will never let you down.
When the Lord withdraws His support I do not think He makes it evident at once publicly. He is so good that He does not do that. But He makes me feel in my affections and in my conscience, that I have been maintaining critical lines in a meeting, or in conversation with a brother, or in my home. One's departure may start in a very small way, and the Lord gives me the feeling that I was ruffled in my spirit. He throws an unhappiness over my spirit, and I know it, and my wisdom is to humble myself before the Lord about it. If you do that, you will never have to do it publicly. But if you do not hearken to the Lord there must come an exposure.
S.J.B.C. @Malachi 2: 16 says, "Take heed then to your spirit".
R.D. To watch over our spirits is a most important thing. "The Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit". If I study Him who is meek and lowly, how patient and gracious I shall be! I shall be a peacemaker. What a fine occupation it is to be amongst your brethren as a peacemaker, but what a fine occupation for *all* the brethren to be it! If I am a peacemaker, I shall ask the Lord for power and grace to curb my tongue. "The tongue can no one among men tame" - so I need not try, but I can turn to the Lord to tame me, and give me grace to bridle my tongue. I feel James really discloses the Spirit of Christ with remarkable wisdom, in the way he touches this question of the tongue. One little remark about a brother or a sister, made indiscreetly may set aflame the whole
{314}
course of nature - just a little remark. In @Hebrews 12: 15 it says, "Watching lest there be any one who lacks the grace of God; lest any root of bitterness springing up trouble you, and many be defiled by it". It is not a *tree* of bitterness, it is the *root*, the thing in its inception, and it comes from beneath. The thing was there unjudged in your heart. If I have a thing arising in my heart, I am sowing a thought. Nobody knows that but the Lord and myself. I can deal with it then, it has not done anybody any damage. I can judge it in the presence of the Lord, and then I can meet you, and shake hands with you, and look into your face, and invite you to look into my heart. But if you nurse it, the next thing is you mention it. Now it has gone its course, and it affects the glorious name that is named upon us.
But how good to think that we can use the tongue in view of blessing! Then if you meet me in the street, or if you visit my home, or if we come together in the meeting, you will ever be on the lines of blessing, and establishing peace. Thus there is an answer to God in the kind of first-fruits as a result of coming under the influence of the Father of lights.
"The fruit of righteousness in peace is sown for them that make peace". You are on the line of blessing and enlargement all the time. It is good to remember, and to admit it, "the tongue can no one among men tame". There is only one blessed Person can tame the tongue, and He gives me the Holy Spirit that I might be completely under control.
{315}
READINGS ON THE EPISTLE OF JAMES (4)
R DUNN
@James 3: 12 - 18; @James 4: 11 - 17; @James 5: 7 - 20
R.D. We have been noticing previously that the character of the present time is one of blessing, and that we are brought to confession of God by our tongues, as it is said: "Therewith bless we the Lord and Father", so that we are committed to blessing. We were dwelling a little on what meekness is, and so I thought we might begin at verse 12. In the close of chapter 3, it speaks of the features - meekness and wisdom - that secure peace amongst ourselves, and fruitfulness for God. It is a great point with James that there might be fruit; he speaks repeatedly of the precious fruit. Then he speaks of the wisdom which does not come down from above, and shows what its effect is: "This is not the wisdom which comes down from above, but earthly, natural, devilish. For where emulation and strife are, there is disorder and every evil thing". He sets over against that the wisdom that comes down from the Lord Jesus in heaven, and a very beautiful thing it is.
W.H.U. Do we get any thought of headship underlying this scripture?
R.D. I have no doubt it is underlying it. In the christian circle we get the benefit of every feature of Christ; in every way the Lord Jesus is available for us. We may not be able to state here in terms what it is, but I have no doubt it is headship. We may test ourselves and our conversation by the features that he gives us here.
{316}
J.B. Was it found in the Person of Christ here upon the earth?
R.D. It was, and now He gives us His own Spirit that His own features might come out in us. We appreciate the beautiful graces in Him, and they become formed in us so that we can express them.
When anything arises that calls for a little consideration, we are so apt to begin to act forthwith, instead of waiting that we might drink in of the Spirit of Christ, and that we might move in the direction of peace. We might have a right thing in view, but James is anxious that we might not only have a right thing in view, but that we might move towards it in the Spirit of Christ, having His support in every step. It would be an expression of Himself, it would be "first is pure". Now we generally apply that to the person we are judging. We say, We are looking for this in you; but I think the way it works out is it exposes the motives in my own heart. There should be no ulterior motive. I might be affected by what is natural, and my judgment be blurred in that way. But if I have the wisdom which is from above, I shall be pure, because I shall be characterised by that wisdom which acts for God's will, and has as an object the honour of the Lord of glory.
This works out from one's heart, and if we are pursuing the line of blessing, we want to see reproduced amongst the brethren the fruits God is looking for today. He is looking for first-fruits for all His mercy and grace expended, and it is our privilege to promote this together. A person on this line has power, and the Lord will support him. I think it is a great thing to have the desire for spiritual power. James says, I do not want your talk; I want
{317}
fruit, I want you to be "swift to hear, slow to speak". He means, Let what you hear reach your soul as the implanted word, and become fruit under the perfect law of liberty. Let there be a good while between the hearing and the speaking.
J.S. Speaking is a thing James seeks to prevent there being too much of - "Be not many teachers".
R.D. "Let him shew out of a good conversation his works in meekness of wisdom". 'Conversation' means 'manner of life'. He wants you to be like Asher, whose shoes were iron and brass. He had a firm tread, and was one who surrendered nothing that was of God; but he moved in grace amongst his brethren, for though firm-footed, his feet were dipped in oil. He walked in the grace of Christ, and such a one would have sons, for there is multiplication on this line: "Asher shall be blessed with sons" (@Deuteronomy 33: 24). James belonged to that tribe morally.
God would have us formed by the wisdom from above. It is a desirable thing to have one's heart adjusted by Christ, so that God can look into it with approval, and you can invite the Lord Jesus and the brethren to look into it. Peter did. He said, I used to keep some of the keys of my heart from Thee. Now in @John 21, with a whole heart open to the Lord's eye, Peter confesses the Lord knows all things - all the motives and purposes of the heart, and he can say: "Thou knowest that I am attached to thee". And if we are thus cleared as to every wrong motive, we can move like Asher, in gracious activity amongst our brethren for peace and prosperity, and also rest like Asher: "And thy rest as thy days". Some of us do not know how to rest in regard to divine things. We are busy doing this and
{318}
doing that, writing letters, and so forth - far better to go and rest awhile, and let the Lord look after things. "To his beloved one he giveth sleep" (@Psalm 127: 2). It is a gift. He says, You can leave things in my hand, and I will look after them. That is the force of that scripture. "And thy rest as thy days". We need not sit up late and rise early, to eat the bread of sorrows - it is vain to do this!
Ques. Do we see the effect of it in the Lord asleep in the storm?
R.D. Yes; we want to turn to the Lord to see everything divinely perfect. I look at that blessed Person sleeping there, and I would like to be able to do what the disciples did not do - I would like to let Him sleep, and to be at rest myself too! If He is at rest, why should we be disturbed?
Ques. Does confidence give rest or sleep?
R.D. If you have confidence it is not to be in yourself; if it is it will give disturbance, not only to yourself, but also to your brethren.
Ques. Is it casting your care upon Him?
R.D. Not only casting your own care upon Him, but casting the interests of God's house upon Him, as One who does have an interest in them. One would not interfere with the thought of taking one's part in the sufferings of the glad tidings, but let me have confidence in the Lord. Paul never lost this confidence although he spoke of fightings without, and fears within. In the path of the Lord's will I can rest. Let me pursue my path expressing the features of Christ.
The order is "first is pure", then you are to be "peaceful", and "gentle" - beautiful qualities that are not
{319}
appreciated enough by us. These would not bring in disorder, they would bring in peace. If there has been disorder among the saints, behind this have been envyings and strife. In @Matthew 20, there was a threatened rift with the disciples; two of them have been proposed by their mother to the Lord, one for His right hand, the other for His left in the kingdom. She sued for a place of prominence - a very poor sort of thing. See how gently Jesus reproves this, and then when the ten heard about it they became indignant, and would quarrel with them, so that the peace of the whole company is jeopardised. But see again how gently Jesus calls them all together, and instructs them, rebuking every disturbing thought in their hearts toward each other, maintaining an unbroken company instead of ten and two. His meekness and gentleness accomplish this.
J.C. But I cannot afford to be gentle.
R.D. You can afford to be anything in this chapter. This chapter gives you your bank, an unlimited bank, its capital is such that we can afford to do anything. You may draw freely on these reserves. I would no doubt find it impossible to be gentle until I went to the bank. You may say, I have been drawing on that for about ten years and am nearly bankrupt now. The bank is not bankrupt, and "*He* gives more grace". Grace is the capital or substance that enables you to pay out. In 3 John there is a special word to Gaius. What a resource of grace he must have needed in his very trying situation. John sees Gaius needs a word to encourage him not to give way. He was probably feeling that the conduct of Diotrephes toward the brethren was now intolerable, and must be resisted, feeling
{320}
too, perhaps, that it was time to act, and patience was exhausted. But John says, "Beloved, do not imitate what is evil, but what is good ... I hope soon to see thee, and we will speak mouth to mouth" (verses 11 - 14). This is just the beginning of christianity. We are at the rock bottom, and every one of us needs to have our spirits bathed in it. It is no good soaring up to Ephesians, if we are not set as James sets us here. He would set us free for the enjoyment of sonship. Sonship is a great gift, but this is the way to come into the enjoyment of it. We shall not taste the blessedness of sonship, if we are not dealing gently with our brethren.
Then this wisdom is "yielding". You may feel you have been rather unyielding in regard to others; well, there is wisdom you can draw upon. It will enable you to yield all the way, and to do it gracefully, because it is in the power of grace. The Lord supports a man that takes the low place. I heard a brother say recently, 'I have done this thing wrong, the other thing wrong - I feel I have done everything wrong'. I felt the Lord was supporting him in every word he said. The Lord never lets a man down who is prepared to go to the wall.
S.J.B.C. He gives grace to the lowly.
R.D. Yes, He does. There is a seat not too much occupied; it is the bottom one. There is never any competition for it, but it is from that seat that the Lord begins His promoting. If you take the low place, the Lord will promote you: "*Friend*, go up higher", He said.
J.S. That is what we were noticing in connection with the kingdom.
R.D. It is the first principle of the kingdom. You could not make a man jealous who is conscious of mercy.
{321}
He has been picked up from the dunghill and has been put among princes, and had every blessing given him, and he says, What more could I have? What more could I want? You could not make a man like that jealous.
Now we come to "full of mercy and good fruits". It is expending itself in blessing. Then it is "unquestioning, unfeigned". In verse 18 you see what is to be the result if you travel on these lines. God says, I will give the fruit of righteousness for these. You begin to feel the fruits of righteousness are sown in the affections. A meeting may have gone on unhappily for ten years, and this touch will bring in an atmosphere of blessing. The condition of the Corinthians was corrected by Paul's first epistle, by the Lord being made supreme in their affections (practically, the kingdom line of things being presented). Thus conditions were prepared for the ministries of the new covenant, reconciliation, and the "man in Christ", being introduced in the second epistle. What comes from man's heart is "earthly, natural, devilish". If I act apart from the Lord and His wisdom I must do damage.
The prayer of Jabez is one well worth remembering. His name indicates sorrow. His mother gave him his name, no doubt she was a spiritual woman. He had brought pain and travail even in his coming into the world. He took it to God and he prays: "Oh that thou wouldest richly bless me, and enlarge my border, and that thy hand might be with me, and that thou wouldest keep me from evil, that it may not grieve me! And God brought about what he had requested" (@1 Chronicles 4: 10). There is a man who says, as it were, I do not want to break any one's heart, but may I be one who brings in blessing; and God brought about his request.
{322}
Now to go on to our next scripture. It is worth while listening when James addresses his brethren. "Brethren", he says - those whom he can commit himself to, he calls his brethren - "Speak not against one another".
J.S. Is that not speaking against the Lord?
R.D. If we speak against our brethren, we are opposing the Lord. I am not moving in love if I speak against the brethren, and the government of God will overtake me. It is a very serious word this. We rather lightly speak against our brethren sometimes. James pulls you up. If I have an exercise about a thing, I will move in the wisdom from above which "first is pure", and go to God first, and then to my brother gently. There is a course wisdom will take, it will be "first is pure", and the end of it will be "good fruits", not disturbance and lack of confidence in the meeting. Let us get on to positive lines! The time to be careful is after the meeting. Do not let us leave the hall doors speaking in such a way that what may have been before us in the meeting is thrown aside in our souls by unguarded and critical remarks; so that we lose the gain of it. Let us see that our conversations may be for edification. If we have been to God first, and then come along on the lines of "first is pure", "full of mercy and good fruits", and we have a little suggestion to make on the line of admonition, given in love, the brother says, Here is a brother who loves me, and he wants to see me prosper, and to see saints prosper. Now he is wisely putting me on my guard as to a possible mistake or hurtful tendency in me. I am glad of his care and criticism, and thankful to pray about it. He has told no one else, and so matters are adjusted.
{323}
"One is the lawgiver and judge". That is to say, I recognise the place the Lord has, and I desire only to be where He can give His support. The Lord comes in and He says, I am Lord; and there is nothing He is more jealous about amongst the saints than this. Whenever I seek to come in between the Lord and the brethren, and to dictate to them, as sure as I do it the Lord will have to say to me. He will allow me to be the doormat, He will allow me to shepherd them, but He will not allow me to lord it over them. I like the way James puts it; Christ is over you, do not lord it over the brethren; there never has been any one who did it and prospered.
S.J.B.C. It is a solemn thing to stand between a servant and his Lord.
R.D. I am not so concerned about the servant as the brother. The servant can go to his Lord, but this is a brother. A servant's place is to serve in humility, as Paul says in @1 Corinthians 3: 21 - 23: "All things are yours ... and *ye* are Christ's, and Christ is God's". The Lord may move but slowly to preserve His lordship, but move He will.
He goes on to speak of how the Lord will support us in regard to seeking His guidance. "Go to now, ye who say, To-day or to-morrow". This is the cause of a great deal of confusion amongst us at times. Supposing the Lord has placed me in A - - -, and the ordering of God is that I should be at A - - - . I say, I would like to go and live in D - - -, there is a nice meeting there; things are a little bit troublesome in A - - - . I pack up and go off to D - - -, and I find myself in trouble there. Do not do that. Let it be, "If the Lord should so will and we should live". This is a very
{324}
important consideration, if we are to be kept in our right places for God's glory. "If the Lord should so will", and if "we should live", which practically means, if God will - I read it in the light of both, and it takes in both home circle and business, as well as the Lord's interests. Mr. Stoney used to say, I should discover what my earthly calling is, and then what my mission is. God is connected with the former, and the Lord with the latter. I ought to say, If the Lord will - that is I look to the Lord and I say, Here is a fresh exercise; I am out of a situation here in A - - -, and I just want to be where I can have Thy support, and I am not sure about moving to D - - - . Well, I just wait. Then there is an opening in D - - -, which is God's ordering, and I am set free in my spirit by the Lord. So all becomes simple. In referring to this matter in D - - -, a situation opens; it may be five pounds a week more, or it may be five pounds less. I ask my brethren about it, and they cannot tell me; they can pray for me and tell me what their exercises are, but after all only God can settle it.
In @Acts 21 the brethren expressed their earnest exercises as to Paul's movements, but they found him determined to go to Jerusalem against their feelings. So they simply left him to God, and desired that the will of the Lord should be done. And the sequel shows that, though Paul in measure lost the Lord's support for a time, their prayers were answered, and the Lord's will was done.
God cares for me in my circumstances, and the Lord directs me in my spiritual path. I need thus to have God's care and guidance as to my temporal needs, and the guidance of the Lord in relation to His interests. I am thinking of the expression, "if the Lord should so will". If I
{325}
have a move in view, I should like to ask the Lord, Is this right? The Lord may indicate that He has put me where I am now, and that I should remain there. Well, if I move, I shall certainly lose His support, and if I remain I can count on Him being with me. Paul could speak of it quite simply. I have come through supported by the Lord; I have kept the faith; I have fought the fight; I have come to the end, and He is going to take me home. We shall live as long as the Lord has a use for us on these lines. That is God's care; and God does love to care for us, so that in simple dependence we should live, and serve His beloved Son.
Ques. Is every saint a servant?
R.D. It is the privilege of every saint to be a servant. There should be a motive before each, that they should serve God, and this is called a labour of love. So that every one of us should be going on in that service, while it is our privilege. We have a positive thing to do, and if we do not carry it out, to us it is sin. It is a great gain to have our paths laid out for us in this simple way. So long as it pleases God to leave us down here on this earth, we can be in the right place, doing the right thing, and in right conditions. If the Lord come now, I am living in the house God put me in, in the circumstances He put me in, and doing the thing the Lord supports me in. If He comes, I shall just go, nothing to fear at all. These are the spiritual conditions in which we take things up.
Now to come to chapter 5 - there are many exercises we are called to pass through which are very prolonged, so he says: "Have patience, therefore, brethren, till the coming of the Lord". God is working wonderful things amongst us, developing spiritual fruits in the affections of
{326}
the saints, and so he brings in this illustration of the labourer. He "awaits the precious fruit of the earth, having patience for it until it receive the early and the latter rain". I think many of us let go an exercise before we come to the "latter rain". Think of going through the spring and the summer, and seeing the corn in the ear, and then something turns you aside, and you give up; you lose the whole crop. So here is a word to carry us through, not only the "early rain", but the "latter rain". He gives us a word as to Job being sustained until he comes through at last, and he recalls his patience, and the tender compassion of the Lord in all Job's testings, until he is in the full enjoyment of all God's thoughts for him.
Now he says, "Complain not one against another ... Behold, the judge stands before the door". Why not leave things with the Lord without fretting and complaining? The judge is just at the door. Do not allow your spirit to become soured, for this will interfere with the good yield. If you are engaged with what concerns the Lord, He is near and you will get His approval; there is no need to justify oneself. There should be such prosperity in our hearts, that there is no room for disappointment.
There is no complaining in the streets of the city where the Lord is supreme amongst the saints. "Ye have heard of the endurance of Job". The Lord bore with, and patiently dealt with him, and what is the end? He gets spiritual wealth, and three daughters; and you remember how the second time he could name his daughters. The first, Jemimah, refers to the reaching of a resurrection morning. At last, he says, The morning has broken. And then the next daughter, Keziah, suggests the fragrance that
{327}
fills the scene. The third daughter, Keren-happuch, is so named as expressing Job's appreciation of the moral beauty of Christ. The morning has come, filled with the fragrance and beauty of Christ. So the end of the Lord is to bring a man into the light of the resurrection morning, and to flood his heart with blessing, so that he has substance for his soul. You have heard of the endurance of Job, and seen the end of the Lord with Job. James enjoins that endurance is to have its perfect work. Job got the latter rain, and the latter rain was what ripened all the fruits. Even if it is such a simple exercise as to being a little more gracious, and yielding, you will not be brought to that before the early and the latter rain have done their work. If you ask the Lord to make you a little more yielding, do not be surprised if you are very much tested in that the next day. It will mean going towards the wall many yards more than you had expected to do. The early rain will cause the seed to swell, thus requiring more room in my affections and testing me in this way. But he would encourage me to look at the fruit and its perfect expression in Christ.
Then "before all things, my brethren, swear not". We are so apt to push things on, but the Lord cannot support that. If the iron be blunt, I need more force to push and support my cause. Wait on the Lord, and let it be "yea" and "nay". If I am presenting the truth, I do not need to press it in human zeal. I only need to simply and meekly present what the truth is, and the Lord will support it. Even Christ committed Himself to the One who judges righteously. It may be I am not prepared to join some association. The association may say they will make it impossible for me to live. They cannot hinder me praying,
{328}
and if they can defeat the Almighty God, it is not the God I know. "Does any one among you suffer evil? let him pray", and if I do anything else I shall not have the Lord with me.
He says, "Is any happy? let him sing psalms". It is a normal thing for us to be happy; let us sing psalms; trace your happiness up to God. "Is any sick?" You count on the interest and affections of the brethren when you are sick, and this puts you in beautiful touch with each other. If I get sick, I find the doorstep begins to wear, that is because the brethren love me; and how much nearer we do get to each other in our sorrows?
Ques. Does this refer to natural or spiritual sickness?
R.D. Oh, it is bodily sickness, but spiritual sickness behind it.
Ques. Would you call in the doctor?
R.D. You may call in the doctor or not, but what James is concerned about is that you should call the brethren in, they are the people who really care for your soul, and you recognise that you belong to a circle where your soul is cared for. "Let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord".
Rem. That is at the request of the sick one?
R.D. Yes; He takes this simple course. He recognises he is not like an ordinary man in the world; he has to do with God, and also God's government, and the people of God. And he goes on to say, "and the Lord shall raise him up; and if he be one who has committed sins, it shall be forgiven him". It may be that he discovers that he has been laid upon his back in regard to certain things he
{329}
has done; perhaps he has been a Freemason and has not told his brethren. He recognises he has not been true to the fellowship, and that the Lord has laid him on his back because He loves him, and He has it out with him.
S.F. And the thing is forgiven him govern-mentally.
R.D. It is in order to show us how gracious the provisions are, how easy it is to get right, and how very difficult to get wrong. I have to jump over gates to get wrong, but I find all the gates open when I want to get right. James is a man who goes in for short reckonings. I may be laid in bed with sickness and I call in the doctor and do the best I can, but if God is speaking to me as to my course the doctor cannot do much. The Lord is giving me an opportunity and I know it, and suppose I do not pay attention to it, God may even allow me to get on my feet again. I may be laid aside again, the Lord speaks louder, until I am brought to face it, until I get clear of the thing that has been the block to my spiritual progress so long. Let us go in for short accounts. If you have taken a course of wrong associations, the Lord sees it and it has to come out. You cannot shut yourself up to ignore that you belong to the Lord, and to the fellowship. So James calls you to face it. If we have cities of refuge and use them, there will be recovery.
Now there is a word of exhortation "Confess therefore your offences to one another". Let us be open one to another. Some time ago, I was asked with others to go and see a brother who felt the Lord had afflicted him, and that he had been careless about divine things, giving too much time to business matters, and so on. He said, 'I just wanted
{330}
you to pray for me'. We felt we could take up his exercise. This is in connection with a brother's exercises, and connected with governmental sickness. Of course, you may be sick tomorrow, and be able to discover no other reason than that the Lord wants you to live a little nearer to Him. So we need discernment as to just what the Lord intends. Here is Elias; Elias says, It is necessary for the good of Israel that there should be no rain. It is the prayer of a spiritual man. And when he saw that there were conditions to receive rain, he prayed again, and the rain came. Not only did the rain come, but the earth caused its fruit to spring forth. That was what Elijah was after, he wanted to see *fruit* in the hearts of the Lord's people.
"My brethren, if any one among you err from the truth, and one bring him back, let him know that he that brings back a sinner from the error of his way shall save a soul from death and shall cover a multitude of sins". Now we should be on that priestly line. If a brother is losing interest, and it becomes evident that he is getting into the world, we should go after him and save him. Now do not think this is a little thing. Look at the possibilities in it for that brother! And very sweet it is if the Lord has used you to care for any one like this, to see him once more sitting in the meeting with a shining face.
James, as it were, leaves us there - saving one another. That is also where Jude leaves us, having compassion on some, "making a difference". What about the others? Jude says: Go after them and save them, "hating even the garment spotted by the flesh". We are not nearly aggressive enough in our activities towards our poor erring brethren, and towards men generally. James
{331}
says to any one who may see an opportunity for recovering a brother: "let him know that he that brings back a sinner from the error of his way shall save a soul from death and shall cover a multitude of sins". That is no small spiritual achievement, and may we covet to do it.
*From Memorials of the Ministry of R Dunn, Volume 1, pp. 99 - 178, Auckland, January/February 1922*.
{332}
{333}
THE RETURN OF THE GLORY
E J McBRIDE
@Luke 2: 8 - 14; @Romans 5: 1, 2; @Colossians 1: 24 - 28; @1 Peter 4: 12 - 14
E.J.McB. What I had chiefly before me was that the Lord might give us exercises that we should be able, under His gracious hand, to secure the return of the glory. Speaking for the saints generally, I think everyone would admit that we have had a remarkable proof of the grace of God. We have had an evident ministry of grace, but God has promised not only to give grace but to give glory (@Psalm 84: 11). One is exercised as to how far individually as believers, or locally as a company of saints set together in any one place, we are exercised in securing the return of the glory. I have no doubt, speaking practically, that while in one way, just as it was in the history of Israel, the glory had never left, yet in another way the public defection of the ancient people of God led to the departure of the glory. And so in the history of the assembly publicly the thing has been the same. In one view of the assembly the glory has never left. One would not like to think that for a moment; but the glory has gone into retirement because of the public state of the assembly. One would be exercised as to any revival at this time which would take the form of bringing the glory back again. I think one sees evidences in persons like Simeon and Anna of a desire that the glory might be brought back again, and on the part of the Lord an answer to those desires.
{334}
Ques. Will you tell us what is in your mind as to the glory?
E.J.McB. I think the idea of glory is that you secure the demonstration of the presence of God here. I think 'glory' in its essence is the moral outshining of the effulgence of the being spoken of. "The glory of young men is their strength" (@Proverbs 20: 29). "Woman, if she have long hair, it is glory to her" (@1 Corinthians 11: 15). You can understand how the enemy is destroying that in a day like this; hence the present practice of cutting hair amongst women. Now the glory of God is evidently Christ, and the assembly is the glory of Christ.
Ques. In what way has the glory gone into retirement?
E.J.McB. I think the assembly position has not been publicly maintained. Saints have not been together in unity. Individualism has really marked the situation more or less up to, I should say, the time of J.N.D. The public position was gone. What you could see was a public denial of everything connected with God, and still claiming to be the bride of Christ. But under the gracious hand of the Lord, and the bountiful ministry of His love, we see moral features of the assembly coming again into view. I do not look for a public re-establishment of it here, but I *do* look for the securing of the glory.
Ques. Do you think that the features coming back among two would secure the glory?
E.J.McB. I think they might be secured in one person. If a person suffers as a christian (he might be the only believer publicly recognised in the village), the Spirit of glory rests upon him. It is pretty evident that when a
{335}
person suffers as a christian God is more to that person than the system of things in which he is. Peter says, "Let him not be ashamed, but glorify God in this name" (@1 Peter 4: 16).
Rem. Glory would be the shining out of Christ in an individual. You would not get the same effulgence in an individual as in the company.
E.J.McB. It would be the same character of effulgence in the company as that coming out in individuals. It is secured in measure in individuals, but the point is that it is secured in a vessel. I think it came out in a peculiar manner in Stephen. No one could deny that in Stephen we have remarkable effulgence shining in one individual. It might help if we see the kind of features that marked the return of the glory as seen in @Luke 2. One feature of it is seen there. I refer to these shepherds keeping watch over their flock by night; it is to them that the testimony comes, and that the glory, which had been in retirement, appears in evidence: "the glory of the Lord shone around them". God was going to make Himself known in Christ, reconciling the world to Himself, and the peculiar features that marked the company to which that was committed is full of interest to us at the present moment.
Ques. Why do you specially refer to the shepherds watching their flock by night?
E.J.McB. It indicates a restoration of the spirit of faith that marked the first beginnings of God's work in man, for Abel was a keeper of sheep, and the spirit of faith is the important point - that we should not be thinking that everything is lost. It is a great thing to revive the spirit of
{336}
faith amongst the saints, so that in the light of it - that is, in the power of the spirit of faith - however dark it becomes, we should watch the flock.
Ques. Would you watch the flock in view of the coming day?
E.J.McB. Yes, in view of the morning, the morning that has no night.
Ques. That would be very like the spirit of Christ in Paul, would it not?
E.J.McB. Undoubtedly, and I think that the Lord is reviving amongst us a spirit of faith. The spirit of faith is in accord with the word. Christ is in heaven as a glorified Man, and that should dominate the situation for us.
Rem. So that although numbers might be few, faith would take account of the immense possibilities. We are not told how many shepherds there were.
E.J.McB. There were not many, but the angel speaks of "all the people". We have, perhaps, got a limited idea of them, but the glad tidings were to be to all the people. During the last two or three years one has seen a great increase in the spirit of evangelism amongst the saints - a growing desire for the conversion of souls.
Ques. Say a little more about the shepherds in Luke. Do you think that the spirit of caring for the flock would be seen today in the way in which we care for the interests of Christ here?
E.J.McB. Yes, I would not like you to go to Christ in glory and leave a single person in Southport behind, if you could take them with you. That is the spirit of the shepherd, and the darker the night the more would you be marked by that spirit of watching the flock. You would not
{337}
be content with watching the flock merely, but you would have a testimony of God for all men, for the glory is going to cover the earth as the waters cover the sea. That is the kind of spirit that marked the shepherds. It is to that spirit that the glory comes. It is manifested to them.
Ques. Is there any significance in the fact that the shepherds were abiding without?
E.J.McB. There was no 'within'. We came out to Him, and we have never been able to go back again. I do not think there is any real 'within' until we go home. That is my impression as far as the world is concerned.
Ques. What about Hebrews, "within the veil"?
E.J.McB. Well, is not that home?
Ques. I was wondering whether we get it now?
E.J.McB. You can go home as often as you like; that is one of the privileges of the family. You have not got to wait for holidays. 'His presence is our home' (`12:4). The passage in Luke helps. The measure in which our concern is for the flock will be the measure in which we come out evangelically. There is one question I would raise, that is: how much are we really concerned about the flock? I think the Lord is reviving the spirit of care amongst us. I am amazed in going about to find the amount of interest there is, not only in other believers, but in the desire that all men should come to know Christ. I have thought, and I think rightly, that the light is evidencing itself. It is becoming very dark. Things outside are darker than they were; there is a positive desire to get rid of God. They got rid of Christ, and now they want to get rid of the One who sent Him. It was a very dark moment in @Luke 2 when the Lord came in.
{338}
Rem. It is encouraging to see that in the coming in of Christ the first result is "Glory to God in the highest".
Ques. What do you call the first move of glory Godward in regard to a soul?
E.J.McB. I think that is a point of immense interest. The first move of glory Godward in regard to a soul, is the admission of need. I do not know anything that is more delightful to heaven, and creates more joy than that recognition on the part of man.
Rem. When Saul of Tarsus began to pray it was taken account of in heaven.
E.J.McB. There is joy in heaven over one repenting sinner, because that one sinner is going to be a vessel of glory. There is a contributive element to the glory of God in one repenting sinner.
Ques. How does need contribute to the glory of God?
E.J.McB. Because it shows you that you cannot do without Him, and man was made for God's glory, and when he admits need he is admitting that.
Ques. Is that the first step towards recovery?
E.J.McB. Yes, and it is an evidence of His glory when man admits it.
Ques. Was not that a reason why the glory departed from Israel, because they did not recognise their need of Jehovah?
Rem. So that to secure what you are speaking about we have to be as a people in a sense of need?
E.J.McB. Yes, I think you will have to admit that many of our Bible readings, and meetings for ministry, fail in spiritual power because we regard ourselves as efficient,
{339}
and the Lord in His goodness says, 'Well, if you are efficient you will hardly need Me'.
Rem. With regard to the coming of the Lord in Luke, it seems that the glory was the one great end in view.
E.J.McB. The coming of Christ into this world was to secure glory to God.
Ques. How did Christ secure glory to God?
E.J.McB. The features of it are very easily seen. God had demonstrated in the garden how He could influence the scene, and how under that influence gold would come into evidence. One of the first things found where the river out of Eden flowed was gold. The river is the influence of the garden, and under God's precious provision the influence brought to light the fact that gold was there. Satan saw evidences of the gold in the man and the woman. Man was created in the image and likeness of God, and Satan tried to cover the gold, and to destroy the glory. But God came down to make known His intention to have the glory with greater effulgence than ever. He intimated to the serpent that the seed of the woman would crush his head - an announcement that involved Christ - and in Luke you have the Babe of that announcement.
Rem. There is a suggestion of suffering in connection with the intimation.
E.J.McB. That is what Peter secures. A person who does not suffer as a christian is not contributing an element of glory to the local company to which he belongs.
Rem. What was lost in Genesis is secured in Christ when He comes.
{340}
E.J.McB. Go a little farther. What was lost in Genesis is secured in Luke with additional glory. In the Genesis picture the glory was in the man and the woman, but in the restoration of it, it is to cover the earth as the waters cover the sea. I understand the glory covering the earth to be a proof that there will not be a spot that Satan can put his foot on. Now, before God secures that on the earth universally, He would secure it in you, and in me, so that there is not a single spot on which Satan can place his foot.
Rem. The name of the first river means overflowing.
E.J.McB. Yes, the earth is going to be covered with the glory of Christ. That makes Christ very great. If the coming of Christ is going to effect that, there is not going to be a spot where Satan can put his foot in the whole scene. There is no confusion with the coming in of Christ. Now you can see the value of every individual believer who has been captured by the gospel. You go to the believer and say, 'How long have you been converted?' and 'What are you looking forward to?' He would answer, 'I have been converted five years, and I wish to be so influenced by the glory that Satan cannot get a foothold anywhere on me'.
Ques. How are you going to secure that now?
E.J.McB. The shining of the glory results in movement towards Christ.
Ques. Why does the idea of fear come in? "They feared with great fear".
E.J.McB. When God begins to seek His own interests He produces a spirit of real exercise on our part, a
{341}
kind of holy exercise as to the gravity of the thing at stake. I think we want to be marked by the "fear of the Lord". It is the beginning of wisdom. We want to feel the gravity of divine things. Think of having a personal part in a vessel that is going to come out of heaven with the glory of God. We are not to be onlookers then; we shall have a personal part in it. When God makes a proposal that surprises you, He convinces you that He has the power to carry it into fruition. There would be nothing to strike terror in the Babe. It suggests the way God takes. He begins very small. The first impressions of Christ are very small, but they are capable of filling heaven and earth.
Ques. Do you suggest an analogy between the period mentioned in Luke, and the present moment? There had evidently been a long period of preparation for the coming of this One, and I suppose we are now passing through the period of preparation in view of His coming in in glory.
E.J.McB. Yes; before the first coming of Christ, God had raised up a king (@Ezra 7: 27), to beautify the house of the Lord. One feels that the house is being beautified today in view of His return, and that He is beautifying it in our eyes. We are learning to cherish more the truth of the house of God. One feature of the present day is that the saints love to be together. It is a spot down here where there is a home for the glory. You can understand the exercises of the apostle in the Colossian epistle to make Christ great in the eyes of the saints. @Colossians 1 is written to magnify Christ to those to whom he wrote. Christ is planted among them. To that company of saints at Colosse the apostle in speaking to them of the riches of the
{342}
glory of the mystery, adds which is "Christ in you the hope of glory" - an evidence of the coming glory. When you begin to take up the exercise of newly-justified souls, one finds that the feeling which has entered is that they are approved of God - that is what Jesus was - and they begin to weigh over the possibilities of being approved of God. To use a human illustration, suppose the king of this country took a sudden fancy to you, you would be approved. Then you would begin to weigh it over and say, 'How far can he go with me? He might adopt me into his family. That would be the extent of his approval. He could never make me a king'. Well, that is the "hope of glory". You begin then to consider the possibilities of what God can do with a person of whom He approves in connection with His own glory. As you begin to weigh this over, and it becomes great to you, by coming in contact with the people of God you begin to realise that you have a place in the midst of them. You have a place there, and you have a capacity, through the grace of God working with you, and your impressions of Christ add to the greatness of that company. Now that is the "hope of glory". I wish every believer knew that. I wish all believers, when they were converted, entered into the fact that they are assets to the christian company in the district in which they are - an element of Christ that the company needs. The working of the thing is this, that no believer who begins to delight in the "hope of glory", can remain isolated. He would find the suffering saints with the Spirit of glory resting on them, and he would identify himself with these people.
Ques. Do you think that the apostle had the assembly in view when speaking of the glory of God?
{343}
E.J.McB. Undoubtedly. Now the mystery is this: what Christ was personally on earth as the Vessel of glory, the body of Christ - His assembly - is to be during His absence.
Rem. The features of Christ are to come out now among us.
E.J.McB. The amazing thing is that they come out among gentiles. It was no new thing for the Jews to have the glory, but the marvellous thing now is that being amongst the gentiles, Christ was expressed by the gentiles. I can understand Peter's difficulty in the house of Cornelius, as the features of the glory came into evidence. Now he had to connect it with an entirely new vessel.
Rem. It is the assembly now to whom belongs the glory.
E.J.McB. "Assemblies, Christ's glory" (@2 Corinthians 8: 23), we read. That is said in connection with brethren who were deputed messengers, carrying ministrations from one company to another.
Rem. It is said, too, that the city has the glory of God. Where did she get it?
E.J.McB. Here. We become acquainted down here with Christ as the expression of God in His moral being; the assembly thus gets her impressions and takes them up with her. The point we want to reach is that there should be the glory *here* and *now*. I think you will agree with me that the great difficulty as to the present expression of glory, lies in our not entering into, in spiritual apprehension, the two epistles that deal with the transition of the soul from the gospel to the assembly - the epistles to the Colossians and the Hebrews. We meet evangelical
{344}
people who have never found their assembly position, and we find them deficient in glory. It shows how necessary it is to have a transfer from the platform of need, upon which Christ met them, to the ground on which purpose would set them.
Ques. How does that work out in Colossians?
E.J.McB. Colossians would free the Gentile mind from looking in any direction whatever for light, help, or upkeep, except to Christ. Now the Jew would be saved by the epistle to the Hebrews from looking back to the ancient archives, and would be brought to see the present position of the glorified Man. In the Colossian epistle we learn that we are "complete in him". We should obtain the support of glory. The preaching of the gospel takes a man out of the world, and out of the clutches of Satan, and he comes out free; now we want to see the Spirit of glory resting upon him. Well, for that he will have to suffer first as a christian, and take up the reproach of Christ, and accept the truth of the circumcision of Christ. The difficulty to get vessels for glory is the dislike we have of Gilgal.
Ques. Will you say a word on "Christ in you the hope of glory", whom we preach?
E.J.McB. The anointed Vessel, which exhibited all God's moral attributes had come to be resident in the company, and the apostle says that that is the only kind of preaching we have. We do not preach the glorification of man, but the ruin of man, but we *do* preach a Man in glory, "whom we preach". The end in view in the gospel is that a man is not only no longer in Adam, but he is in Christ.
{345}
Ques. Is that the idea of presenting every man "perfect in Christ"?
E.J.McB. Yes. I think we sometimes lack the shepherd care that marked the beginning, and when the soul is converted we rest, but we have to watch the flock by night.
Rem. I was interested to see that when Moses went up to mount Abarim, and was told that his day was done, he prayed to God for a man with a shepherd spirit to be set over the assembly.
E.J.McB. You do not want a warrior to lead you into privilege, but a sympathiser. You want a person who knows the entanglements of the outside system, and who will be with you while you are brought through them.
Rem. You were speaking of watching the flock all through the night. What did the shepherds do with the flock when they went to Bethlehem?
E.J.McB. They took it with them - not physically, of course; I mean that as having the true spirit, you are standing by them in heart, and you are watching interests that will be salvation to them. I sometimes say to a believer who has a great care in the local meeting, and the Lord raises up a ministry, 'If you were to go and hear the ministry, the flock would get the benefit of it'.
Rem. We ought to exhibit the features of the Colossian saints.
E.J.McB. What is one of them like? I want to see the features of a man that belongs to that sort of company. I come to Epaphras and say, 'You have many converts in Colosse'. 'Yes'. 'I suppose you are quite satisfied'. 'I will never be satisfied till they are all exactly like Christ'. 'Why?' 'Because when they are exactly like Christ, Satan
{346}
cannot get a foothold anywhere'. "That we may present every man perfect in Christ". Every bit of the land has been captured for Christ.
Ques. Is that the thought of the tabernacle boards being overlaid with pure gold?
E.J.McB. Yes.
Ques. What is the connection between the hope of glory, and the present glory you have spoken of?
E.J.McB. The land is in view, and Christ becomes very great, and you say, 'Wonderful day, and I shall be in it'. You begin to feel that amongst the saints there are instincts, and affections that belong to heaven. If you took the Supper you would be in it. I think that the idea of Joshua being magnified, is that the natural gives place to the spiritual. The spiritual becomes greater with you.
Rem. The hope is always there before us, I take it, till we actually reach glory.
Ques. Would you agree with the thought that every gathering should be expressive of "Christ in you the hope of glory"?
E.J.McB. There are special occasions on which you can enter into the elements of glory. Suppose you went to a Bible reading and the saints begin to speak together on the things of God, say, in @1 Thessalonians 1. You can understand that the more they talk together about Christ and His things, the nearer the glory becomes. But then there are special occasions in which you move into glory.
Ques. Is that the idea of "from glory to glory"?
E.J.McB. Yes, in connection with the ministry of the new covenant; and the effect of it is we all become like one another. God in that way comes out in expression in
{347}
the saints. The rays of glory are the most far-reaching rays in the world. If we could secure the glory, the rays would reach the whole vicinity. This was evident in Christ Himself. There was the moral effulgence of God shining out in that blessed Man. We want a local company like that. If there is, the report of it would be circulated and spread abroad. How precious, if before we are actually like the Lord, there should be on earth the moral expression of the glory! What a precious thing it would be in view of the return of Christ! What a triumph for God that before we are actually conformed to the image of His Son, there should be a company on earth now in moral conformity to Him! In suffering as a christian the Spirit of glory rests upon you. We are to have bodies of glory. God has secured now, morally, what is to be displayed publicly in the day to come. We have that in the Spirit. I have no doubt that a "body of glory" is requisite for a man who is influenced by glory. He has worn out the garment he has on, and he wants a better one. As the end is secured in the individual, and it is brought into the company, that company has added lustre to the precious interests of Christ locally.
Rem. Peter connects the suffering with the glory. The difficulty on our part is that we are not really prepared to accept the suffering.
E.J.McB. Yes; how did Christ enter into His glory? By suffering. I suppose there could not have been any glory apart from suffering. The peaceful, quiet confidence in God that marks the man who has been turned out by men - the Spirit of glory - has its own effect. You cannot express it, but you can feel it. The thought of our light affliction, which is but for a moment, working for us an
{348}
eternal weight of glory, supports us in suffering. We feel that God is being blasphemed outside; we want Him glorified inside. Then, too, the Spirit of God rests upon such an one. It becomes manifest that a man is sustained by more than human power - it is by divine power. It is not natural to take suffering easily. It is not natural to be converted. The moment man admits need it is an unnatural thing, it is an evidence of the spiritual power that is behind things. We want to be a people witnessing that there is a God, and that He is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. You can see that it is a great day to a locality when it becomes evident that the glory has come back again.
Rem. You could understand that the gospel would go out in great power. Is it that the man comes out like God?
E.J.McB. That is right. That is what God intended at the beginning. Man was made in the image and likeness of God. No matter what breakdown has come in, God has never lost really. Look how the Lord proposes to His ancient people! If they had lost everything, and if the finest feast which Jehovah had given them had failed to satisfy them, He says, "If any one thirst, let him come to me and drink ... out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water" (@John 7: 37, 38).
Rem. When it is a question of bringing in the glory in an outward way it will be very quickly accomplished.
E.J.McB. It will. "Suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host". It will not take long for God to bring in the glory to cover the whole scene.
{349}
Ques. Where is the suggestion of suffering in connection with the first scripture?
E.J.McB. In the Babe coming into this world. Almost everyone has some sort of a home, but He had not "where to lay his head". The saints were chosen before the foundation of the world, but they have not been brought into public manifestation yet. They await the day of "the Son of man coming ... with great power and glory" (@Mark 13: 26). What an eye-opener it will be for Satan when he sees them as they are really seen by God, when they come out and begin to reflect all God's glory. For He is going to be magnified in all them that believe.
Rem. In the book of the Revelation when the city comes out of heaven having the glory of God, the nations walk in the light of it.
E.J.McB. I think the first evidence of it was when the Ethiopian eunuch came up. The rays of the glory had reached Ethiopia, and he came up to find the centre of glory. He went to the "city of the great king", but he found the glory in the desert in becoming acquainted with Jesus. That is the mystery; He has set the glory down, right down in the midst of the Satanic citadel. It is not difficult to secure the glory in heaven, but God has secured His glory in the very city of the enemy. It is secured "where the throne of Satan is" (@Revelation 2: 13), in that there are people who are of Christ and are His object. The effect on the eunuch is beautiful. He went on his way rejoicing.
Rem. I suppose the gain of His first coming was available to all Israel. And although there may be very few in the light of the coming glory, and of what God is going
{350}
to bring into view, yet if we have an exercise to be found in that light, do you think the whole assembly will get the gain of it?
E.J.McB. If you get half a dozen saints in the world with the light of the glory in their souls, the whole assembly gets the benefit of it.
Ques. In what way?
E.J.McB. It is like the sun. Nothing is hid from the heat thereof, it is very far-reaching. Influence is one of the most interesting things in the Bible - the influences of night and the influences of day - two totally different influences. Light is in contrast to darkness, night is in contrast to day. None of the desert influences in your soul should produce any night seasons. The influence of the glory at the end of Luke was very wonderful. "Ought not the Christ to have suffered these things and to enter into his glory" (@Luke 24: 26)? People think that Christ entered into His glory when He went on high. His glory was morally present here.
From The Return of the Glory, pp. 5 - 24, Southport, January 1925
{351}
SECURING THE GLORY MORALLY NOW
E J McBRIDE
@Ezekiel 1: 1 - 4; @Haggai 2: 4 - 9; @Romans 16: 25 - 27; @Jude 20
I want to say a word or two, beloved, as to the way the Lord would encourage an individual believer who had exercises as to His interests, and who longed to secure the glory; how He would encourage such an one in a day like the present. I believe that the end of that encouragement would be that the Lord would revive in the vicinity and surroundings of that believer, something to evidence the fact that He was supporting him. I think I may say that the first important feature in the recovery of the glory with any one is the consciousness, in his or her soul, of its departure. "The glory is departed from Israel", one of old said (@1 Samuel 4: 22). I read the passage in Ezekiel for that reason. The prophet Ezekiel, as you know, is the great servant of the glory. He has a special service in regard of Israel, and I believe a special service in regard of the assembly, and that service is to secure the return of the glory.
The exercises in Isaiah are to secure the evangelical spirit of Jehovah in Israel. In other words, to break down the contracted, selfish, national spirit that marked them, about which there was no glory, and to put in its place an enlarged spirit of liberty and affection that would go out to every one. Now in order to work that out, the main objective of the prophet's ministry is to bring the people,
{352}
by a series of very interesting exercises, to contemplate Christ as a Substitute - perhaps the most difficult thing to get any one to contemplate. Believers can contemplate Christ in almost every light rather than that light. I have no doubt that the series of woes which Isaiah brings forward, are to get souls into the consciousness of what the prophet started with in his ministry, that is what he said in the presence of the glory, "Woe unto me! for I am undone; for I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips" (@Isaiah 6: 5). The series of woes I believe to be the way God will bring His ancient people to that utterance. When they come to that, they will want a substitute; they will look round for a living Man, a Person of whom of old it could be said, "He shall grow up before him as a tender sapling, and as a root out of dry ground" (@Isaiah 53: 2). They will look round for Christ, and I would feel inclined to say that I believe the gospel has had its proper effect on any believer when he has looked round for Christ. The first effect of the light of God entering a soul is to look round for relief. The pressure of guilt, the burden of guilt, makes a man look round for relief, but when he gets relief he looks round for Christ, and when he does so he finds Him, for the desire of all nations has come. That is the object of Isaiah.
Jeremiah, as I understand it, takes hold of you at that moment, and would substitute the Spirit of Christ for your spirit. He finds you have looked round for Christ, and have compared Christ with yourself, and that in the comparison you have realised what you are. You can understand that. I am sorry for the person who compares himself with Christ, and does not feel ashamed of himself, but Jeremiah comes
{353}
on the scene, and he records the fact that when God first spoke to you He produced in you a feature of Christ, and He has never forgotten it. You may have forgotten it, but He reminds you of it. He says, "I remember for thee ... when thou wentest after me in the wilderness, in a land not sown" (@Jeremiah 2: 2). "Thou wentest after me". What a moment that was for God's heart! And so He works in you till you renounce the spirit of Adam and you adopt the Spirit of Christ.
Now Ezekiel comes along at this stage to take account of you as a believer marked by the Spirit of Christ. What is going to be the end of the Spirit of Christ, beloved? "Whom he has justified, these also he has glorified" (@Romans 8: 30). When the Spirit of Christ has full sway with a man, there will not be a feature about that man that is not entirely in accord with all the blessedness of God. Ezekiel comes along to secure that. But he has to bring into evidence, not the guilt of a man, that is what Isaiah deals with; nor the state of a man, which Jeremiah deals with; but what a man has produced by his activity in having lent a hand to building up, under Satan, a vast system of things that has not a feature of Christ about it. That is why the glory had departed (see @Ezekiel 10).
People sometimes say, speaking of their own meeting, 'I don't know why it is that we do not get any refreshment or any light'. Have you built up a place for one brother, for one special person, more than another? If you have, you have repelled the glory, and so the prophet shows you the spot he was in when he took account of things and saw the glory depart. "I was among the captives by the river Chebar". That is the spot where he was when he took
{354}
account of what I should call the ruin of christendom, or, to use the language of the apostle Paul, "the great house". Let me say that if you want to be in accord with the mind of God, and to be helpful as regards the conditions for the restoration of the glory, you have first to take account of the "great house". In other words, you have to see to it that you do not attempt, in anywise whatever, to restore christendom. Ezekiel was by the river, with the captives, and I ask, 'What did you find?' 'Nothing but captivity all around me'. He stood by the river with the captives, not a very happy picture, but, beloved friends, he found the heavens were opened to him, and not only so, but he saw "visions of God", and this book is essentially a book of visions.
What are the visions of God? If God had His way with you, what He would show you is Christ. People build up what they call good meetings, and are very anxious to supply, it may be, plenty of ministry, plenty of gospel preaching, plenty of activity; but I say, where is the glory? I do not suppose there ever was, or ever will be, a meeting with an outward constitution that could touch Corinth, but where was the glory? Retired! Oh, how very solemn; and yet, as we know, the apostle writes with great confidence to that company, and he wrote to secure the glory. When he gets them properly awakened, as Ezekiel would seek to get you awakened to the visions of God, then you get a sight of Christ, and you form your conclusions from that sight. God would thus give you a vision. Let me speak for a moment of Calvary. I daresay you have been to Calvary. Have you seen Calvary as a vision of God? Have you ever seen it in that light? What the whole earth was like to God
{355}
at the moment when Jesus was crucified. That was a vision of God. Now, beloved, let me say this: the whole moral glory of the universe was in that crucified Man. What was the world or its glory, or the Roman Empire worth in the eye of God? Nothing. What was glorious in the sight of God? One crucified Man. Never was love expressed like it; never were the moral features of God brought out in such a way. It became demonstrated to the whole universe at that moment that "God is love". If we were to contemplate the great movements of the Vessel of glory, that is Christ Himself, in the light of the visions of God, we should very soon be in touch with the glory.
Ezekiel goes on to say, "And I looked, and behold, a stormy wind came out of the north, a great cloud, and a fire infolding itself, and a brightness was about it, and out of the midst thereof as the look of glowing brass, out of the midst of the fire". That is the prophet's description of the glory. It is very touching. He describes it as of glowing brass, coming out of the midst of a fire, that is, as I understand it, a peculiar brilliancy which has shone, and radiated, through everything that is suggestive of the scrutiny and judgment of God. I would say, beloved, that is what you will look like when you have come out of the trial of your faith. It is much more precious than gold. You will come out like glowing brass, as it comes out of the midst of a fire, the peculiar shining which is the product of the exercises that God has brought you through.
The point I would like to establish with each believer, is to take your place in the captivity. There are many devoted believers who are endeavouring to restore the church - that is, trying to improve the state of things. Their
{356}
exercises are good, their desires and labours are good, but all are to no end. God is not going to re-establish the church publicly. It will remain in captivity outwardly until Christ comes back again. But you may get visions of the light from the opened heavens, and you may get a divine impression that you can scarcely put into words, for who can put into words what glowing brass is like when it has come from the fire?
Now the prophet Haggai comes in to help. We read there, "But now be strong, Zerubbabel, saith Jehovah; and be strong, Joshua son of Jehozadak, the high priest; and be strong, all ye people of the land, saith Jehovah, and work". I would like to emphasise this point to every brother and sister. I would not speak unkindly, but I would speak personally: it is a matter of very great distress to many saints, myself among them, that coming into a locality, you may see fifty people together who outwardly are in assembly setting. They attend the prayer meetings and the Bible readings, and possibly occasions of special ministry, and come to the Supper. But when you come to look at them and take account of them, you find that everything is carried on by about six; and you stay a week in the place, and you ask - what are the forty-four doing? Nothing. Forty-four are doing nothing, did you say? The forty-four are not important people. Well, I will read the passage over again, and see if I have made a mistake. "But now be strong, Zerubbabel". That is the specially supplied ministry for the moment. Then I find Joshua the son of the high priest. That is the answer to the special ministry in your own local gathering. He is working, that is all right. What about the common people? "And be strong, *all* ye
{357}
people of the land, saith Jehovah, and work". Yes, *all ye people*. What does the Lord say to them? "Work". What do you mean? I will tell you what I mean, beloved: if you have been committed, and I trust you have, to the precious interests of the glory, they call for all your time. Now how much time does a man have? The amount of leisure he has apart from what occupies him in earning his righteous living here. These interests of Christ here call for all your time. You have to work. These last days require all the time you have; every spare minute is required for the service of the glory. If you get home from business at, say, seven o'clock, then you start work at seven o'clock. By that I mean that you have left your legitimate calling: your mind, and interests, and affections turn at once to the precious interests of the glory and you begin duty. You may not go out of the house that night. You can sit, it may be, with your wife and your children, but you are thinking of the interests of Christ, and you are supporting them by the way you carry on your work.
Then the Lord says, "The word that I covenanted with you when ye came out of Egypt, and my Spirit, remain among you". I find, speaking practically, that the scriptural record of people who supported the glory, is that they "continued daily in the temple". I think our meetings suffer from people coming to them in a slothful state. I say to a sister, 'What work have you been doing?' 'Oh, I am of no importance. I thought the meeting was carried on by the brothers who are gifted'. Meetings that are led by the Spirit, are the fruit of workmanship - the workings of the Spirit of God in every brother and every sister. Why, if a sister can do nothing more, she can bring the spirit of
{358}
Christ into the meeting, and so the Lord points out that if this feature is found, He will secure a return of glory. He says, "I will shake the heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and the dry land; and I will shake all nations, and the desire of all nations shall come; and I will fill this house with glory". I believe I can say this without hesitation, that if these features are revived, we shall all become an actual part of the working interests of Christ in the place in which we live. The Lord will remove the hindrances. It would not be very difficult for God to shake a king from his throne. It is a pleasure to God to remove the things that interfere with Christ's coming. I am not speaking of His public coming, that will be by-and-by, but of Christ coming into manifestation among His people, as the apostle says, "Christ in you the hope of glory" (@Colossians 1: 27).
Haggai then describes it very beautifully. "The latter glory of this house shall be greater than the former". What was the former glory of the house? 'Oh', you say, 'the impression I got when I was first converted'. It must have been very fine. What is it like today? It surpasses everything ever heard. The radiancy of Christ in His place eclipses all else. That is what Haggai would secure, and it calls for all your time, energy, and work; you want to be committed to it, body, soul, and spirit.
I shall say a word now on the working out of this practically. You may say, 'It is all very well to talk like that, but you know we are ordinary common mortals'. Let me say a word on the epistle to the Romans, and the vision of God in that epistle. I have chosen that epistle, and that of Jude, as the New Testament scriptures I want to allude to in connection with the subject before me. In Romans we
{359}
have the gospel in its radiancy, in Jude we have the ruin at its worst, and so in the two letters we get the features of the glory in a very remarkable way.
What is the special vision of God in Romans? Suppose I were to ask a young believer to read the epistle through carefully, and to feel, like Ezekiel sitting down amongst the captives by the river Chebar. Let it be the case of one only recently converted, not knowing there was any meeting in that city, but he meets a fellow believer, recently converted too, and they sit down by the river, so to speak. The things of God are precious to them, and they say, 'We do not know what to do, we shall have to wait till we get to heaven, there is no hope here. Perhaps we had better pray'. Well, immediately they begin to pray they find heaven is open. Heaven is intensely interested, and it is wide open to all their exercises, and they have not been praying very long before they get one of the visions of God. Then they read the epistle to the Romans (that is the first epistle that any young believer would read to know what to do, and how to do it). And they come to chapter 3: 24, 25, and read "Christ Jesus; whom God has set forth a mercy-seat, through faith in his blood". 'Ah', they say, 'We can get some communications there as to where and how we ought to go', and it is like the glowing brass, out of the midst of the fire. They could not explain it, but it becomes very attractive, and the nearer they get to it the more attractive it is. They say, 'We are not the only two christians in this place, we can see. What do you think? How are we going to find the others?' I will read the verse for you. "Now to him that is able to establish you, according to my glad tidings and the preaching of
{360}
Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the mystery, as to which silence has been kept in the times of the ages, but which has now been made manifest, and by prophetic scriptures, according to commandment of the eternal God, made known for the obedience of faith to all the nations". That is where we are going to find them. Very fine, beloved! Here is the revelation of the mystery. In the visions of God we receive divine communications, and we begin to realise that there is something here that is not yet in public manifestation. They begin to look for it, and I would say this to all believers, whoever they are, or whatever community they belong to, as men speak; if you begin to look for the mystery you will very soon find it.
When you begin to look for it the first thing you want to learn is how it came into existence. As you learn to contemplate Christ, you will become so intensely interested in Him that you will be absorbed. I know of one who once wanted to find the mystery. He knew nothing about it, beyond the fact that he had an instinctive feeling that there was this glowing brass somewhere. So to find it he began to be occupied with Christ, and he found that Christ was a Man in glory; that "the desire of all nations" was a Man in glory. He became so engaged with Christ, that one day, walking along the street thinking about Him, he said aloud to himself, 'A Man in glory', and 'a part of the mystery'. A sister who was walking along the same road and heard him, said, 'Do you know the Man in the glory?' And he said, 'No, I do not, I am feeling after Him, but I have seen the shining of it'. She said, 'I can tell you about that; it was the preaching of Jesus Christ that brought it to me'. He invited her to tea, and she sat down
{361}
at his house and unfolded Christ to him as the fulness of God, and then she went on to tell him of half a dozen believers who met together in one room, and he said, 'I would like to try that'. He went to try, and he has never tried anything else since. He found the 'hope of glory' there. He found Christ amongst His people.
What is the object of the preaching? It is to lay hold of souls, and to bring them out of the kingdom of darkness, into the kingdom of the Son of God's love, and to put them down amongst other believers, so that there may be a sphere in which Christ can have His present portion. That is the epistle to the Romans, and as the apostle puts it very beautifully, to "the only wise God, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever". If God can do that with one man, He can do it with a million. I can understand the apostle feeling that the only exercise he had was to find Christ.
I want to press in regard of this epistle the importance of looking at chapter 3 as the vision of God. So many people read it doctrinally, and I have seen brothers sit down and discuss it with an ingenuity and ability, that almost make my brain whirl, and when they have finished I do not know who is right, or who is wrong. Perhaps they both have some truth. Then someone else comes along who has much less natural ability, it may be, and he says, 'That is a vision of God'. 'I do not understand what you mean'. 'It is the outshining of the absolute delight that it is to the heart of God to say what He wants to say, and which He never could say until Christ died'. He never was free to open His heart till Christ died, but when @Romans 3 becomes the vision of God to your soul you are not
{362}
surprised when you read chapter 8, and see that nothing is able to separate us from the love of God.
We are in the last days of the history of man, as well as of the assembly, and things are worse than they have ever been. Men are actually blaspheming God. That is why I read those verses in Jude. In that epistle we have the most solemn picture in the Bible of the awful depravity to which things would sink. "These are they who set themselves apart, natural men, not having the Spirit" (verse 19). I do not know anything more serious, than what is called in this world the 'Russellites' - those who are justly described as setting themselves apart, natural men, not having the Spirit. They have utterances about the whole world being saved, but when you come to examine the utterances there is no mark of the Spirit about them. There is no vision of God there; and yet they are so subtle, so dangerous. Then the apostle turns round and makes this beautiful remark, "But *ye*, beloved, building yourselves up on your most holy faith". This is where you want to work. There is much building to be done. You do not want to put the building off to the Monday night prayer meeting, or the Wednesday night Bible reading; you want to work always.
You are going into a shop to buy a pound of tea, and in the doorway of the shop you meet a brother. Now that is an occasion to work. You have not five minutes to spare and you say to the brother, 'Are you keeping bright today, dear brother?' 'Yes, thank God'. What is that? Work. You are building yourselves up on your most holy faith. The thing that is uppermost in the heart comes out. So Jude says, in days like these, you want to be building one another up, fortifying, strengthening the elements of the
{363}
glory in the souls of the saints, and keeping yourselves in the love of God. And in the deep and holy, and blessed sense, that if God has secured you in His love He will hold you in His love forever. You do not look at circumstances, or at trouble in the meeting, you keep yourself in the love of God, and then if you come to trouble it is very beautiful how the servant puts it, "Awaiting the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life" (verse 21). Let me say this: every trouble in your body, in your history, in your meeting, is an element intended to conduce to eternal life. I have not the slightest hesitation in saying that the exercises of the meeting, the exercises of the business, are to teach us that we have a life and interest in that day - that the things here die. It is a very great mercy when anything disentangles us from things here, and makes that kind of life more real to us.
Jude then goes on to speak of our exercises in the work; some have to be saved with fear, snatching them out of the fire, and we are to hate even the garment spotted by the flesh. These are the activities of work. Then he comes to that beautiful passage, "But to him that is able to keep you without stumbling, and to set you with exultation blameless before his glory" (verse 24). What is it that gives God exceeding joy in presenting the believer blameless before His glory? Weigh that over quietly. Shall I tell you what I believe it is? That the person whom He presents in the presence of that glory is in accord with the glory he is presented in the presence of. That is God's glory. 'I have worked in you to produce moral likeness to Christ, and I am going to present you blameless before My glory, and what delights Me is the similarity'. I think that is a triumph
{364}
for God. You were once a child of Adam, once a cause of joy in the heavens, because you were converted, and now God has completed His work in you. He is going to present you blameless before His glory with exultation. We know that we shall be like Him, when He appears. The way God works to separate His people from the subtleties of the Babylonish system with all its hideous features, and anti-Christian wickedness, is by the features of Christ beginning to rise up in their holy beauty and blessedness. As these are seen in His people they become an intense delight to the heart of God, and He will present them blameless before His glory with exultation. Oh, beloved, if God has proposed that the Sanctifier and the sanctified shall be all of one, He is working that purpose out. He can take up any brother, and any sister; they may not have any particular gift, but God can take them up and He will present them before His glory. And the whole universe will look on and say, 'Yes, there is no disparity, there is likeness to Christ in that person. They are all like Him'. 'Like Jesus! Grace supreme!' (`72:4).
Jude concludes with that touching expression, "To the only God our Saviour". I like that, "To the only God our Saviour". Do not forget it, beloved. We may have been breaking bread for fifty years, and have been blessed to a great many, but do not connect glory with that, connect work with that, and when you have worked you will get your pay. The issues of glory are that in your work, and in your service, you have learned a little of the only wise God, your Saviour. If it had not been for God, you would not have come through. If you stand up in public, you will have many attacks made upon you, but you can say "the
{365}
only God our Saviour". The service of God calls for all we have, and all we are. To Him "be glory, majesty, might, and authority, from before the whole age, and now, and to all the ages. Amen".
From The Return of the Glory, pp. 25 - 40, Southport, January 1925
{366}
{367}
THE TESTIMONY OF GLORY
E J McBRIDE
@Psalm 19: 1 - 6; @2 Corinthians 3: 16 - 18; @Revelation 21: 9 - 14
E.J.McB. I think it must be evident that the present christian testimony in its highest character is connected with the thought of glory. There is proof of this in the testimony of Stephen; in the conversion of Saul of Tarsus; and in the epistle to the Ephesians. The testimony of Stephen was the transition from the proffered mercy to the Jew, which was rejected - the last overture of God to His ancient people - to God taking up His original thought of glory, changing from the national thought of it, to the family thought. The glory of God is that He is Father. That is His glory, and I thought the conversion of Saul by the glory, evidenced the fact that the vessels that are to have part in this testimony, have to be formed from the spot to which they belong. That is the conversion of Saul. The epistle to the Ephesians shows you that the thought is not to have a Jew or a Gentile in blessing, but a company formed of Jew and Gentile made one, praying together by the Spirit, and capable really of holding glory. There is glory to God in the assembly.
Rem. There is a glory connected with Israel. In @Romans 9: 4 we read, "Whose is ... the glory".
E.J.McB. Yes, and there is a glory connected with manhood - natural glory. I take it Israel's glory will be that they will be the head of the nations. What is so
{368}
distinctive about God, is that He has the feelings and affections of a Father. That is His glory. In all His creatorial and His administrative actions, He has the thoughts and feelings of a Father, and that was revealed when the Son was here; that glory then came to light.
Rem. "A glory as of an only-begotten with a father" (@John 1: 14). That would be the very highest point?
E.J.McB. That is right, the very highest point. It is the radiancy of that which is to fill everything, and from which every family will take character. If we knew better the generation to which we belong, we should be a dignified people. We try and get the young people out of the world by representing what the evil of the world is, and they say, 'I do not believe it, I will go and try'. If you get them out of the world by glorifying God in their eyes, they would say, 'I will not have anything to do with it, I will not touch it, I belong to a much more glorious system'. I merely remark that, to secure the fact that the glory is a great assembly feature at the present moment. I read @Psalm 19 because it brings before us a spot where God's glory has not been outraged. I think the reason why we want to take account of that is this, that we have to look at the glory, and we have to look at the assembly as having come from heaven. It did not spring up in the earth. There is a day coming when the glory will cover the earth, but the whole assembly testimony has come down from heaven - from the place where God has secured His glory, and where it has not been tarnished. Everything that He had committed to man had been in measure outraged, but He has secured His glory in the heavens. It is from there that Christ came. One feels the danger of making christianity a part of
{369}
something here, instead of a holy, exotic plant, that belongs to another sphere, and that cannot live by anything that is here. It is entirely dependent for its existence, and for its development, on what comes from heaven.
Rem. That is very beautiful, because we see that in Christ: He lived on account of the Father.
E.J.McB. Yes, "All my springs are in thee" (@Psalm 87: 7). He was as a root out of dry ground. The ground yielded nothing to Christ.
Rem. All His joys were derived from heaven.
E.J.McB. Yes. You may ask the question, Why did God lay the Israelite aside, and frame a vessel entirely from heaven? The greatest of men whom God raised up - remarkable men - failed Him, so He brings in His own Man out of heaven.
Ques. I suppose that everything now has to be patterned after that Man?
E.J.McB. Yes. The church lost glory when she received support from the earth. The church at the beginning, in its pristine beauty, stood as a vessel wholly and entirely dependent on supplies from heaven. But when they introduced what was worldly, and of man - intellect, ritualism, and ordinances - they began to mar the features of the glory. That was the great danger at Colosse, and had evidently been developed at Corinth. The apostle feared the danger of introducing an element of earthly glory into a vessel that is going to display Christ in such wise that it expresses the glory of God. I have no doubt that in the public history of the church the glory of Christ has become lost to view. In Thyatira there is room for a woman in publicity, which means that the glory of the man has waned.
{370}
Ques. When you spoke about the conversion of Saul, had you in mind this vessel being formed from the glory?
E.J.McB. Yes, and it is not difficult for any believer, who reads his Bible to discern that we get an entirely new note introduced in the assembly's constitution with Paul's ministry - a note that the early apostles found some difficulty in picking up in their music.
Ques. What is the new note you speak of?
E.J.McB. The heavenly note. You can understand Peter's difficulty as to the sheet let down. It was let down from heaven, it was taken up to heaven, its only contact with earth was for the conversion of Peter. It had done its work when Peter was converted. It had no interests here, it belonged entirely and exclusively to heaven.
Ques. When you say Peter was converted, you mean to the truth of the Gentile being admitted?
E.J.McB. Yes; you can see the necessity for Peter's conversion, because he had the keys; and if you do not convert the doorkeeper you will have no one in heaven.
Ques. Is the gospel, then, the gospel of the glory of the blessed God?
E.J.McB. Yes, the outshining of the radiancy of God.
Ques. In connection with the glory and what is heavenly, do we not get that in John's gospel? There were those of whom the Lord could say, "And the glory which thou hast given me I have given them" (@John 17: 22).
E.J.McB. That touches a very important point - the necessity for John's ministry. The tendency would be to ritualise Paul, but John comes in to show that we can only
{371}
understand Paul in the light of his ministry - that is, in the light of that which is vital. Paul was brought in to complete the word of God. The tendency with the complete word of God was to ritualise it. John's testimony was that the Word *was* God. His ministry is vital, the effect of it is seen in living people, it cannot be put into the hands of the clergy. To ritualise it would spoil it. Now the heavens have been opened, and the radiancy of that spot has come to this scene in a Person - the Son, our Lord Jesus Christ. That is why Christ is so attractive to the saints.
Ques. "We have contemplated his glory" (@John 1: 14) - was that not special to the apostles?
E.J.McB. Well, I suppose it was. They had a unique position in relation to Christ. But then they have described the position and shown us the way into it, so that it does not remain unique any more. "That which we have seen and heard we report to you, that *ye* also may have fellowship with us" (@1 John 1: 3). John's gospel is "I am the way".
Rem. I can understand your remark in regard of what comes from heaven, from the glory, that there is nothing here that will add to it, and it must go back there.
E.J.McB. That is right. People ask sometimes, 'Why all this history of sorrow, why all these trials and tribulations?' The reason for them is that the vessel is being formed to hold the glory, not only to be in it, but to hold it: "having the glory of God". The vessel will be all divine handiwork, so there is most exclusive workmanship in the framing of it.
{372}
Ques. Do you connect the framing of it with the discipline of the way?
E.J.McB. Yes; all the history of your life here with all its vicissitudes, its exercises, its joys and its sorrows, is being used of God to form each one who shall stand as part - a component part - of that stupendous structure that will be adequate to have the glory of God.
Ques. Is that the thought of transformation?
E.J.McB. Yes, and not only transformation, but transparency; it is clear as crystal. There was no doubt whatever that nothing about the Person of Christ hid the radiancy of God that was there. The point God is working for with the saints, is that they shall be changed into the same glory. The veil is done away. Why? Because we have transparency. The necessity of a veil is that things are not quite transparent, but when that which abides and subsists in glory comes in, the veil is removed. The apostle says "having therefore such hope, we use much boldness" (@2 Corinthians 3: 12). All the features of it are absolutely suitable to the place to which it belongs. I have no doubt the ministry of Christ in Luke made the company that was associated with Him as transparent as Himself.
Rem. This makes the assembly very great, because if Christ was here and He was transparent, and there was nothing to hide the shining out of the glory, the assembly should be here with the same features.
E.J.McB. Yes, and all God's operations now have in view the assembly being formed for *Him*, not for men.
Ques. Must there not be training by the way, as the moulder with his hammer would straighten things out?
{373}
E.J.McB. Yes; John helps you there. He says, "What we shall be has not yet been manifested" (@1 John 3: 2). It has not yet been manifested, but it is in process. There are two kinds of processes; one the moulding in the hands of the artificer, the other the crucible under the hand of God, and I have no doubt we mould one another. You may get many knocks, but God takes care of the crucible Himself. If He puts it into the fire, He watches it. He *sits* as a refiner. He never lets the furnace exceed your powers of endurance. He knows the amount of pressure under which you can pass. "God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above what ye are able to bear" (@1 Corinthians 10: 13). The trial of your faith is much more precious than of gold which perishes, though it be tried with fire. Having secured the situation and having suggested the bridal aspect of it, as in @Psalm 19, it is like the bridegroom coming out, going forth from his chamber, and you say, 'What are you looking for?' 'I am looking for the bride'. 'Have you not come out a little prematurely?' Suppose the Lord comes out, would you say He had come out a little prematurely?
Rem. It says, too, "he rejoiceth as a strong man to run the race". He must have something in view if He rejoiceth.
E.J.McB. I think the Spirit secures bridal affections now, so that He is not disappointed. I like the thought of Christ coming out, because if He comes to His people He will find the affections there that will be fully developed in the glory. What a choice thing it is to Christ to come and find affections here that are heavenly in character, and origin, and in all their longings formed by the Spirit. Peter
{374}
speaks of loving one another out of a pure heart fervently. How intensely precious to Christ! 'Oh', you say, 'I am not of much account'. But I say, you can love the brethren with a pure heart fervently. That is one of the choicest features that can be produced on earth.
In the epistle to the Corinthians you have the local company, and the exercise of the apostle is that the local company should be in order. You might say to Paul, 'What do you want Corinth in order for? You raise certain questions with them, what is in your mind?' 'Well', he says, 'I will tell you. If I could only get the local company in order, I should begin telling them about the glory'. So in the second epistle, having helped them into divine order by his first epistle, the apostle lets his heart out, and the interesting feature is that in doing so, he actually takes a man into the glory. That is the way he conducts a man there, and the man says, 'I do not know whether I have a body or not'. Now, when he gets the saints at Corinth to recognise the difference between the celestial and the terrestrial, he has got them in order. The saints had risen to his thought, that there is a heavenly vessel. They were accustomed to earthly vessels. Every man is accustomed to look forward to a time when there will be earthly glory. Now the apostle got the Corinthian brethren to recognise that there is heavenly glory; "different is the glory of the heavenly, different that of the earthly" (@1 Corinthians 15: 40). He has things in their proper order now, and having secured that he begins to let his heart out. He introduces the Lord of glory. They had been polluting all the features of the glory. They had magnified Adam to such an extent that they had beclouded Christ. Where there are men of ability
{375}
there is often the beclouding of the precious features of Christ. A simple sister or brother, who is of very little importance in the world, may be very great in spiritual affections, like Mary "the house was filled with the odour of the ointment" (@John 12: 3). I sometimes wonder whether we have room for these boxes of ointment in our meetings.
Ques. Will you explain what you meant, when you said in the first epistle the apostle was setting things in order so that he might present the glory?
E.J.McB. What I think is that, under that line of ministry, he liberates a soul to such an extent that the soul is prepared to follow the whole line. He could not stop short, and I think sometimes you feel, when under a ministry of Christ, as if you had arrived there. That is the point in 2 Corinthians, but note this: if you are there, you will feel very small down here. I do not think I ever felt so distressed with my pathway, as the moment when I first had a sight of the glory.
Rem. Then we should be like Stephen. We should want to go there now.
E.J.McB. When God opens heaven and the blessedness of it lays hold of you, you say, 'Well, how long have I to wait?' The Lord would propose, under the ministry of the covenant, that He would commence conditions by which you can make that practical. That is what I call covenant conditions. He would establish conditions by which you can take that journey; He would assure you of liberation here. That is @2 Corinthians 4. Liberation here is that, instead of the body being the controlling vessel, something within it becomes the controlling power; "always bearing about in the body the
{376}
dying of Jesus" (@2 Corinthians 4: 10). He gives you also a constitution which belongs to where you belong. That is your new constitution.
Rem. Do you suggest, then, that it is the glory really which liberates?
E.J.McB. Yes, I do. There is no doubt whatever that if we were under the shining of the covenant, being held by the Lord of glory, we should be changed.
Rem. Then in chapter 4 it says, "We have this treasure in earthen vessels".
E.J.McB. Now a man is liberated from what is here because he looks at his body as the earthen vessel that holds the deposit. Your impressions of Christ are infinitely greater than the vessel in which they are. I would be sorry for any preacher who did not feel, when he got up to preach, that he, as a vessel, could not express the impressions he has.
Rem. They are too great.
E.J.McB. Yes, they would be.
Rem. The thought is very beautiful that God is forming a vessel that is great enough to express Christ. He is forming the holy city which, when it comes out of heaven, will be great enough to express Christ, and when the display comes, it will have the glory of God.
E.J.McB. That will be the end of all God's ways with us. Saints will write their hallelujah psalms in the ways of God with them, and everything that hath breath will praise the Lord. It is not once a week, but everything that hath breath will praise Him. All their breath goes to praise the Lord. That is the end of the psalm history. God brings the saints into unity, and into affection so that they
{377}
are together really, not merely because they are in the same room. The danger with people is they reckon they are together because they have met in the room, but the brethren ought to be always together.
Ques. Do you mean in the way of being together in affection?
E.J.McB. Yes, quite so. The fact of brethren being together because they are in the room is merely an ecclesiastical church position that is public. The brethren are together because they love one another. Being together is only a manifestation of the affections that will not be apart from one another.
Rem. As the Scripture says, "*We* all, looking on the glory of the Lord". We should begin to move in this connection if we were all looking on the glory of the Lord.
E.J.McB. Now do you not think we should be right in saying that the supreme point of glory that God has secured in the Administrator is this, that He can frame a vessel to hold the glory. Now Pharaoh gave Joseph supreme authority to administer in Egypt, according to his wisdom, and to put every man just in the place he wanted him in. God gave His Son supreme authority to frame a vessel to hold the glory, and that could express God's feelings in a family way.
Ques. Is chapter 3 the process in view of that? Is it progressive "from glory to glory"?
E.J.McB. We become more like one another - that is, those formed according to the same image - so that it will become apparent to the world when the assembly goes up. 'Why, they might all be brothers, they are so like one another'. As a matter of fact, they are all brothers.
{378}
Rem. That is interesting - to be like one another, and in many respects so unalike. You referred to Joseph, who had the power to put every one in the place in which he wanted him. I suppose the same thing is true with us. The Lord can put each one in his place, and each one would have the same object - the glory of the Lord would be the end in view.
E.J.McB. Yes. John's first impression when he was called into heaven was radiancy (@Revelation 4: 1 - 3). That is the first impression. There are a great many other things he saw when he had been there a little time, but the first impression he had was of radiancy; "and he that was sitting like in appearance to a stone of jasper and a sardius" (@Revelation 4: 3).
Rem. Speaking of the precious stones again, there should be with us ability to recognise these things. We shall see them readily enough in the glory, but we may see them now.
Rem. In chapter 3 it is, "transformed according to the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Lord the Spirit". Why is that?
E.J.McB. As I understand it, it is not that He told you to do it, not because you ought to do it, but you get imbued with the spirit of the Transformer. That is, if you had every believer on earth absolutely subject to the authority of Christ as Lord, you would have them all in one place and all like one another. The point secured in this second epistle is a very choice one. "Come out from the midst of them, and be separated ... and I will be to you for a Father, and ye shall be to me for sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty" (@2 Corinthians 6: 17, 18). Sons and daughters describes the family *here*, not our heavenly
{379}
relationship. Referring to the Psalm again, we read as to the sun, "there is nothing hid from the heat thereof". Sometimes people talk about not being evangelical. They think one can be evangelical by visiting the houses of people who do not know Christ, but if we were to secure proper assembly conditions on the heavenly line, I am sure the heat of the sun would be felt. That is testimony. We have made a great mistake. We have taken to life-boat building, when we should have had a light-house. People have made the need the object, rather than the light that is to remove it. I am not saying need is not going to be an object, but you secure your objective by securing the light that will remove the need. Why, look at the light! I am not afraid of making for that harbour. Look at the light.
Rem. "The shining forth of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ" (@2 Corinthians 4: 6).
E.J.McB. "We have this treasure in earthen vessels".
Rem. The vessel was broken when they stoned Stephen, but the glory shone out then.
E.J.McB. The actual language of the heavenly man came out there. "Lord, lay not this sin to their charge". What a moment for God! I think of God looking down on that dying man and saying, 'That is like Jesus over again!' It is very choice.
Ques. What is seen in Stephen is beautiful. How could that be produced in us?
E.J.McB. It is a very real thing. In @2 Corinthians 4: 10, we read, "Always bearing about in the body the dying of Jesus". The world had its way with Him. Men would get rid of Him if they could, and they did. You would leave
{380}
them if you could, but "Lord, lay not this sin to their charge".
Rem. Then the life of Jesus is manifested in our body?
E.J.McB. It is remarkable. It does not say bearing about in the body the death of Jesus, but the "dying".
Ques. What is the difference?
E.J.McB. The death was one act; the dying of Jesus is from @John 11 to 19. Those peculiar utterances, those peculiar affections, that would introduce the light of an entirely different scene into this scene, that is the dying of Jesus.
Rem. Paul wished for the conversion of Agrippa and those who were with him.
E.J.McB. He did, indeed, and I have never met a christian yet who was badly treated by a man, who would not have done all he could for the man's soul's interests. That is the kind of spirit a christian has. A man comes and tries to destroy your trade. You ask him to a gospel meeting.
Ques. That is how the jailor was converted, was it not?
E.J.McB. That is a choice sample. Now in Revelation you get the city coming out of heaven, and one of the angels who had the seven last plagues, having come to show it to John. The idea of the seals, and the end of all the plague system is brought before the mind, for when God brings the issues of Calvary to bear on the scene, there will be no more plagues. God put the judgment on that Man that we might escape. If you refuse to escape, and He lets the judgment out, it will be the end of all
{381}
plagues. There will be no more escape. The angel would just give you a sight of what has been framed, while these things have been going on. What am I going to show you? The bride, the Lamb's wife - what the Bridegroom came out of heaven to see, as suggested in @Psalm 19. That is the point.
Ques. Do you mean that this goes back to an earlier part of the book of Revelation? That is before the plagues are inflicted.
E.J.McB. Yes. The seven last plagues, I mean the whole history of plagues, has been God's way of framing this vessel. The assembly, we know, will have been actually caught up before the last plagues are literally poured out; but what is before me is the ways of God morally now with the assembly, putting her through them in principle, so that their moral import and lessons have been learnt. In the day of display it will be evident that she has judged morally all that the righteous judgment of God bears down upon when the last plagues are inflicted.
Rem. That is interesting, because the plague order would seem to be over in @Revelation 21: 9, It says "one of the seven angels which had had ... the seven last plagues".
E.J.McB. I do not know anything that is more valuable to us, than to recognise that everything that God has had on this earth has had a contributing element in the formation of the assembly.
Ques. Give us an example.
E.J.McB. He had to destroy the city of Sodom, but it brought to light that He saved a righteous soul. That is an actual assembly feature. It was brought to light that there
{382}
was a righteous soul, vexed by the filthy conversation of the wicked, and God has developed that soul in such conditions. That is marvellous. It is an assembly feature. What will mark the assembly is that she has a righteous soul. In going through Scripture you cannot help seeing that the overtures of the grace of God were calls to man. What is going to come out of that? Look at the radiancy that is coming out of that.
Rem. I suppose the plagues are in connection with clearing the scene, are they not?
E.J.McB. It is very much like display here. If we could sit down and see that everything has been swept away, it would be a great thing. The carrying of it out publicly is, I think, a detail. God has gone through all the moral issues that are going to be publicly raised, and the assembly ought to go through them. She is entirely dissociated from this scene in all her links. Have you ever had that view of the assembly, "and shewed me"? How the Lord would like to show you what the assembly is from His standpoint. We speak of it with feeling and affection from the breakdown viewpoint, but the Lord says, 'Let Me give you a look at it. Have you ever seen it as I see it?' 'Well', you say, 'I do not know how you made it'.
Rem. John was a long way from the breakdown here in the mountain, was he not?
E.J.McB. That, I consider, is the value of the Supper. There is nothing that takes one away from the breakdown like the Supper. You might be millions of miles away.
Rem. In the transfiguration the Lord took His disciples into a high mountain, but when He would give a view of the bride it is to a *great* and high mountain.
{383}
Ques. Is Balaam's prophecy in line with this?
E.J.McB. Yes. I think Balaam's position is that he is made to see the people as Jehovah sees them. The exercises of the scene of ruin would bring one into line with what God is doing. The angel is showing the thing as God sees it, and the effect of it is that you turn away from everything here. You say, 'In a little time the ground will be cleared'. You get a vision of what is there.
Rem. So that to be conversant with God's movements, helps us in the understanding of the vessel that is formed for His glory?
E.J.McB. There is nothing that is of greater value to the saints than to look at the moral issues of anything. You say, 'There is no harm in that', but what is the moral issue of it? And when you see that, you turn away. 'Now', He says, 'I will show you the moral issue of all God's ways'.
Rem. That is interesting. It is not a question of the harm of a thing, but what it is going to lead to.
Rem. If we considered the moral issue of things it would affect us in our daily life.
E.J.McB. Yes. If we were "bearing about in the body the dying of Jesus", and the new creation's stainless light were dawning in our souls, we should be in accord with God as to moral issues. You would say to the angels, 'I am not surprised at what you are doing. My ideas of moral issues are framed from God's - that brings me into sympathy with divine operations'. God would give you, by the Spirit, divine thoughts of the assembly, as she is in the affections of Christ. What marked her in the crystal-like character of her light - nothing hidden or secret - no
{384}
undisclosed matters - beautiful, clear, transparent and open. It is radiancy.
Ques. So there is not only transformation, but there is transparency. Sometimes we speak about reflection. Now reflection is not quite enough, is it?
E.J.McB. A looking-glass is reflection. That is why I used the word radiancy. Reflection means that you have got a peculiar substance behind it, but in radiancy the things go through and through it; it comes out from all quarters - in every part of it.
Ques. It has been said, 'The pearl is a supreme assembly thought'. Why?
E.J.McB. Because it is what Christ gave Himself for. Ephesians describes the heavenly vessel - that epistle is really the charter of the assembly position. "Taken us into favour in the Beloved:" "holy and blameless before him in love" (@Ephesians 1: 6, 4). You can sit down and think of it, and re-think of it and you cannot get beyond it. "Holy and blameless before him in love".
Rem. Christ loved the assembly and gave himself for it. He had that in view, as it is coming out here.
E.J.McB. He had that in view; the passage describes the man and the woman as of one another. "This mystery is great, but *I* speak as to Christ, and as to the assembly" (@Ephesians 5: 32).
Rem. What marvellous expressions, "blameless before him in love". "Having no spot, or wrinkle, or any of such things" (@Ephesians 5: 27).
Rem. He presents it to Himself glorious.
E.J.McB. Yes. Suppose some one gives you a choice, exotic plant, to carry home to your wife, and you
{385}
do not know how to carry it home. You are afraid of injuring one petal, and you think an injury to the smallest petal would spoil the beauty of the whole thing. Here is a vessel of transparency that has been carried home, and there is not a petal spoilt.
Rem. It is very wonderful.
Rem. "What hath God wrought!"
From The Return of the Glory, pp. 41 - 60, Southport, January 1925
{386}
{387}
THE ENTRANCE INTO GLORY
E J McBRIDE
@Psalm 24: 1 - 10; @Luke 24: 50 - 53
E.J.McB. I think we may take it that the great principles of access are established in Christ.
Ques. What do you mean by the principles of access?
E.J.McB. How we enter into the glory now practically. We shall actually enter into it by and by. I think the Psalm we have read springs from the conclusion of the wilderness history. One would suggest that @Psalm 23 concludes the wilderness history, and the house is established. There are two thoughts, as I understand it: one is for the permanent abode of God, an eternal thought; and the other is to assure a footing for present privilege. The footing upon which you can really enter into privilege now, as in @Psalm 24, seems to suggest the way the Lord opens the system of glory, and also the conditions whereby the saints can enter into it now. I think, speaking generally, most brethren would agree that the moment for privilege is the Supper. But I think the difficulty at the Supper sometimes is that the saints are disposed to go farther than Bethany; they go beyond Bethany, instead of letting the Lord lead. The Lord had a definite intention in leading them out to Bethany and no farther. We are inclined to go farther on, to the millennial conditions here. What will happen publicly when the Lord takes the earth and the fulness thereof as His own, is that the power of death will
{388}
be broken - Lazarus will be alive - so to speak. Service will be put on a platform that has no labour connected with it, for Martha, as representing service, will be in harmony with the surroundings. Then, too, every divine impression of Christ will have an outlet, as seen in Mary. There will be a spirit of opposition as seen in Judas, but it will be held in abeyance. My impression is that the Lord would lead saints as far as Bethany; the danger (one speaks practically) is that instead of stopping there with the Lord, they go on, and miss the peculiar heavenly privilege that belongs to translation.
Ques. Go on where?
E.J.McB. Into display. 'On His Father's throne is seated Christ the Lord, the Living One' (`404:1). Many a meeting travels into the joys of the thousand years, and misses the joys of heaven. The thousand years is on earth, is it not?
Rem. There is an earthly side, but it is connected with the coming of Christ in power and great glory, is it not?
E.J.McB. Yes, I think the point in @Psalm 24 is not so much that privilege is open, but who it is that opens it. Not the vast, stupendous system that has been opened up, but He *who* has opened it, so that we can enter into the heavenly side of things. What is connected in Luke with Bethany is the fact that it is from there He is carried up into heaven. You may move on to millennial joys, or you may hesitate when you get to Bethany, as to going any farther, and if you hesitate you will be carried up into heaven.
{389}
Ques. Would not that be going farther still?
E.J.McB. It would be going *higher*, but not farther. You want to go higher, but you do not want to go into things that are not yet public. What spoils the time of privilege is, either a recurrence in your mind to what *has* transpired, or looking on to what *will* transpire, instead of enjoying what *is*. From that spot you can rise to the full height. What will publicly take place on the earth when the Lord comes back again, has taken place in the saints; they are in the state of being clothed with power from on high. God is going to pour out His Spirit on all flesh in the days to come; that is a millennial thought, but the Lord tells the disciples to remain in the city till they were clothed with power from on high.
Ques. Do you look upon Bethany as being very close to heaven?
E.J.McB. I do, the portals of heaven are there. You will observe in @John 12 and 14 the Lord opens out two things to them from Bethany. He shows the millennial earth, in that the Greeks come to see Him, but then He opens the Father's house. That is evidently the suggestion of the Lord. The Psalmist connects the thought of going up with "blameless hands and a pure heart;" that is the way the apostle connects the thought of privilege with the Hebrew brethren - hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, bodies washed with pure water.
Rem. Those are conditions for entering into the holiest, and for really entering into privilege?
E.J.McB. Yes, one sometimes wonders whether the glories of Christ, and all that is connected with Him - the outward glories that belong to that peculiarly blessed
{390}
Person - have not sometimes robbed us of the blessedness of that personal communication from Himself, which is so intensely dear, and cherished in His own heart. "That where I am ye also may be" (@John 14: 3).
Ques. Do you think that the danger with us in the morning meeting is to bring in the kingdom glories, rather than being occupied with the family side?
E.J.McB. Yes, and that is what I call going beyond Bethany. "He led them out as far as Bethany". You will notice Luke is very careful. He does not say 'Amen' in closing his gospel. If he said, 'Amen', he would not have written the Acts of the Apostles. The whole point is that having secured the thing in one Man, it goes on, so Luke's second book has that in view.
I think nothing takes the earthly glory and glamour out of a person, and gives him heavenly colour, like the contemplation of that Man as seen in Luke. Christ is portrayed before you in that gospel in a double way; one is to give you all the thoughts of God presented in man, and the other is to secure in you the contemplation of the kind of man you yourself are going to be. People acquire habits, and methods of thought, and often methods of speech, from the people they admire most. I merely say that to draw attention to the care of Luke as a writer - "as far as Bethany". When it is a question of the Lord coming to you, no saint's house would detain the Lord. "*He* made as though he would go farther" (@Luke 24: 28).
Ques. What is the mount of Olives then?
E.J.McB. I understand the mount of Olives to be a spot where things are looked at entirely from God's standpoint; fleshly thoughts are of no account there. The
{391}
tendency is, if you go into the presence of Christ to contemplate His glory, if not held in personal communion, to be taken up with the magnificence of the view, rather than with the love of the One round whom the glory centres. Is that not so?
Rem. To be looking on as an outsider at the display rather than going in?
E.J.McB. Yes, and perhaps sharing in it. We shall share in the display, but then the display with all its magnificence is the divine answer to the breakdown, but the Father's house is a scene of love and holy joy within.
Rem. I thought when we went in our view of His glory was extended?
E.J.McB. Yes, but if you enter the millennium now, you give Christ His place as Lord; that is what I should call a millennial setting. You are recognising that everything belongs to Christ before the world recognises it. It is giving Christ His due place of lordship over the soul. If an unbeliever were to go into the home of one of the saints, he would say, 'You do not seem to have any of the troubles of the world in your home'. 'No, because the Lord is supreme; the commandments of the Lord are written on the door post, and they are the conditions of heaven on the earth'. The point is who brought them to this? The Lord of glory did. Now, the challenge is not what He has done, but *who* is *He*? If you come to contemplate who He is you will find that He is the Son of the Father's love. That is for us much greater than the Lord of glory.
Rem. I was thinking, He will not stop short till He brings us to His Father and our Father, to His God and our God.
{392}
E.J.McB. That is right. That is not onward, it is upward, as the writer of the hymn says, 'That way is upward still' (`12:6). You may go right on to the thousand years, but then the point is He would detain you at the spot from which you go up. Well, you say, I do not know the way up, and He says, 'You watch Me, and I will show you the way up'. How did He go up in Luke? He was *carried* up, and He was carried up because He was wanted up there. If He had *gone* up, you and I could not have gone, but if He was carried up there is no reason why we should not be carried up. If He inaugurates a line that is open to us, we can go. That is the supreme point. If He had gone up and entered in His own right we should have had to stay down here, but He was *carried* up. You would not mind if some one carried you up. The translation is this - the rapture - caught up - you are prepared to be at His beck and call, and let Him do what He likes with you. If He can get you as far as Bethany He will take you up. But the difficulty is to get you detained there. You run off to the things of the coming day.
I like the view of Christ creatorially; one loves the stupendous greatness of God to dawn on the soul. God gave Job a lesson on astronomy, to get Himself in His greatness in Job's mind. It is very precious.
Ques. So you think that His joy would be now to carry us up?
E.J.McB. That is the whole point. I think you have lost the real import of the Supper if you are not translated in your affections. You are beyond the millennium there, you are in the family circle of divine affections. Divine
{393}
things in their essence cannot be expressed in language, they are known in enjoyment.
Rem. And therefore a pause in the meeting may mean inward enjoyment.
E.J.McB. I do not know why in that hymn (`14:1) of J.N.D.¬s, 'Hark! ten thousand voices crying', the compilers of the hymn-book left out that wonderful verse, 'Till voice by voice in silence fails'. It is where we are all one in Christ Jesus, where male and female cease to exist, and where a sweet weight of glory comes over the saints - not visible glory, but moral glory. The consciousness of divine Persons is known in the soul.
Rem. Do you think we know perhaps too well the programme of the 'morning meeting' - up to a certain point, and consequently there is not the waiting at Bethany, because that is where our affections are led to, is it not?
E.J.McB. I like that; I think our danger is programme. Having been favoured by light, saints in their minds have got an ordered meeting made up. You cannot order privilege, you can order display. You can have the trumpeters coming first, and the bandsmen coming afterwards, the immediate attendants following them, and then the person himself coming. You can order that, but you cannot order the affections. They have a way of running of their own.
Rem. I think that is interesting, because if we really look to the Lord as Head we cannot tell where He will lead.
E.J.McB. You could not tell the next thing that is going to be done. What is before me is the doorway into
{394}
privilege. Privilege, as I understand it is this, the saints have before them Christ in the sense of the complete triumph of good over evil. Now they are free to enjoy Him in the intimacy and affection of the circle that He left, after having established and vindicated the attributes of God. That is what I understand by privilege. The privilege of the believer is his home circle conditions.
Rem. So that really the enjoyment of the Supper would bring you in your affections to the family circle?
E.J.McB. My own experience is (I may be simpler than some), that the Supper makes Christ real and personal to me in affection. Of course He will be actually visible when I have a body of glory. There is not the slightest doubt that when you know Christ personally, it gives you to see things you have never seen before. There is no doubt whatever that we reach privilege by way of display.
Rem. I was thinking of that verse in @Ephesians 2 where, after speaking of the riches of God's mercy, it says that in the ages to come He might display. Do you look at display in that light?
E.J.McB. I do. I have no hesitation in saying that no person has ever touched the joys that belong to the family circle of divine affections, without submitting first to Christ as Lord, owning His right to rule from the river to the ends of the earth. Until that place of supremacy is given to Christ, no one is free to contemplate Him in His personal place of affection with the Father. The scripture says every knee shall bow at the name of Jesus, and the effect of that is glory to God the Father - note *every* knee.
Rem. So really the kingdom is the way in.
Ques. Is that prior to the thought of Bethany then?
{395}
E.J.McB. It is. You touch the spot where all those rights are recognised. It was apparent to every one that Lazarus had been dead but was alive again. That is one of the features - the Colossian ground is there - risen with Christ; the power of death has been broken. Lazarus represents the company; he is a personal figure to represent the state of a Colossian company, so to speak.
Rem. Now that is John's view of Bethany. What would you say Luke's view of Bethany is?
E.J.McB. Well, Luke's view of it shows what it was to Christ. John's view is what it is for His own. Luke would show you what Bethany was to Christ. Christ in manhood had secured a spot from which every outraged thought of heaven had been destroyed. He led them that far. If we were to exploit that spot, you have the ancient people back in their place, a heavenly company held, and the nations brought into privilege. He detained them, and having detained them there, He blessed them, and as He blessed them He was carried up. He inaugurates a new road up to heaven. When you come to the Supper your anxiety is to break bread. You come there with the feeling in your soul that those outward memorials have a moral significance, if you could only get hold of it, and you want to do so. I think the Lord says to you, 'If I can detain you long enough you would see Me at that spot, and not only see Me there, but you would see Me go up'.
Rem. I suppose you would feel you wanted to hear the Lord's voice, His own voice, and you would want to have His own peculiar touch upon your spirit, and you would linger there in view of that.
{396}
E.J.McB. Yes, I have often connected it (I don't know what others think), with the little maid. Peter knocked at the door and she goes to the door, and she says, 'It is Peter'. 'Why don't you let him in?' She was too happy, because it was Peter. The Supper is a very sensitive thing. There is nothing official about it. If you hear a knock you say, 'I am sure it is the Lord'. Well, let Him in.
Rem. I think that is good, because the brother then who gives thanks, does it in the freshness and power of the Spirit, and the saints recognise the Lord.
E.J.McB. Yes, he does not try to explain the Supper. I think brethren get into bondage because they think they have to explain the Supper. It explains itself; all you have to do is to feel that the Lord has knocked; then every one is alive to the fact that it is the Lord, and there is a peculiar spring in the brethren to any living affection.
Ques. Are you making Bethany and the breaking of bread synonymous?
E.J.McB. Yes, pretty much synonymous. You will find, if you read John, that at the time of the Supper, all those peculiar instances - Lazarus, Martha and Mary - connect themselves with the thought of the Supper.
Ques. Are you speaking of chapter 12?
E.J.McB. Yes.
Rem. There we read they made Him a supper.
E.J.McB. Yes, that is, the affections of the saints are secured for the pleasure of Christ; they want to entertain Him. I have no doubt whatever that when the millennial day is established, every one's desire will be to gratify the Lord.
{397}
Ques. Could you say a little about the remark you made, that if the Lord could detain us He would lead us as far as Bethany?
E.J.McB. I think He would detain us at Bethany. The tendency with us perhaps is that when the Lord brings us to a certain point, and His moral greatness rests in the soul, and we begin to get a sense of the greatness of Christ, we overlook the fact that the Head is there. Room has to be left to allow the Person who is so great to speak. The indications of the Head are precious.
Ques. Do you look upon @John 12 as a millennial scene, where they make Him a supper?
E.J.McB. Yes, I do. I think that the kind of spirit and attitude that should mark the saints as come together, is indicated there. They each one come from a home where they have learned the Lord personally, as illustrated in Martha and Mary and Lazarus. They have come by Colossian teaching to recognise that they do not need to go outside of Christ. They have tried physicians, but the doctors are of no account; and at last they have turned to the Lord, and then they find that He is adequate for the situation, for He is the resurrection. They are "complete in him". If you have found a Person who can lift your brother out of death, you have found some one who is infinitely greater than any physician. You are risen with Him; you have the Lord's interests at heart, and He would have you taken up with His interests; but then the point is that from that spot - Bethany - He shows you that He is not going to exploit His interests down here. The rest of chapter 12 shows that, but from the end of the gospel we see that He is going to enter heaven, not personally in His own rights,
{398}
as presented in John, but He is taken up as the first-fruits of those who will also be taken up. So we read "and was *carried* up into heaven".
Ques. What is the difference between what is mentioned in Luke, "carried up into heaven", and John, "I ascend"?
E.J.McB. As we have said, the two thoughts are distinct. In John it is not a question of the Son down here in weakness, but One who enters heaven in the right of His own Person, and there is a people who are wholly spiritual who can move without any hindrances. In @John 20, you will notice, the Lord enters, the doors being shut. He is independent of doors.
Ques. So it is important to see these things in their own peculiar setting?
E.J.McB. It is very valuable. You want to keep the spiritual on its own plane. Hence the Lord says to Mary, "Touch me not". In Luke He says, "Handle me and see". You must keep the thing in its own bearing.
Ques. Would you say John's line is essentially spiritual? What would Luke's line be?
E.J.McB. I think the point in Luke is He secures it in your affections. The Lord wants the affections to move, and so we get the institution of the Supper in Luke. The Supper is open to the simplest affections. You do not want to be very advanced for the Supper to be open to you; a person may only have been received the Lord's Day before, but the Supper is open to him. The spiritual stature may be very small. The Lord secures it in the affections of the saints.
Rem. What is set forth in the Supper is the way the Lord came down to the very bottom to reach us.
{399}
E.J.McB. And it was from that point that the Father raised Him. He was raised by the glory of the Father. That is, the Father secured a family in that Person.
Rem. So that being "carried up" does not depend on spirituality, it depends on the affections.
E.J.McB. That is the whole point. That is what Luke would secure. In John the movements depend on spirituality. If I said to a man, 'I want you to come in without opening the door', he would say, 'I cannot come in unless you open the door'. That is what John would secure. A man who is independent of doors - who knows nothing of the natural barriers of life here; that is the line of ascension.
Rem. You remarked that the gospel of Luke does not end with 'Amen'. I am not quite clear as to that.
E.J.McB. You do not say, 'Amen', to a chapter that is going on. The Acts of the Apostles is the second book written by Luke. You do not want to say, 'Amen', till the other is completed.
Rem. It speaks at the beginning of the Acts of the things which Jesus began to do and to teach, as if the things were going on.
E.J.McB. Yes, and there is a great similarity between the opening chapter of the Acts, and the last chapter of Luke, as though the writer would say, 'I am just running over the thread so that you will know what we have had before'.
Ques. I have a difficulty about the ascending line. Is not the ascending line touched in the morning meeting?
{400}
E.J.McB. Oh yes, I think that; but it is not looked at from the side of the saints as being here in weakness and affliction, but as in spiritual power and dignity. There are the two sides; there is your place as children of God, but then there is your place in sonship. Your place in sonship is spiritual; you cannot take up a place outwardly in sonship. Outwardly it does not yet appear what we shall be. God has given us the privilege of being the children of God, cared for by God, but the stranger does not know that we are sons. Sons are on the line of what is spiritual. The two lines have to be kept in their own setting.
Rem. I suppose it would take the twenty-four elders to say, 'Amen'.
E.J.McB. It would indeed. In the early history of the saints they began on the line of Luke. Well, the enemy came in and said, 'I will very soon swamp that line; I will disorganise you, I will bring divisions among you'. John's line comes in and introduces the spiritual, so that if what is outward fails the enemy will not be able to touch it.
Rem. It is approached in a way from Luke's side?
E.J.McB. You must approach it in that way. If you do not know what it is to have been a guilty sinner, you have never known grace, nor anything of the precious things of God. There may be a tendency with us to have a sort of ultra-spirituality, in which we forget that we are debtors to mercy. That is dangerous.
Ques. Would you, at the Supper, be happy if there was a little more waiting on the personal affection side - the Bethany side - rather than perhaps an immediate advance in connection with what is spiritual?
{401}
E.J.McB. Yes, speaking as a brother I wish we were detained more at the Supper; the Lord's movements take their spring from Bethany. Do not make up a meeting; the Lord would bring us to the Supper if we were simpler. But while recognising that He would bring us to it, we want blameless hands and a pure heart, according to @Psalm 24. We must be exercised to bring nothing in to interfere, no feelings against any one. A brother who is nursing feeling against his brethren is a hindrance to the Lord's activities.
Rem. To bring personal feeling would be a disturbance; would the blameless hands be our associations?
E.J.McB. Yes, I think so. We have to do business with the world, to mix with men, but we can do it with clean hands - blameless hands. We want the preciousness of the love of Christ to have more weight with us. The psalm raises the question, "Who is this King of glory"? The answer is, "Jehovah strong and mighty, Jehovah mighty in battle", but later on the psalmist says again, "Who is he, this King of glory? Jehovah of hosts, he is the King of glory". If you read the psalm it is very beautiful. "He is the King of glory". "Lift up your heads, ye gates ... and the King of glory shall come in". Who is He? That is the point. He is the King of *glory*. The challenge the Lord makes when He raises the question of the assembly with Peter is, "Who do ye say that I am"? (@Luke 9: 20). You have to supply the answer. That is your privilege.
Rem. The answer the second time is very beautiful, "Jehovah of hosts, he is the King of glory".
E.J.McB. Each brother and each sister should have an impression of the glory of Christ, and each impression
{402}
of Christ would give a stimulus to the meeting. No brother would give the same impression. Sometimes one gives an impression, and that impression colours the meeting. We each one of us ought to have our own peculiar impression, something that we have gathered up relative to Christ. Then the convening together ceases to be a mere 'brethren's meeting', on the lines of ritualism and formalism when it is known beforehand what is going to be done, and how it is going to be done. A meeting carries with it immense possibilities. We might rise higher than any conception we have ever been given before. Let us look out for the spiritual possibilities of a region that we have perhaps never been in.
Rem. One has often thought that if we make room for Christ as Head, the possibilities are great. We cannot limit Him.
E.J.McB. We can, as under His leading, let Him take us as far as He wants to, and when He wants us to stop, let it be as under His control. There is no doubt that at times we go beyond the Lord. When He would hesitate we go on, and in that way we hinder Him. But the Lord is very good; He bears with us. He continues to appeal to our affections.
Ques. Was He speaking to the affections when He showed His disciples His hands and His side?
E.J.McB. Yes, I think the Lord would confirm His compassion to us. We do not read it in history. It is confirmed to us. The Lord would confirm it to us in His own Person, 'Well, you know, I went through intense pain for you; see My hands and My side'. It makes it intensely personal, and the Lord would confirm it. It is not merely
{403}
an historical account, it is a personal interview with His own.
From The Return of the Glory, pp. 61 - 78, Southport, January 1925
