{#The Call of God}
{1}
THE CALL OF GOD
The question arises as to what it means when it says "Let my son go", and what is meant when it says in @Hebrews 11: 8, "By faith Abraham, being called, obeyed to go out into the place which he was to receive for an inheritance, and went out, not knowing where he was going". The Gospel as rightly received in the soul, involves the call of God out of Egypt. God would call us out, and Abraham is the great example in the Old Testament of one called out, and it says, "By faith Abraham, being called, obeyed". Abraham was living in a city, Ur of the Chaldees, and excavations have brought to light that the culture of that city was on a par with Paris at the present time. There were not the modern inventions, but the art and culture of Ur of the Chaldees was of a very high order. But it was a wicked and idolatrous city.
God said, "Go out of thy land, and from thy kindred, and from thy father's house, to the land that I will shew thee. And I will make of thee a great nation, and bless thee, and make thy name great; and thou shalt be a blessing. And I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that curseth thee; and in thee shall all families of the earth be blessed", @Genesis 12: 1 - 3. Stephen tells us that it was the God of glory who appeared to Abraham.
One would love to think that the God of glory had appeared to our hearts ... this blessed God ... who justifies sinners, who sanctifies the defiled, who reconciles enemies, who bestows the great gift of sonship and who gives the Holy Spirit to dwell in us -- what a glorious God He is! Surely in some measure the God of glory has appeared to every one of us. Have not we *some* impression of the glory of this God? If so, you will have a great desire to enjoy not only the blessing but the company of the Blesser, and if you are to have
{2}
the company of the blessed God Himself, the only way is for you to move out, for you cannot enjoy the blessing, nor can you enjoy God's presence in the way He would love to be with you, while you remain in the world.
Scripture says, "Friendship with the world is enmity with God", @James 4: 4. The world as a system is built up on the principle of leaving God completely out of account. It is a system of rebellion and robbery. It takes God's property -- the fulness of the earth, and, without any reference to the Owner, it appropriates and uses it as it thinks fit. That is the great principle of sin -- leaving God out of account and ignoring His rights. It would be regarded as intolerable in human affairs if a man appropriated another's property without any regard for the rights of the owner. But that is what men are doing all the time. It is the principle of the world system.
How different it will be when what belongs to God will be used for God, when the Lord Jesus reigns! The oil found in the earth will not then be used to carry atom bombs. The manner in which men use created things is outrageous to God. But what else can we expect from a world which proved its enmity and hatred of God by crucifying Christ -- a sin of which it has never repented, in spite of its cathedrals and crosses? If you were to attend any great social function and make a speech in honour of Christ -- the greatest Man living -- you would be derided. The world does not want to hear about Him. It has not changed, and has never repented of the crucifixion. Individuals have, but the world as a system has not.
So the word is "Go out", and this brings in the principle of the obedience of faith. "By faith Abraham, being called, obeyed". Paul says he preached the gospel for the obedience of faith among all the nations. Faith not only puts its trust in Christ and His finished work, but obeys the call of God. A man who really trusts in Christ and owns Him as Lord and
{3}
Saviour could not, with a good conscience, remain in the world. The call has come to him, and it is for him to obey.
Now, the obedience of faith is a matter of love. If you have accepted the Gospel and let the light of this blessed God shine into your heart, the One who has justified, sanctified, and reconciled you, made you one of His sons, and put the Spirit of His Son into your heart -- you will love Him. "We love because He has first loved us". The Bible says faith works by love. You cannot believe in such a God and Saviour without loving that God and Saviour. It is impossible. This is how God has secured human hearts. He has loved us into loving Him.
With Abraham and the children of Israel, who are types of us, it meant an actual geographical movement. It is not so with us today. You will still live in the same street and go to the same office or factory but you are a very different person -- you are in the world but not of it. The Lord Jesus said, "They are not of the world, as I am not of the world. I do not demand that thou shouldest take them out of the world, but that thou shouldest keep them out of evil", @John 17: 14 - 15. The will of God in Christianity is that we should remain actually in the world, but to be in it as not of it and as not wanting anything it can offer. You are not dependent on it for your joy and resources. They are all in God. Jesus as a Man here found all His portion in His God and so does the believer.
