{#The Choice of a Career}
{1}
THE CHOICE OF A CAREER
Strictly speaking, the believer has no choice. He is not his own, he is bought with a price; and his true business in life is to do the will of God.
God's will is, therefore, his career; Christ his Object and Christ his Motive. What a wonderful career this is! None other can compare with it. Those who pursue it are assured of divine support, a heavenly Father's care, and the acquisition of the true, the eternal riches.
The Lord Jesus is the great Model. "Coming into the world he says ... Lo, I come (in the roll of the book it is written of me) to do, O God, thy will", @Hebrews 10: 5 and 7. That will involved for Him the offering of His body once for all as the great Antitype of all the offerings and sacrifices of old. Our sanctification and all our blessing depend upon it. At twelve years of age He said, "Did ye not know that I ought to be occupied in my Father's business?", @Luke 2: 49.
{2}
God's will for the Christian is clearly set out in Scripture. Christ's body is here and he is to function as a member of it. God's house is here, and he is responsible to undertake military, levitical, and priestly service in relation to it, and to the God who dwells in it (see @Numbers 1 - 4). His calling is heavenly and he is to pursue with all his energies, "looking towards the goal, for the prize of the calling on high of God in Christ Jesus", @Philippians 3: 14. God's will, therefore, 'demands my soul, my life, my all!'
The young believer may say, 'Yes, but I have my living to get'. The Lord Jesus, referring to temporal needs, says, "Seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you", @Matthew 6: 33. God, as it were, says (to use the language of another), 'You make my interests your concern, I'll make your wants My care'. God does far better for a man than a man could do for himself. And so the Scripture says, "Confide in Jehovah with all thy heart, and lean not unto thine own intelligence; in all thy ways acknowledge him, and he will make plain thy paths", @Proverbs 3: 5 and 6.
As you pray and wait upon Him about your earthly calling, your heart already fixed upon Him and His interests, He will make quite plain what that earthly calling shall be. And, as chosen by Him, it will be the calling that will serve best your place in His kingdom here below, and thus your present and eternal happiness.
