{#The Deity of Christ}
{1}
THE DEITY OF CHRIST
Souls saved through the testimony of the Gospel are baptized to the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. In the house of God they learn the whole truth as to this God who is One, and yet revealed in such a remarkable way; and the whole truth as to the Man Christ Jesus who gave Himself a ransom for all. And one outstanding truth as to the Man Christ Jesus, is that God has been manifested in flesh. That is the answer to all the heresies. We come to the end of human reasoning, for *God* has been manifested in flesh.
The Man Christ Jesus is God; the Fulness dwelt in Him, and dwells in Him now bodily; so we come to finality -- we cannot get beyond that. And where it is accepted the soul is preserved from every heresy. The great heresies of the early centuries, which have been revived under modern names in the last century, concurrently with the revival of the truth, all deny the Deity of Christ. Whether you think of Russellism, or Christian Science, or Spiritism, whatever it may be; bring them up against this great truth of who the Man Christ Jesus is, and they are exposed.
But in God's house this great truth is preserved. You come into God's house, and you learn that God is One, the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit; and that the Man Christ Jesus was no less than God manifested in flesh. The Fulness was, and is, in Him. In the house of God the Spirit is available to help us. We are dependent upon the Spirit of truth to preserve us in the truth, not only to guide us into it, but to *keep* us in it; because the moment the human mind intrudes we get into difficulties; and these difficulties were troubling even the brethren at Ephesus.
All this bears on conduct in the house of God, as to how
{2}
we let our minds run loosely. It says in @1 Timothy 1: 3, "that thou mightest enjoin some not to teach other doctrines, nor to turn their minds to fables and interminable genealogies, which bring questionings rather than further God's dispensation, which is in faith". All the theories that men propound as to who Jesus is, these genealogies, all come to a stop once you accept the truth that in Him all the Fulness was pleased to dwell.
There is no question now about these genealogies or questionings. The Godhead was there. What gives room for these questionings and interminable genealogies and so on, is some defect in the apprehension of the Deity of Christ. Once His Deity is accepted we are set free from them. So John's Gospel was written last, that all these reasonings might be brought to an end. "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word *was God*.... And the Word became flesh". "Before Abraham was, *I am*". Before these truths the human mind has to cease.
