{#The Servant of the Lord}
{23}
THE SERVANT OF THE LORD
@2 Timothy 2: 1 - 26
I think we have to remember that the testimony is, in a way, dependent upon young men; and, of course, when I use the term "young men" I mean women, too. When John in his epistle speaks of young men he has not sex in mind. "I have written to you, young men, because you are strong, and the word of God abideth in you, and ye have overcome the wicked one. Love not the world, nor the things in the world. If anyone love the world, the love of the Father is not in him", @1 John 2: 15. The Lord's coming is near but we have to provide for the continuance of the testimony, and it depends upon young men who are whole-hearted. What is required is whole-heartedness. The Lord has to say to Laodicea, "I would thou wert cold or hot". What He felt was the lukewarm state; it was distasteful to Him; and He said, "I am about to spue thee out of my mouth". There is nothing more insipid than a half-hearted Christian. In @Luke 14 the Lord Jesus speaks of the figure of salt. After speaking of what discipleship means he says, "everyone of you who forsakes not all that is his own cannot be my disciple. Salt then is good, but if the salt also has become savourless, wherewith shall it be seasoned? It is proper neither for land, nor dung; but it is cast out". It is a solemn word. The Lord as much as says, 'I do not want half-hearted people'. They are insipid and are really of little use to God or man.
The scripture in Timothy is a challenge to all of us as to whether we are prepared to be whole-hearted in the testimony. It is evident, in the Old Testament scriptures, that God looked for features at the end
{24}
which were like those at the beginning. In Malachi God takes them back to Jacob's tithe, "Bring the whole tithe into the treasure house". He wants that at the end. The remnant was a tenth -- @Isaiah 6: 13 -- that is to say, the whole remnant becomes a tithe. He also takes them back to David's vow, when he refers to Judah as being married to the sanctuary. He says, "Judah hath profaned the sanctuary of Jehovah which he loved and hath married the daughter of a strange god". David said, "I will not give sleep to mine eyes ... until I find out a place for Jehovah, habitations for the mighty God of Jacob", @Psalm 132: 4, 5. David's vow links on with Jacob's vow. What marks true royalty according to God is unselfish seeking what is for God down here. This is implied in being "married to the sanctuary". God's praise in the sanctuary is the chief concern in life and that is what marked David. God also looks back in Malachi to the covenant with Levi, reminding the priests of what they had been at the beginning. He is looking at the end of the dispensation for features like those at the beginning -- all requiring whole-heartedness. In the early church the whole tithe was brought in, there was devotion to the sanctuary, and there was an unremitting occupation in priestly service. God is looking for these features at the end.
So Paul, in his exhortation to Timothy begins by addressing him as his child. It ought to be an exercise to be true children of Paul. Paul is the outstanding model for us, as the one in whom these features found expression. Who so devoted to Christ as Paul? He had no reserves, he was wholly here for Christ, he was also, so to speak, married to the sanctuary, and who maintained priestly service in the darkest moment like Paul? We often think of him in that prison at Philippi, turning it into a temple of praise. He says "Thou, therefore, my child". Paul requires children. It is necessary for the testimony that Paul should
{25}
have children and it is open to each one of us young ones, in some measure, to qualify for this appellation to be children of Paul, to be imitators of him as he was of Christ. He had previously said, "All in Asia have turned away from me", @2 Timothy 1: 15. He is not questioning their Christianity; he leaves that to the Lord, for the Lord knows them that are His and if they are unfaithful He abides faithful. He never forgets one of His own on earth and we should never forget them. Paul says in this epistle, "Tychicus I have sent to Ephesus". He sends to them the best brother he has got for the purpose, the beloved brother and faithful minister in the Lord -- @Ephesians 6: 21 -- although all had forsaken him. He is representative of the Lord in this, for the Lord is faithful to every saint on earth. But the general feature today is that Christians turn away from Paul, and Paul completed the word of God, he filled out the word of God -- @Colossians 1: 25. No one does himself such damage as he who turns away from Paul, for his ministry is like a key which opens up the real meaning of the Old Testament. To understand the types we must have Paul's ministry. We could not even understand Eve and Rebecca, as types without it. People object to Paul because of his whole-heartedness. There is no compromise in his ministry; he maintains things at the Divine standard. So few people are ready for the Divine standard at its full height. For instance, one thing many object to is the silence of women in the assembly. While in Christ Jesus there is neither male nor female, Christians are called upon to maintain every divine institution down here, and Paul insists on every divine institution being maintained in integrity. The relative relationship of man and woman is one such institution. Christians generally are not prepared to give themselves up to God and His claims. It involves full surrender. All that I am and have is to be for God and for the expression of
{26}
His Own thoughts down here in testimony. I do not think we can be called a child of Paul unless we have committed ourselves thus, and the Lord is looking for that unreserved committal. Paul realised that in these days things would depend upon individual devotedness. There is the collective thought, that there should be in each locality the expression of features proper to the assembly as a whole, although seen in but a few. But this can only come about as individuals are secured in devotedness. That is why we are right in saying that things depend upon young men. The older ones pass off the scene and young men must be prepared to carry the burdens of the testimony. Paul is handing things on to his child Timothy, and he speaks of a number of ways in which the servant of God is regarded as in practical service. He speaks of a soldier, an athlete, a husband-man, a workman, a vessel, and finally a bondman, and he brings in what is proper to each. It indicates what an all round demand the testimony makes upon us, bringing into activity every spiritual faculty. It is a calling worthy of true manhood; it brings out true manly qualities, and this should inspire all of us to take it up. How this nation has been inspired by a call for manhood and suffering, and our call to action should no less inspire us! But before he touches that, he says, "Be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus". This is our resource in all that follows, and involves our freedom of access into the presence of God. Do not let us limit this to the meetings, for priestly service should be our most joyful occupation at any hour of the day, drawing near to God and bringing to Him the sweet incense and pure oblation which delights His heart. What strength there is in drawing near to God and thus going forth in the power of the priestly grace of Christ!
He speaks first of service in the field -- the battle-field, the athletic field and the field of husbandry.
{27}
This is an arduous side of service. "Take thy share in suffering as a good soldier of Jesus Christ". Paul says, "For which cause I also *suffer* these things, but I am not ashamed", @2 Timothy 1: 12. What a soldier Paul was, suffering in an extreme way, but he says, "I am not ashamed". He counted it an honour to be suffering, that the elect "may obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory". That is what service in the field is for, that all the elect should be secured and be brought into the full salvation that is in Christ Jesus. It involves this arduous service and Paul was content to take it up with that great end in view, "for the sake of the elect". To this end we need to stand for the truth as good soldiers of Jesus Christ; we need also to be engaged in husbandry, tending souls as plants -- patient work, watering and feeding as we have opportunity, that they might become available as olive trees in the house of God. At the same time we need to be in constant athletic training, as running a race ourselves. What a runner in the race Paul was! It is of little use for us to stand for the truth merely in terms. That is where the athletic side comes in, the need to keep in training day by day, so that we answer to the truth as moving on in the heavenly calling. All this involves the suffering side of the position, but Paul brings in a word of encouragement, a "faithful" word, as a lever for the soul. There are several faithful words in the epistles to Timothy. "The word is faithful; for if we have died together with him, we shall also live together; if we endure, we shall also reign together; if we deny *he* also will deny us; if we are unfaithful, *he* abideth faithful, he cannot deny himself". I understand these words probably formed part of a song used by early Christians, a song surely to inspire the soul, in this arduous form of service. You can understand the Christian soldier, as he lays hold of this faithful word, throwing himself into the conflict. Do we want
{28}
to live here where Christ has no place? "He who loses his life for my sake shall find it". We have the opportunity of losing our lives in this world. "If we have died together with him, we shall also live together". It is intended to inspire the soldier as he goes into the battle.
Paul then refers to another line of activity. "Strive diligently to present thyself approved to God, a workman that has not to be ashamed, cutting in a straight line the word of truth". This is not field service, but workmanship with the house in view. "A workman" implies skilled service, and a workman expects that his work will come under review and scrutiny, and so the great lever in this connection is to be *approved to God*. Service in the field may be successful in some measure, but if there is to be a full result for God, skilled service is also needed, in order that the saints may be built up in the truth. It links on with the plummet in the hand of Zerubbabel in @Zechariah 4: 10. Zerubbabel was a workman who could use the plumb line, and the seven eyes of Jehovah rejoiced to see it in his hand, for it meant that what was going to be built would be according to the truth. Timothy was to be like that, so that when his work came under Divine scrutiny he would have no need to be ashamed. How important it is that the truth should be cut in a straight line, in view of the saints being built together and preserved in God's house in a way that is entirely pleasing to the One Who dwells there. Everything evenly balanced according to truth so that there is nothing to offend the eye of God. If there is to be in these last days an expression of the features proper to the assembly as a whole, the word of truth must be cut in a straight line.
Following this, Paul introduces the idea of a vessel, and what is in view is serviceability to the Master, which involves qualifications in the way of
{29}
personal holiness, so that we may be sanctified and meet for His use. Viewed as vessels it is not a question of what *we* do; but of what *He* would do with us. Much might be done in service without personal holiness, but it is better to be usable than useful -- to be *serviceable* to the Master. In order to be thus the exhortation is, "Let everyone that names the name of the Lord withdraw from iniquity". We are not to try to put things right in Christendom. We are to meet error in order to seek to save souls from it, but some people think if they remain where they are they can help. But it says that "profane, vain babblings ... spread as a gangrene", verses 16 and 17. If gangrene sets in, the only hope is to cut away the good from the bad. The believer is to withdraw from iniquity, and to purge himself out from the vessels of dishonour. The same word is used in @1 Corinthians 5 where it speaks of purging out the old leaven. It involves suffering, for we would like to have the company of all our brethren, but the commandment of the Lord is imperative. This kind of holiness is essential if one is to be sanctified and serviceable to the Master and prepared for every good work. It is a wonderful thought, *every* good work. The enemy sometimes occupies souls with one kind of good work, but this is *every* kind of good work. The Master can use such a vessel in any direction, whether in the service and praise of God, like the holy vessels of the sanctuary, or in service to the saints or in service to men. The great lever in the soul is the desire to be *serviceable to the Master*. Surely it is worthwhile, whatever the cost may be. The Apostle pursues the question of holiness in a very complete way, for he continues, "But youthful lusts flee and pursue righteousness, faith, love, peace, with those that call upon the Lord out of a pure heart".
Finally he speaks of the servant or bondman of the Lord. What should characterize a bondman is the spirit of his Master. Whatever we may undertake
{30}
as soldiers or workmen, we shall discredit our service and the One we serve, unless we are marked by the spirit of the Master. "A bondman of the Lord ought not to strive". It is one thing to be bold in standing here for what is due to God, but it is another thing to have the boldness that is a true feature of Christ, that is, boldness coupled with gentleness and meekness -- boldness without contention. It is a great test in a day like this, when error abounds on every hand and the servant of the Lord feels he must state the truth. It is a great thing to state the truth in a right spirit. Nothing is worse than to stand for the truth in a spirit which discredits the truth. We are to hold and state the truth and yet be "gentle towards all, apt to teach forbearing; in meekness setting right those who oppose, if God perhaps may sometimes give them repentance to acknowledgment of the truth", verse 25.
One desires that in going over this chapter we may all be encouraged, and especially the young men and women. The Lord is calling you; He needs you and He looks for a full committal to these things. It is love for the world and the things in the world which would pull the other way. In dealing with the military side, the Lord says, "What does a man profit, if he should gain the whole world and suffer loss of his soul?" @Matthew 16: 26. This is a word for instructed believers. Peter had already confessed Him as the Christ, the Son of the living God, but had quailed at the prospect of a suffering path; and the Lord says, "If one desires to come after me, let him deny himself and take up his cross and follow me". Do not think that is addressed to babes; it is a challenge to young men. How the world gets hold of us! The Lord says, "For whosoever shall desire to save his life shall lose it". You cannot take up this chapter in Timothy if you love the world. God is weakening the world at the moment, to set young men and women free from it, that there might be found in
{31}
them today these features of whole-heartedness. This chapter gives us every encouragement. As to the arduous side, if we die together with Him we shall live together, if we suffer we shall also reign together. As to the workman, it is possible for young men and women so to handle the truth as to be approved unto God. And as vessels we can be serviceable to the Master. What levers there are in this chapter to go in for these things! Then, finally, to be gentle towards all, characterised by the spirit of our Lord. May it be so for His Name's sake.
Nonnington, Kent -- June 2, 1941, G. R. Cowell, Address, Green Haddad Booklets, Anchor Of The Soul, 8: 23 - 31
