{#Communion With God}
{85}
COMMUNION WITH GOD
*Very brief notes taken at random during a Reading at South Shields, with Mr. G. R. Cowell -- 16th February, 1963. He fell asleep on the 19th February, 1963*.
@Genesis 3: 8; @Leviticus 26: 2 - 4, 11 - 13; @Genesis 5: 22; @1 John 1: 3 - 7; @Revelation 22: 1, 2
Each of these Scriptures refers to walking. Walking denotes communion. @Revelation 22: 2 refers to a street -- a place to walk in. Verse 21 of the previous chapter says the street was of pure gold as transparent glass. The desire to walk in communion begins with God. Fellowship with one another is only secondary. The pure gold indicates the outshining of God.
Enoch and Noah walked with God. "And Enoch walked with God; and he was not, for God took him".
David remarked, "Thy condescending gentleness has made me great". We have been called out of the world and into His fellowship. Fellowship consists of walking together in consistency. God is faithful and He looks to us to walk consistently in the fellowship. Have fellowship with God and share it with one another. God has called us together, He has raised us up together and made us sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ. Ephesians speaks a great deal about the Christian walk. God's love and grace help us to walk consistently. It is very touching to know that the great God wants to commune with us -- it should touch all our hearts that the Creator desires our companionship so that we
{86}
have communion with His thoughts and joys. The voice of Jehovah Elohim was heard as He walked in the garden in the cool of the day. The cool of the day -- opposite to heat -- is the best time. God made a garden of great delight -- a river and a tree of life. Instead of a happy walk He finds conditions where He has to deal judicially. He walks today in the midst of the seven golden lamps -- @Revelation 2.
"I will come in and sup with him". The Lord desires close communion. "Lay hold of eternal life", @1 Timothy 6: 12. "Be ye therefore imitators of God", @Ephesians 5: 1. Walk in love up the golden street. God *is* love. Ephesians is so indicative of His nature. The desire originates with Him. "Without faith it is impossible to please him". We must seek God. Enoch sought Him and he found Him. He walked with Him 300 years.
The damsel arose and walked. The paralyzed man went into the temple "walking and leaping and praising God", @Acts 3: 8. Enoch had fellowship with God. Walking would touch the thought of obedience -- @Leviticus 26: 3, 12. We form part of the true tabernacle -- part of God's habitation. "I will dwell among them, and walk among them; and I will be their God, and they shall be to me a people", @2 Corinthians 6: 16. How God loves to be with us!
The street is in perfect surroundings, but God would walk among us in the scene of opposition and in the wilderness path. "Walk even as he walked"; "I have broken the bands of their yoke", @Ezekiel 34: 27. Walking uprightly gives the thought of walking in dignity.
The way of holiness -- @Isaiah 35: 8 -- is connected with our walk with God. "This is the way, walk ye in it",
{87}
@Isaiah 30: 31. "Be strong", @Isaiah 35: 4. "I delight in the law of God according to the inward man", @Romans 7: 22 -- "I myself with the mind serve God's law", verse 25.
We cannot prove we know God unless we keep His commandments. Be full of Joy. God is love, there is no darkness.
We need sustenance in the path -- perennial river and tree of life -- @Revelation 22: 2.
On either side of the river, was there the tree of life.
